GOD AND OTHER MINDS
A Study of the Rational Justification
of Belief in God
CONTEMPORARY PHILOSOPHY
General Editor
Max Black, Cornell University
Editorial Committee
Charles A. Baylis, Duke University
William Frankena, University of Michigan
Morton White, Harvard University
Induction and Hypothesis: A Study of the Logic of
Confirmation. By S. F. Barker.
Perceiving: A Philosophical Study.
By Roderick M. Chisholm.
The Moral Point of View: A Rational Basis of Ethics.
By Kurt Baier.
Religious Belief. By C. B. Martin.
Knowledge and Belief: An Introduction to the Logic of
the Two Notions. By Jaakko Hintikka.
Reference and Generality: An Examination of Some
Medieval and Modern Theories.
By Peter Thomas Geach.
Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity.
By Sydney Shoemaker.
God and Other Minds: A Study of the
Rational Justification of Belief in God.
By Alvin Plantinga.
GOD AND
OTHER MINDS
A Study of the Rational Justification
of Belief in God
By Alvin Plantinga
Cornell University Press
ITHACA AND LONDON
Copyright © 1967 by Cornell University
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review,
this book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced in any
form without permission in writing from the publisher. For
information address Cornell University Press, 124 Roberts
Place, Ithaca, New York 14850.
First published 1967 by Cornell University Press.
Published in the United Kingdom by Cornell University Press Ltd. ,
2-4 Brook Street, London W1Y 1AA
Second printing 1969
Third printing 2972
Fourth printing 1975
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 67-20519
International Standard Book Number 0-8014-0338-3
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
To Kathleen

Preface
IN this study I set out to investigate the rational justification
of belief in the existence of God as He is conceived in the
Hebrew-Christian tradition. Part I examines natural theology,
an important traditional approach to this matter, by consider-
ing in turn the cosmological, ontological, and teleological argu-
ments for the existence of God. These arguments are, I believe,
worthy of serious and detailed study; and the last one is not,
perhaps, completely without promise. Nevertheless it is open
to a serious objection (developed in Chapter Four); along with
natural theology generally it must finally be judged unsuccess-
ful.
Part II considers natural atheology, the attempt, roughly, to
show that, given what we know, it is impossible or unlikely
that God exists. Here I consider the problem of evil, verifica-
tionism, the paradox of omnipotence, and an ontological dis-
proof of God's existence. None of these survives close scrutiny;
VII
Preface
the verdict must be that natural atheology is no more success-
ful than natural theology.
Since neither natural theology nor natural atheology offers a
satisfying solution to the problem at hand, I try in Part III
another approach to it by exploring its analogies and connec-
tions with a similar question--the "problem of other minds. "
In Chapters Eight and Nine, I defend the analogical argument
for other minds against current criticism and argue that it is
as good an answer as we have to the question of other minds.
But in Chapter Ten it turns out that the analogical argument
finally succumbs to a malady exactly resembling the one afflict-
ing the teleological argument. I conclude that belief in other
minds and belief in God are in the same epistemological boat;
hence if either is rational, so is the other. But obviously the
former is rational; so, therefore, is the latter.
My thanks are due to Professor Max Black for helpful edi-
torial suggestions, and to George G. Harper, who read the en-
tire manuscript and saved me from much stylistic gaucherie.
My thanks also to the Journal of Philosophy for permission to
incorporate a few paragraphs of "Kant's Objection to the On-
tological Argument" (LXIII [1966]) in Chapter Two; to the
Philosophical Review for permission to reprint "A Valid On-
tological Argument? " (LXX [1961]) as part of Chapter Two;
to the Review of Metaphysics for permission to reprint brief
portions of "Things and Persons" (XIV [1961]) in Chapters
Eight and Nine as well as sections of "Induction and Other
Minds" (XX [1966]), which here appear as parts of Chapters
Eight and Ten; and to Cornell University Press and George
Allen & Unwin Ltd for permission to include in Chapter Six a
revised version of "The Free Will Defence, " which originally
appeared in Philosophy in America, Max Black, editor (Ithaca
and London, 1965).
viii
Preface
I take this opportunity to record my abiding gratitude to sev-
eral of my teachers, including Cornelius A. Plantinga, William
K. Frankena, and Henry Stob. I must make special mention of
William Harry Jellema, whose magnificent teaching and think-
ing kindled my enthusiasm for philosophy and have served as
models ever since.
In writing this book I have had the benefit of stimulating
discussion and penetrating criticism from a large number of
friends, colleagues, and students--especially William P. Alston,
Charles Landesman, Jr. , Ian Mueller, and Nicholas Wolter-
storff. I am particularly eager to acknowledge my indebtedness
to the members and former members of the Wayne philosophy
department--especially Richard L. Cartwright, Hector Casta-
fieda, George Nakhnikian, and (perhaps most of all) Edmund
L. Gettier, III, and Robert C. Sleigh, Jr. It would be hard to
overestimate their contribution to this book; I have learned
more from them than I can say.
ALVIN PLANTINGA
Calvin College
Grand Rapids, Michigan
January ig6y
IX

Contents
Part I: Natural Theology
One: The Cosmological Argument 3
Two: The Ontological Argument (I) 26
Three: The Ontological Argument (II) 64
Four: The Tcleological Argument 95
Part II: Natural Atheology
Five: The Problem of Evil 115
Six: The Free Will Defense 131
Seven: Vcrificationism and Other Atheologica 156
Part III: God and Other Minds
Eight: Other Minds and Analogy 187
Nine: Alternatives to the Analogical Position 212
Ten: God and Analogy 245
Index 273
xi

Part I
NATURAL THEOLOGY

One
The CosmoWical Argument
IN this study I shall investigate the rational justifiability of
a particular religious belief--the belief in the existence of
God as He is conceived in the Judeo-Christian tradition. But
the question arises: how can one approach this topic? How
could one show that it is or is not rational to believe in God's
existence? One important traditional approach is to be found
in "natural theology, " in which one gives proofs of some of
the central beliefs of theism. But what would constitute a
proof of God's existence? What would such a proof be like?
Certainly not just any deductively valid argument with true
premises will serve. For consider the following argument: If
the Taj Mahal exists, God exists; the Taj Mahal exists; so
God exists. Taking the first premise as a material conditional,
any theist will hold that it is true; so what we have here, he
must concede, is a deductively valid argument with true prem-
ises. And yet it is by no stretch of the imagination a proof
of the existence of God.
God and Other Minds
What the natural theologian sets out to do is to show that
some of the central beliefs of theism follow deductively or
inductively from propositions that are obviously true and
accepted by nearly every sane man (e. g. , Some things are in
motion) together with propositions that are self-evident or
necessarily true. In this way he tries to show that certain
pivotal religious beliefs--particularly the existence of God and
the immortality of the soul--are rationally justifiable. And I
think it is evident that if he succeeds in showing that these
beliefs do indeed follow from those propositions, he succeeds
in showing that these beliefs are rational. Since I am restrict-
ing my concern to the rationality of belief in the existence
of God--a belief which is the foundation and center of any
theistic religion--what I shall do in this and the three suc-
ceeding chapters is to consider carefully and in some detail
three famous and traditional pieces of natural theology: what
Kant called the cosmological, the ontological, and the teleo-
logical arguments for the existence of God. Although these
arguments are famous and traditional, contemporary philos-
ophers have had little or nothing to say about the first and
third; and while they have said much about the second, much
remains to be said.
The locus classicus for the cosmological argument is the
"third way" of St. Thomas Aquinas:
The third way is taken from possibility and necessity and runs thus.
We find in nature things that are possible to be and not to be,
since they are found to be generated, and to be corrupted, and,
consequently, it is possible for them to be and not to be. But it is
impossible for these always to exist, for that which can not-be at
some time is not. Therefore, if everything can not-be then at one
time there was nothing in existence. Now if this were true, even
now there would be nothing in existence, because that which does
not exist begins to exist only through something already existing.
The Cosmological Argument
Therefore if at one time nothing was in existence, it would have
been impossible for anything to have begun to exist; and thus even
now nothing would be in existence--which is absurd. Therefore,
not all beings arc merely possible, but there must exist something
the existence of which is necessary. But every necessary thing ei-
ther has its necessity caused by another, or not. Now it is impos-
sible to go on to infinity in necessary things which have their neces-
sity caused by another, as lias already been proved in regard to
efficient causes. Therefore, we cannot but admit the existence of
some being having of itself its own necessity, and not receiving it
from another, but rather causing in others their necessity. This all
men speak of as God. 1
In order to consider this argument we need some kind of
schematization of it. The following will perhaps serve our
purpose initially:
(a) There are at present contingent beings ("things that
are possible to be and not to be").
(b) Whatever can fail to exist, at some time does not exist.
(c) Therefore if all beings arc contingent, then at one
time nothing existed--from (b).
(d) Whatever begins to exist is caused to begin to exist
by something else already existing.
(e) Therefore, if at any time nothing existed, then at every
subsequent time nothing would exist--(d).
(f) Hence if at one time nothing existed, then nothing
exists now--(e).
(g) Hence if all beings are contingent, then nothing exists
now--(c), (f).
(h) Therefore, not all beings are contingent--(a), (g).
(i) Hence there is at least one nccessary being--(h).
(j) Every necessary being either has its necessity caused by
another being or has its necessity in itself.
Summa Theologica, Q. 3, art. 3.
God and Other Minds
(k) It is impossible that there be an infinite series of neces-
sary beings each of which has its necessity caused by
another.
(1) Therefore there is a necessary being having of itself
its own necessity, and this all men speak of as God--
(i), (]")>«•
As it stands, this argument is singularly unconvincing.
It has often been pointed out, for example, that (b) is not
obviously true; and in any event (c) does not follow from it.
For even if every being did fail to exist at some time or other,
it surely would not follow that there is some time at which
every being fails to exist--the inference looks like a simple
quantifier mistake. And even if there is a time at which every
being fails to exist, it scarcely follows that this time would
have been in the past; perhaps that unhappy time is still to
be looked for. Here Aquinas' commentators make a suggestion
designed both to support (b) and to shore up the inference
of (c) from it; but before we examine this suggestion wc must
ask a preliminary question: how, exactly, are we to under-
stand the modal terms--possible, contingent, necessary--that
the argument contains?
Aquinas says little about this, and his commentators say
less. In Question II, Article 1, he points out that some prop-
ositions self-evident in themselves are not self-evident to us.
A proposition is self-evident in itself, Aquinas says, if its sub-
ject contains its predicate; this characterization indicates pretty
clearly that he takes these propositions to be necessarily true.
Since, therefore, he maintains that the proposition God exists
is self-evident in itself (but not to us), it is fairly clear that
he takes that proposition to be logically necessary; and hence
it is initially plausible to suppose that in the third way he
sets out to demonstrate the existence of a logically necessary
being. And indeed, Aquinas is very often understood in just
The Cosmological Argument
this way. 2 On the other hand, P. T. Gcach and Patterson
Brown emphatically rcject this interpretation, replacing the
notion of logical necessity with the relatively obscure ideas of
"imperishable existence that has no liability to cease" 3 and
"inability to undergo any essential change in any of the ways
permitted by the Aristotelian theories of matter and form,
potentiality and actuality, and simplicity and complexity. "4
I shall consider both kinds of interpretation.
What does it mean, then, to say that a being is logically
necessary? We might try the following explanation:
(m) x is a necessary being = def. the proposition x exists
is logically neccssary.
But (m) has the unfortunate consequence that a being A
could be necessary while a being B identical with A would
be merely contingent. Even if the proposition God exists is
logically necessary, the proposition The being worshipped by
St. Francis exists is not; and this despite the identity of God
with the being worshipped by St. Francis. This awkwardness
can be relieved as follows:
(n) x is a necessary being = def. (1) The proposition x
exists is logically necessary, or (2) x is identical with
some necessary being.
Many contemporary philosophers apparently believe that
'See, for example, C. B. Martin, Religious Belief (Ithaca, 1959), pp.
151-152; and J. }. C. Smart, "The Existence of God, " in New Essays in
Philosophical Theology, ed. A. Flew and A. Maclntyxe (London, 1955),
PP- 35~39> and many others.
SP. T. Geach and G. E. M. Anscombe, Three Philosophers (Oxford,
1961), p. xi 5.
Brown, "St. Thomas' Doctrine of Necessary Being, " Philosophical
Review, LXXIII (1964), 76-90; quotation from p. 82.
God and Other Minds
ncccssary beings (in this sense of the term) arc impossible;
for it is a necessary truth, they think, that no existential state-
ments are necessary. I shall discuss this claim in Chapter Two.
For the moment let me say only that if "existential" is not
given an extraordinary sense, the claim appears to be an un-
supported dogma to which such propositions as There is a
prime number between 16 and 18 arc counterexamples.
A point in favor of the Geach-Brown reading of St. Thomas
is that under the present interpretation it is difficult indeed to
grasp the distinction between beings "ncccssary in themselves"
(necessary a se) and beings that have their necessity "caused
by another" (necessary ab aliter). What arc wc to make of
the suggestion that a ncccssary being has its necessity caused
by another? No necessary being, of course, could be caused
to come into existence, since it is impossible that a necessary
being begin to exist. Nor can we suggest, presumably, that
a ncccssary being has its necessity caused by another in case
that other acts upon it in some specifiable way; the fact that a
given being is a ncccssary being is itself a ncccssary fact, and
hcnce there is no possible way of acting upon a ncccssary being
such that if it were not acted upon in that way, it would not be
ncccssary. How then are wc to take this suggestion? Wc might
try the following:
(0) x is a necessary being ab aliter if (1) x is a necessary
being and there exists a ncccssary being y (distinct
from x) such that the proposition y exists entails (or
is entailed by? ) the proposition x exists, or (2) x is
identical with a being that is necessary ab aliter,
adding that x is necessary a se in case it is necessary but not
ncccssary ab aliter. Now we must ask ourselves first how the
term "entails" is being used here. If wc identify entailment
S
The Cosmological Argument
with strict implication (i. e. , take it that p entails q if and only
if the conjunction of p with the denial of q is necessarily false),
then of course a necessary proposition is entailed by just any
proposition. Further, any necessary being will be identical with
some being x such that the proposition x exists is necessarily
true. Suppose that there arc two necessary beings x and y. Then
x will be identical with some being w such that w exists is
necessary; y will be identical with some being z such that
z exists is necessary; z exists will entail and be entailed by
w exists; hence z and w are both (by (o)) necessary beings
ab aliter; hcnce (by (o)) so are x and y. What follows then is
that if there are two or more necessary beings, all of them are
necessary ab aliter (and hence none necessary a se).
We might try to avoid this difficulty by defining "entails"
more narrowly so as to preclude the result that a necessary prop-
osition is entailed by just any proposition. But none of the at-
tempts to do this seem very satisfactory; some of them sacrifice
such essential properties of entailment as transitivity, while
others rejcct argument forms (e. g. , the disjunctive syllogism)
that are about as clearly cases of entailment as any we have. 5
And even if we did restrict entailment so as to preclude the
so-called paradoxes of strict implication we should by no means
have avoided the difficulty. For let x and y be any necessary
beings. Again there will be a z identical with x and a w identi-
cal with y such that z exists and w exists are necessary. Now
let R be some relation (there must be one) that x (and only
x) bears to w. Then the thing that bears R to w is a necessary
being, and the proposition The thing that bears R to w exists
presumably entails w exists even in our restricted sense of en-
tailment, whatever that is. But then it follows (by (o)) that
y is necessary ab aliter, and by the same argument we can show
" See below, pp. 55-58.
God and Other Minds
that x is necessary ab aliter. Once more, then, we get the result
that if there is more than one necessary being, there are no
beings necessary a se.
There is a substantial difficulty, therefore, in glossing "neces-
sary" as "logically necessary" in St, Thomas' third way; wc
then find no easy way to understand the distinction between
necessity a se and necessity ab aliter. I do not know how to
overcome this difficulty, and shall limit my concern with the
proof to the part through step (i). To the objection that (i),
though true, is of little interest to theism in that the number
seven, for example, is a necessary being in the explained sense,
we may reply that Thomas is speaking of beings capablc (un-
like the number seven) of bringing into existence or creating
other beings; 0 and the conclusion that there is a necessary being
of that sort is of considerable interest to theism. (It is, of
course, a long step from (i) to God exists; but St. Thomas
attempts to supply some of the necessary argument in the pas-
sages following Question II. ) Furthermore, it is certainly plausi-
ble to suppose that there is at most one necessary being of this
sort, in which case the category of beings ncccssary ab aliter
will be empty. Of coursc it must be concedcd that this does
not remove the difficulty in understanding necessity ab aliter.
We still have the peculiar result that on any plausible reading
of "necessity ab aliter, " if there arc any beings necessary ab
aliter, then there are no beings necessary a se; whereas what
St. Thomas argues is that if there are any beings necessary ab
aliter, then there is at least one being necessary a se. (It ought
to be noted that these are not inconsistent; what their con-
junction entails is only that there are no beings necessary ab
aliter. )
Limiting our concern, then, to the argument up through step
(i), let us return to the inference of
And hcnce a clause to this effect should be added to definition (n).
The Ontological Argument (I)
(c) If all beings are contingent, then at one time nothing
existed
from
(b) Whatever can fail to exist, at some time does not ex-
ist.
As I noted above, the inference is on the face of it flagrantly
fallacious. Recognizing the need for repair, some of St. Thomas'
commentators--for example, Gilson and Copleston--suggest
that what we have here is a truncated version of the argument. 7
In Question 46, Article 2, Aquinas argues that for all we can
prove philosophically, the world may have existed for an in-
finite stretch of time--that is to say, there is no sound argu-
ment against the supposition that for every (open or closed)
time interval during which there were contingent beings, there
was an earlier time interval during which contingent beings also
existed. What Aquinas really means to show, so the suggestion
goes, is that even if contingent beings have existed for an infi-
nite stretch of time (in the sense just mentioned), there must
still be a necessary being. And the premise to be added is that
in any infinite stretch of time, every possibility is realized; a
possibility that does not get itself realized in an infinite stretch
of time is not worthy of the name, as Gilson puts it. The real
structure of the proof, then, is more complicated and may be
set out as follows:
(1) Either contingent beings have existed for an infinitely
long time or they have not.
(2) Suppose contingent beings have not existed for an in-
finite stretch of time.
(2a) Then there was at least one contingent being C
E. Gilson, The Philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas, tr. E. Bullough
(Cambridge, 1929), p. 85; and F. C. Copleston, Thomas Aquinas (Lon-
don, 1955), pp. 119-120.
God and Other Minds
that began to exist and was not brought into exist-
ence by a pre-existing contingent being--(2).
(d) Whatever begins to exist is causcd to exist by some-
thing else already existent.
(2b) Hence C was caused to exist by some being B
distinct from and pre-existing C--(2a), (d).
(2c) B is not contingent; hence B is a necessary being
-- (2a), (2b).
(i) There is at least one ncccssary being--(2c).
(3) So if contingent beings have not existed for an infinite
stretch of time, then there is at least one necessary be-
ing-- (2)-(i).
(4) Suppose contingent beings have existed for an infinite
stretch of time--suppose, that is, that for every time in-
terval during which contingent beings existed, there was
an earlier time interval during which contingent beings
existed.
(a) There are contingent beings now.
(a') In any infinite stretch of time, every possibility is
realized.
(c) Therefore, if all beings arc contingent, then at one
time nothing existed--(a'), (4).
(d) Whatever begins to exist is caused to begin to ex-
ist by something already in existence.
(e) Therefore if. at any time nothing existed, then
nothing would exist at any subsequent time--(d).
(f) Hence if at one time nothing existed, then noth-
ing exists now.
(g) Hence if all beings are contingent, then nothing
exists now--(c), (f).
(h) Therefore not all beings are contingent--(g), (a).
(i) Hence there is at least one necessary being--(h).
(5) So if contingent beings have existed for an infinite
The Cosmological Argument
stretch of time, there is at least one necessary being--
(4)~(i).
(6) Hence there is at least one necessary being--(1), (3),
(5)-
Now the inference of (6) from (1), (3), and (5) is cer-
tainly unexceptionable. Proposition (1) is necessarily true; (2)
and (4) are hypotheses of conditional proofs, and hence be-
yond reproach. The question, then, concerns the arguments
for (3) and (5). The argument culminating in (3) is valid;
(d) is its only premise. Is (d) acceptable? Aquinas apparently
thinks it self-evidently true. And, indeed, (d) is plausible; some-
thing like it has governed and directed a great deal of scientific
inquiry. Nevertheless there are reasons for doubting that (d)
is self-evident or necessarily true. Is it not logically possible
that an elementary particle (or for that matter a full-grown
horse) should just pop into existence, uncaused by anything
at all? It is certainly hard to detect any inconsistency in that
notion. Of course Aquinas needs only the truth of (d) for his
argument; and while I am prepared to deny its necessity or
self-evidence, I am certainly not prepared to deny its truth.
Hence I propose to concede premise (d) (at least for the sake
of discussion) and accept the argument for (3).
If we accept (d), then steps (d) through (i) in the argu-
ment for (5) appear to be impeccable. Our question, there-
fore, concerns the inference of (c) from (4) and (a'). Now
(c) is a conditional proposition; hence if (4) and (a') entail
(c), then the conjunction of (4), (a'), and the antecedent of
(c) (call it (ac)) entails the consequent (cc) of (c). Our
question, therefore, is whether the following argument is valid:
(4) For every time interval during which a contingent being
existed, there was a preceding time interval during
which a contingent being existed.
God and Other Minds
(a') In any infinite stretch of time every possibility is real-
ized.
(ac) Every being can fail to exist,
(cc) Hence at one time nothing existed.
This argument does not appear valid; to construct an explicitly
valid argument with (4) and (a') as premises and (cc) as con-
clusion, we should have to replace (ac) by
(p) It is possible that nothing exists.
(4), (a'), and (p) do entail (cc); and presumably Thomas
thought that (ac) entails (p)--that is, presumably Thomas
believed that (q) is necessarily true:
(q) If, for every being x, it is possible that x does not exist,
then it is possible that nothing exists (that everything
fails to exist).
Now the general principle of which (q) is an instantiation
may be stated as follows:
(r) If, for every being x, it is possible that x has P, then
it is possible that everything has P.
But (r) is not a valid principle. Perhaps we can see this most
easily if we restrict the range of r to contingent propositions
and let P be the property of being true. Then clearly enough
for any contingent proposition p, it is possible that p is true;
but (in view of the contingency of the denial of a contingent
proposition) it is not possible that all contingent propositions
are true. Therefore, (q) is not an instantiation of a valid prin-
ciple of (modal) logic; (ac) does not formally entail p. Still
St. Thomas might well argue that (q), though not a truth of
logic, is nonetheless necessarily true. And it certainly is not
clear that it is not. Could it be logically necessary that there is
at least one being (capable of causing other beings to begin to
The Cosmological Argument
exist), although every being is logically contingent? It is plau-
sible to suppose not. Hence I propose to accept St. Thomas'
claim with respect to (q). The completed argument from (4)
and (a') to (c) then goes as follows:
(4) For every time interval during which contingent beings
have existed, there was a preceding time interval dur-
ing which contingent beings existed,
(a') In any infinite stretch of time, every possibility is real-
ized.
(ac) Every being can fail to exist--hypothesis.
(q) If every being can fail to exist, then it is possible that
nothing exists--necessary truth,
(p) Hence it is possible that nothing exists--(ac), (q).
(cc) There was a time at which nothing existed--(4), (a'),
(P).
This argument is valid; hence (4), (a') and (ac) entail (cc);
hence (4) and (a') entail that if (ac) is true, so is (cc)--that
is, (4) and (a') entail (c). Our problem, then, is to evaluate
(a')--the claim that in an infinite stretch of time, every pos-
sibility is realized. Suppose we take a closer look at it. It is im-
mediately clear that if it is to be of use in the argument, (a')
must be so construed that its consequent is not necessarily false,
or even known by us to be false. (Otherwise St. Thomas could
use it to show, contrary to his own explicit disclaimer, that the
world has not existed for an infinite stretch of time. ) But just
here the difficulty arises; it is by no means easy to interpret
(a') in such a way that its consequent is possibly true. In eval-
uating the argument from (4) and (a') to (c), to be sure, we
relied upon a rough and intuitive understanding of it; that a
closer look is necessary becomes apparent when we notice that
(understood in that same rough and ready way) (a') appears
to contradict (4). For suppose that (4) and (a') are true. (4)
God and Other Minds
entails that past time is infinite. Furthermore, (4) is certainly
not necessarily true (nor did St. Thomas think it was). Its
denial is therefore possible, and hence, by (4) and (a'), true.
But then the conjunction of (4) with (a') entails (4) and also
its denial; hence (a') is inconsistent with (4). How, therefore,
is (a') to be construed?
What at first leaps rashly to mind is the suggestion that (a')
be taken as the claim that if past time is infinite, then every
contingent proposition has been true at some time or other.
But of course then it would have been true both that, for ex-
ample, Napoleon was at Waterloo at 9: 00 A. M. on January 5,
1862, and that he was not at Waterloo then. Nor can this for-
mulation be succored by restricting it to propositions contain-
ing no specific time reference; for then we get the consequence
that if past time is infinite, then Napoleon both was at Water-
loo at some time or other and was never there. As a more seri-
ous attempt, let us try the following: Let S be a set of properties
such that every property is either a member of S or logically
equivalent to a conjunction or disjunction of members of S.
And let us say that a proposition Q is a world description if
(1) Q is a conjunctive proposition whose conjuncts are of the
forms P is instantiated, and P is not instantiated (where "P"
ranges over members of S), (2) Q asserts of every member of
S either that it is instantiated or that it is not instantiated, and
(3) Q is consistent. Thus, we might say, any world description
specifies some possible world and any possible world is specified
by some world description. Now perhaps we can restate (a') as
(/? ) If past time is infinite, then for any world description
WD there was a time t such that WD at t is true.
Now obviously there is at least one world description (WDi)
entailing that there are no contingent beings. WDi might, for
example, contain as a conjunct the proposition that the prop-
The Cosmological Argument
erty of being a contingent being is not instantiated. Hence if
(/3) is true, then if (4) is true and past time is infinite, there
was a time at which no contingent beings existed. But if there
were no necessary being, then by (d) there would have been
no contingent beings subsequent to that time and hence none
now.
But (/? ) is not without its difficulties. For let R be the prop-
erty a contingent being has just in case it is a member of a set
S of contingent beings such that, for any time t, at least one
member of S exists at t. (St. Thomas clearly thinks it possible
that there be such a set. ) Then if past time is infinite, there
was a time at which R is instantiated is true. But of course if
WD 1 was ever instantiated, R was never instantiated; hence
(jS) entails that if past time is infinite, then R was instantiated
at some time and also was never instantiated--that is, (/? ) en-
tails that past time is not infinite. Clearly, then, (/? ) is un-
satisfactory as an explanation of (a').
There is one more formulation of (a') I wish to consider.
Let us say that a property P is nontemporal in case it is pos-
sible that there be a pair of times t and f such that something
has P at t and nothing has P at f. Redness would be non-
temporal, while eternality or everlastingness would be temporal
properties. (Furthermore, existence is to be construed as a
property for the purposes of this discussion, and of course it
will be a nontemporal property. ) Given this definition, we can
state (y):
(y) If a proposition P is such that:
a) it is of one of the following four forms: everything
has Q, nothing has Q, something has O, and some-
thing lacks Q (where "O" ranges over nontemporal
properties), and
b) P is possibly true,
J7
God and Other Minds
then in an infinite stretch of time there is a time
t such that P at t is true. 8
Notice that (y) differs from (ji) primarily in that it lays upon
the properties involved the restriction that they must be non-
temporal in the above sense. (Of course the properties used to
show that (p) is unacceptable were temporal properties. )
We have already conceded St. Thomas the claim that if
there is no necessary being, it is possible that nothing exists.
So if there is no necessary being, the proposition Nothing exists
meets the conditions laid down in the antecedent of (7); hence,
by (7) if past time is infinite there was a time t such that
Nothing exists at t is true--that is, there was a time at which
nothing existed.
If (y) evades the difficulties besetting (fi), it nonetheless
has its own troubles. For consider the following artificial (but
relevant) properties: let us say that a physical object is gred
if and only if it is red and every physical object is green at some
time or other; and let us say that an object is dred if and only
if it is red and it is false that every physical object is green at
some time or other. Gredness and dredncss are nontemporal
properties by our definition, for it is true that something is gred
(dred) at a given time only if at that time something is red.
Hence it may be true at one time but false at another that
something is gred (or dred). It then follows by (y) that if past
time is infinite, then there was a time t at which something
was dred and a time f at which something was gred. But if
so, then every physical object is green at some time or other
while some physical objects are never green; (y) too entails
that past time is not infinite. Hence St. Thomas could accept
(y) no more than (/? ) or (a'); for if he could, he could show
8This formulation of (a') was suggested to me by Professor Robert Col-
lins Sleigh, Jr.
The Cosmological Argument
(contrary to his own explicit disclaimer) that the world has
not existed for an infinitely long stretch of time.
The difficulty, then, is not that there are good reasons for
thinking (a') false or no reasons for thinking it true; the diffi-
culty is in so formulating the principle that it will function
satisfactorily in the argument. Those commentators who rec-
ommend it do not so much as notice these difficulties. Of
course my failure to find a reading of (a') that will satisfy the
argument by no means shows that there is no such reading.
But in the absence of an adequate version of (a') this state-
ment of the third way is of at most dubious worth.
But perhaps a weaker premise than (a') could be employed
in the proof. After all, St. Thomas needs, not the assertion
that every logical possibility is realized in an infinite stretch
of time, but only that every possibility of a certain restricted
sort is. We might consider, therefore, adding to the argument:
(s) In any infinite stretch of time, any object which can fail
to exist does fail to exist.
Now (s) alone is insufficient, for it does not guarantee that if
past time is infinite, there was a time at which all contingent
objects simultaneously failed to exist. Here perhaps we could
employ a suggestion of Geach's; he surmises that St. Thomas
means to treat the universe itself as one "great big object. " 9
It is by no means clear, of course, that the universe is an object.
It is by no means clear that if a and b are just any objects, then
there is an object c composed of a and b. But even if the uni-
verse is an object, it is one of a peculiar kind indeed. We may
see this by asking under what conditions the universe would
not have existed. Suppose S is the set of contingent objects (not
including the universe itself) existing at a given past time t.
Now clearly enough it is not sufficient, for the nonexistence of
"Op. cit. ,
p. 115.
God and Other Minds
tlic universe at t, that some of the members of S fail to exist
at t. And even the nonexistence of all the members of S at t is
not sufficient; the universe's existing at t requires only that
some (contingent) being or other exists at t; this is the only
version of "the universe exists at t" that will serve in the argu-
ment. Hence the proposition that the universe exists at t is
logically equivalent to the proposition that some contingent
being exists at t. So if, in (s), we take the universe as itself an
object, then (s) entails
(s') if it is possible that no contingent being exists, then in
any infinite stretch of time there will be a time at which
no contingent being exists.
We have already conceded Thomas the premise that if there
is no necessary being, then it is possible that no contingent be-
ing exists. Proposition (s') (and hence (s)) conjoined with
that premise entails that if there is no necessary being, then if
past time is infinite, there was a time at which no contingent
being existed. Proposition (s) will therefore serve to bridge the
gap between (b) and (c), given the supposition that past time
is infinite. Nonetheless, (s) is not acceptable for Aquinas. It
implies that if contingent beings have existed throughout an
infinitely long stretch of time, then there was a time during
that infinite stretch of time at which no contingent beings ex-
isted--that is, it entails that the world has not existed through-
out an infinite stretch of time. For clearly it is possible that
there be no contingent beings, nor would St. Thomas think
otherwise. God was under no logical (or any other) compulsion
to create the world. But then it follows by (s) that if past time
is infinite, there was a time at which no contingent beings ex-
isted. And hence (s), like (a'), (/3), and (y), is too strong.
One final attempt: perhaps wc can make progress by replac-
ing (s) with
The Cosmological Argument
(t) If there is no necessary being, then in an infinite stretch
of time any objcct which can fail to exist, does fail to
exist.
Again, (t) will be strong enough only if we take the universe
to be one of the objects under consideration. Given that, how-
ever, (t) entails
(u) If there is no nccessary being, then if it is possible that
no contingent beings exist, then in any infinite stretch
of time there is a time at which no contingent beings
exist.
And given the nccessary truth of the proposition that it is pos-
sible that no contingent beings exist, (t) is equivalent to
(v) If there is no necessary being, then in any infinite
stretch of time there is a time at which no contingent
beings exist; that is,
(w) Contingent beings have existed for an infinite stretch
of time only if there is a nccessary being.
We began our examination of the third way by noting that St.
Thomas appears to make an invalid inference: from
(b) Whatever can fail to exist at some times docs not exist,
he infers
(c) If all beings are contingent, then at one time nothing
existed.
We then moved to the suggestion that the real structure of the
proof, contrary to appearances, is as follows: (1) Either contin-
gent beings have existed for an infinite stretch of time or they
have not. (3) If they have not, then (in view of (d)) there
must be a necessary being. (5) On the other hand, if they have
God and Other Minds
existed for an infinite stretch of time, then too there must be
a ncccssary being. Why so? What reason is there for supposing
(5) to be true? The current suggestion is that (t) is the prem-
ise from which this is to follow. And indeed it does follow from
(t), for (t), as we have seen, is equivalent to (w)--the propo-
sition that contingent beings have existed for an infinite stretch
of time only if there is a necessary being. But (v) (and hence
(t)) is of course no reason at all for (5); it just is (5) thinly
disguised. Or, if that is putting the matter too strongly (in view
of the fact that what has been demonstrated is only the equiva-
lence of (5) and (t)), it is surely true that anyone who had any
doubts about (5) will have, and have justifiably, the very same
doubts about (t); it is not as if (t) were widely accepted or
independently plausible. These expedients, then, are of little
help; the third way construed as an attempt to prove the ex-
istence of a logically necessary being is at best inconclu-
sive.
P. T. Gcach and T. P. Brown consider it a mistake to con-
strue the argument in this way--that is, as an attempt to prove
the existence of a logically ncccssary being. Geach's reasons for
rejecting this interpretation appears to be that "the 'necessity'
that is asserted of God is identified Aristotelian style with eter-
nity--with imperishable existence that has no liability to
cease. " 10 But of course this is not much help: a being with
"imperishable existence with no liability to cease" is a being
that cannot ccase existing, a being whose nonexistence is im-
possible. But our problem is precisely the force of "cannot"
and "impossible. " If the impossibility in question is not logical
impossibility, of what sort is it? Causal or natural impossibility?
A causally ncccssary being would be one (presumably) whose
Op. cit. , p. 115.
The Ontological Argument (I)
existence was entailed by causal laws, or the laws of nature (but
not by just any statement). What this suggestion might come
to in the case of God is far from clcar, since on St. Thomas'
view God is responsible for the character of the causal laws
themselves. God instituted these laws when he created the
world; but God did not in instituting these laws bring himself
or his necessity into existence. Thus it is not easy to see the
alternative to construing Aquinas' "necessary being" as "logi-
cally necessary being. " Furthermore, there is the fact (see above,
p. 6) that on Aquinas' view God is a logically necessary being,
which suggests that in proving the existence of a necessary be-
ing "that all men speak of as God" he may be trying to prove
the existence of a logically necessary being.
Nevertheless there are two important considerations favoring
the Geach-Brown interpretation. Brown points out that Aqui-
nas seems to concede the existence of many created neccssary
beings; 11 and it is certainly not easy to see how a logically neccs-
sary being could have been created. And second, there is the
difficulty I pointed out (above, p. 8) in making sense of the idea
of a logically necessary being that is necessary ab aliter. Here
the Geach-Brown interpretation--according to which a neces-
sary being is one which possesses "imperishable existence with
no liability to cease" (Geach) or which "could not begin or
cease existing by any 'natural' process allowed by the Aristote-
lian physics" (Brown)--enjoys a clear superiority. For (as
Brown points out) under this interpretation a being necessary
ab aliter would be simply a created necessary being, a necessary
being a se being uncreated. Accordingly this reading of the third
way warrants examination.
The crucial difficulty here as in the previous case is in bridg-
ing the gap between
u Op. dt. , pp. 79-82.
God and Other Minds
(b) Whatever can fail to exist at some time does not exist
and
(c) If all beings are contingent then at one time nothing
existed.
A contingent being is one with "a genuine liability to perish"
(Gcach) or with "a built-in process of corruption" (Brown).
And (supposing as in the previous case, that the proof is de-
signed to cover the possibility that the world has always ex-
isted) it is perhaps plausible to think that no being with such
a "built-in process of corruption" would survive an infinite
stretch of time. But what justifies the supposition that if all
beings were contingent and past time is infinite, then there
would have been a time at which all beings simultaneously
failed to exist? Proposition (a') and its epigoni will be of no
more use here than they were previously. But perhaps Geach's
suggestion will be helpful: should wc take the universe itself
to be one of the beings in the range of the quantifier of (c)'s
antecedent? If all things were contingent, then the universe
too would display a "built-in process of corruption" that would
have come to an inevitable fruition if past time is infinite. But
the universe, as previously remarked (above, p. 19) is a pecul-
iar kind of object. For if the universe's failing to exist at a given
time entails that at that time no logically contingent being
exists (as must be the case if Gcach's suggestion is to be rele-
vant) then the proposition The universe exists at t is equivalent
to Some (logically contingent) being or other exists at t. And
if the universe is one of the objects in the range of the quanti-
fier of (c)'s antecedent, it must also fall in the range of the
quantifier of
(i) There is at least one ncccssary being.
And so in proving (i) what we prove is that at least one element
The Ontological Argument (I)
of a set of beings containing the universe as a member is a
nccessary being--that is, possibly the universe itself is the neces-
sary being whose cxistcncc we have proved. Forced upon us by
the exigencies of the proof, this introduces further complica-
tion. To say that the universe exists is only to say that some-
thing or other exists; what is it to say that the universe is a
necessary being? Presumably this means that the universe has
no built-in tendency to perish. But this, in turn, is not to say
that some object (in the ordinary sense of "object") is a neces-
sary being; it is to say only that there is no tendency for every-
thing to fail to exist at the same time. In proving (i), then,
what we prove is that either some object is a ncccssary being
or else there is no tendency for everything to go out of existence
simultaneously.
Similarly with
(1) There is a being neccssary a se.
If we accept Geach's suggestion, then here too it is perhaps the
universe itself that is the being nccessary a se. Now a being is
necessary a se in case it is necessary but uncreated, existent from
eternity. To say that the universe is the being necessary a se,
again, is not to say that some ordinary object with no tendency
to corruption has existed from eternity; it is to say only that
there have always been objects and there is no tendency for
everything to go out of existence simultaneously--a conclusion
in which the skeptic may cheerfully acquicsce. If we try to
bridge the gap between (b) and (c) in this way, therefore, the
conclusion of the third way will be vastly weakened and, in-
deed, of little interest to theism. Since the third way seems no
more successful under this interpretation than under the pre-
vious one, we must conclude that this piece of natural theology
is ineffective.
Two
The Ontological Argument (I)
THE ontological argument for the existence of God has fasci-
nated philosophers ever since it was formulated by St. Anselm
of Canterbury (1033-1x09). It is doubtful, I think, that any
person was ever brought to a belief in God by this argument,
and unlikely that it has played the sort of role in strengthening
and confirming religious belief that, for example, the ideologi-
cal argument has played. To the unsophisticated, Anselm's
argument is (at first sight at least) remarkably unconvincing,
if not downright irritating; it smacks too much of word magic.
And yet almost every major philosopher from the time of An-
selm to the present has had his say about it; the last few years
have seen a remarkable flurry of interest in it.
What accounts for this fascination? Not, I think, the reli-
gious significance of the argument, although no doubt that can
be underrated. The cause is perhaps twofold. First, the ontologi-
cal argument offers an enormous return on a pretty slim in-
vestment--a definition, and a perplexing but not altogether
The Ontological Argument (I)
implausible premise connecting existence and "greatness, " yield
the theistic conclusion. Second, although the argument cer-
tainly looks at first sight as if it ought to be unsound, it is pro-
foundly difficult to say what exactly is wrong with it. Indeed,
it is doubtful that any philosopher has given a really convincing
and thorough refutation of the ontological argument. Too often
philosophers merely remark that Kant refuted the argument
by showing that existence is not a predicate and that "one can-
not build bridges from the conceptual realm to the real world. "
But it is very doubtful that Kant specified a sense of "is a
predicate" such that, in that sense, it is clear both that existence
is not a predicate and that Anselm's argument requires that it
be one. Nor are the mere claims that no existential propositions
are necessary or the above comment about bridge building im-
pressive as refutations of Anselm--after all, he claims to have
an argument for the necessity of at least one existential propo-
sition. So one must either show just where his argument goes
wrong, or else produce a solid argument for the claim that no
existential (in the appropriate sense) propositions can be neces-
sary--and this, I think, no one has succeeded in doing.
In this chapter I shall state Anselm's argument and examine
some objections to it. First and most important is Kant's ob-
jection--an effort to find a general refutation that applies to
every version of the argument. Kant, of course, thought that
the argument fails because it presupposes that existence is a
predicate. I believe that there is no such general refutation, and
in the remainder of the chapter I shall look carefully at some
contemporary restatements of Kant's objection.
I
Anselm states his argument as follows:
And so, Lord, do thou, who dost give understanding to faith, give
me, so far as thou knowest it to be profitable, to understand that
God and Other Minds
thou art as we believe; and that thou art that which we believe.
And, indeed, we believe that thou art a being than which nothing
greater can be conceived. Or is there no such nature, since the fool
hath said in his heart, there is no God? .. . But, at any rate, this
very fool, when he hears of this being of which I speak--a being
than which nothing greater can be conceived--understands what
he hears, and what he understands is in his understanding; al-
though he does not understand it to exist.
For, it is one thing for an object to be in the understanding,
and another to understand that the object exists. When a painter
first conceives of what he will afterwards perform, he has it in his
understanding, but he does not yet understand it to be, because lie
has not yet performed it. But after he has made the painting, he
both has it in his understanding, and he understands that it exists,
because he has made it.
Hence, even the fool is convinced that something exists in the
understanding, at least, than which nothing greater can be con-
ceived. For, when he hears of this, he understands it. And what-
ever is understood, exists in the understanding. And assuredly that,
than which nothing greater can be conceived, cannot exist in the
understanding alone. For, suppose it exists in the understanding
alone; then it can be conceived to exist in reality; which is greater.
Therefore, if that, than which nothing greater can be conceived,
exists in the understanding alone, the very being, than which noth-
ing greater can be conceived, is one, than which a greater can be
conceived. But obviously this is impossible. Hence, there is no
doubt that there exists a being, than which nothing greater can be
conceived, and it exists both in the understanding and in reality. 1
This argument, it seems to me, is best construed as a reductio
ad absurdum. Let us use the term "God" as an abbreviation for
"the being than which none greater can be conceived. " The
argument then proceeds (in Anselm's own terms as much as
possible) as follows:
Proslogion, ch. ii.
The Ontological Argument (I)
(1) God exists in the understanding hut not in reality--
assumption for reductio.
(2) Existence in reality is greater than existence in the un-
derstanding alone--premise.
(3) A being having all of God's properties plus existence in
reality can be conceived--premise.
(4) A being having all of God's properties plus existence in
reality is greater than God--from (1) and (2).
(5) A being greater than God can be conceived--(3), (4).
(6) It is false that a being greater than God can be con-
ceived--by definition of "God".
(7) Hence it is false that God exists in the understanding
but not in reality--(i)-(6), reductio ad absurdum.
And so if God exists in the understanding, he also exists in
reality; but clearly enough he does exist in the understanding
(as even the fool will testify); accordingly he exists in reality
as well.
A couple of preliminary comments: to say that a state of
affairs is conceivable is to say that there is no logical impossi-
bility in the supposition that it obtains. And to say specifically
that a being having all of God's properties plus existence in
reality is conceivable, is simply to say that it is possible that
there is a being having all of God's properties plus existence in
reality--that is, it is possible that God exists. To say that a
being greater than God can be conceived, on the other hand, is
to say that it is possible that there exist a being greater than the
being than which it is not possible that there exist a greater.
The most famous attack upon the ontological argument is
contained in a few pages of the Critique of Pure Reason--an
attack which many think conclusive. Kant begins with the fol-
lowing general considerations:
God and Other Minds
If, in an identical proposition, I reject the predicate while retain-
ing the subject, contradiction results; and I therefore say that the
former belongs necessarily to the latter. But if we reject subject
and predicate alike, there is no contradiction; for nothing is then
left, that caw be contradicted. To posit a triangle, and yet to reject
its three angles, is self-contradictory; but there is no contradiction
in rejecting the triangle together with its three angles. The same
holds true of the concept of an absolutely necessary being. If its
existence is rejected, we reject the thing itself with all its predi-
cates; and no question of contradiction can then arise. There is
nothing outside it that would then be contradicted, since the neces-
sity of the thing is not supposed to be derived from anything ex-
ternal; nor is there anything internal that would be contradicted,
since in rejecting the thing itself we have at the same time rejected
all its internal properties. "God is omnipotent" is a necessary
judgment. The omnipotence cannot be rejected if we posit a Deity,
that is, an infinite being; for the two concepts are identical. But if
we sav "There is no God, " neither the omnipotence nor any other
of its predicates is given; they are one and all rejected together with
the subject, and there is therefore not the least contradiction in such
a judgment. .. .
For I cannot form the least concept of a thing which, should it
be rejected with all its predicates, leaves behind a contradiction. 2
Here Kant sceiTis to be arguing that no existential proposi-
tions are necessarily true--or is he, perhaps, arguing merely that
no existential propositions are analytic in his more narrow
sense? If the latter is his meaning, then what he says will be
irrelevant to Anselm's proof. Perhaps that proof requires that
God exists be necessarily true; it certainly does not require that
God exists be analytic in Kant's sense. The second step of
Anselm's argument as outlined above--that existence is greater
than nonexistence--is presumably, according to Anselm, neces-
Critique of Pure Reason, tr. N. K. Smith (London, 1929), pp. 502-
503.
The Ontological Argument (I)
sarily true, but not necessarily analytic. If what Kant says is to
be relevant, therefore, we must take it as a reason for supposing
that no existential propositions are necessary.
But when we inspect this argument closely, it looks like a
lot of fancy persiflage; what appear to be its premises seem to
have no bearing at all on its conclusion. How are we to con-
strue the argument? The conclusion, apparently, is that in re-
jecting the existence of a thing we cannot be contradicting our-
selves. To be relevant in the present context this must be equiv-
alent to the claim that no proposition which merely denies the
existence of a thing or things of a specified sort is contradictory
or necessarily false. Why not? Well, if we deny, for example,
that God exists, "there is nothing outside it (i. e. , God) that
would then be contradicted, since the necessity of the thing
is not supposed to be derived from anything external; nor is
there anything internal that would be contradicted, since in
rejecting the thing itself we have at the same time rejected all
its properties. " But how, exactly, is this relevant? The "necessity
of the thing" in this instance would be the alleged fact that the
proposition God exists is necessary. But what could Kant pos-
sibly mean when he says that there is nothing "outside of"
God that could be contradicted by the denial of His exist-
ence? Presumably it is propositions that could contradict it;
and there are plenty of them that do so, whether or not God
exists. Does he perhaps mean to say that no true proposition
would contradict the denial of God's existence? But this would
be to hold that God does not exist, which is certainly nothing
Kant is prepared to affirm. Does he mean that no necessarily
true proposition would contradict it? But surely this would
beg the whole question; for the claim that the proposition
God does not exist is not inconsistent with any necessary
proposition, is logically equivalent to the claim that God
exists is not necessarily true. We do not seem to have much
God and Other Minds
of an argument here at all. This paragraph, as it seems to me,
is really no more than an elaborate and confused way of as-
serting that no existential propositions are necessary.
That Kant should have been unable to "form the least con-
cept of a thing, which, should it be rejected with all its
predicates, leaves behind a contradiction" is something of a
surprise, given his views about mathematics. For he seems to
believe that the true propositions of arithmetic and geometry
are necessarily true, even if not analytic in his more narrow
sense. But of course many of the truths of arithmetic are ex-
istential propositions. There is a prime number between seven-
teen and twenty, for example, or The successor of six is greater
than five certainly appear to be necessarily true, as Kant him-
self urged. But surely they are also (prima facie at any rate)
existential propositions. However that may be, the burden of
Kant's objection to the ontological argument is contained in
the following passage:
"Being" is obviously not a real predicate; that is, it is not a concept
of something which could be added to the concept of a thing. It is
merely the positing of a thing, or of certain determinations, as exist-
ing in themselves. Logically, it is merely the copula of a judgment.
The proposition "God is omnipotent" contains two concepts, each
of which has its object--God and omnipotence. The small word
"is" adds no new predicate, but only serves to posit the predicate
in its relation to the subject. If, now, we take the subject (God)
with all its predicates (among which is omnipotence), and say
"God is, " or "There is a God, " we attach no new predicate to the
concept of God, but only posit the subject in itself with all its pred-
icates, and indeed, posit it as an object that stands in relation to
my concept. The content of both must be one and the same; noth-
ing can have been added to the concept, which expresses merely
what is possible, by my thinking its object (through the expression
"it is") as given absolutely. Otherwise stated, the real contains no
The Ontological Argument (I)
more than the merely possible. A hundred real thalers do not con-
tain the least coin more than a hundred possible thalers. For as the
latter signify the concept and the former the object and the posit-
ing of the concept, should the former contain more than the latter,
my concept would not, in that case, express the whole objcct, and
would not therefore be an adequate concept of it. My financial posi-
tion, however, is affected very differently bv a hundred real thalers
than it is by the mere concept of them (that is, of their possibil-
ity). For the objcct, as it actually exists, is not analytically con-
tained in my conccpt, but is added to my concept (which is a deter-
mination of my state) synthetically; and yet the conceived hundred
thalers are not themselves in the least increased through thus ac-
quiring existence outside my concept.
By whatever and by however many predicates we may think a
thing--even if we completely determine it--we do not make the
least addition to the thing when we further declare that this thing
is. Otherwise it would not be exactly the same thing that exists, but
something more than we had thought in the concept: and we could
not, therefore, say that the exact objcct of my concept exists. If we
think in a thing every feature of reality except one, the missing
reality is not added by my saying that this defective thing exists. 3
How, exactly, is what Kant says here relevant to Anselm's
ontological argument? And how are we to understand what
he says? The point of the passage seems to be that being or
existence is not a real predicate; Kant apparently thinks this
follows from (or is equivalent to) what he puts variously as
'the real contains no more than the merely possible, " "the
content of both (i. e. , concept and object) must be one and
the same, " "being is not the concept of something that could
be added to the concept of a thing, " and so on. An adequate
concept, Kant believes, must contain as much content as the
thing of which it is the concept; the content of the concept of
'Ibid. ,
pp. 504-505.
God and Other Minds
a thing remains the same whether the thing exists or not; and
the existence of the object of a concept is not part of the con-
tent of that concept. But what is the content of a concept, or
of an object? In what way do objects and concepts have con-
tent? Kant gives us very little help, in the passage under con-
sideration, in understanding what it is to add something to a
concept, what it means to say that a concept contains as much
as an object, or what it is for a concept and its object both to
have content--the same content.
Perhaps what he means is something like this: the content
of a concept is the set of properties a thing must have to fall
under or be an instance of that concept. The content of the
concept crevasse, for example, includes, among others, the
properties of occurring on or in glaciers, and being more than
one foot deep. The content of the concept the tallest man in
Boston will include, among others, the properties of being a
man, being in Boston, and being taller than any other man
in Boston. The content of an object, on the other hand, is the
set of properties that object has; and a thing a has (at least)
as much content as or contains as much as a thing b if every
member of b's content is a member of a's content. But here
we immediately encounter difficulty. For of course it will not
be true that the concept of an object contains as much con-
tent as the object itself. Consider, for example, the concept
horse. Any real horse will have many properties not contained
in that concept; any real horse will be either more than six-
teen hands high or else sixteen hands or less. But neither of
these properties is in the content of the concept horse (al-
though of course the property of being either more than six-
teen hands high or else sixteen hands or less will be). Simi-
larly for the tallest man in Boston: he will have the property
of being married or else the property of being unmarried; but
neither of these properties is part of the content of the con-
The Ontological Argument (I)
cept the tallest man in Boston. This suggestion therefore re-
quires amendment.
"By whatever and by however many predicates we may
think a thing--even if we completely determine it--we do not
make the least addition to the thing when we further declare
that this thing is. " This sentence provides a clue. We might
note that to every existing object there corresponds its whole
concept: the concept whose content includes all (and only)
the properties the object in question has. (The content of
the whole concept of an object will obviously contain many
properties. ) Now suppose we say that the whole concept of
an object O diminished with respect to P is the concept
whose content contains just those properties that (1) are
members of the content of the whole concept and neither
entail4 nor are entailed by P, or (2) are entailed by properties
meeting condition (1). 5 (Very roughly and inaccurately, a
whole concept diminished with respect to P is what remains
of a whole concept when P is deleted from its content. ) Sup-
pose, furthermore, that the Taj Mahal is pink and let Ci and
C be, respectively, the whole concept of the Taj Mahal and
the whole concept of the Taj Mahal diminished with respect
to pinkness. Evidently there are possible circumstances in
which C but not Cj would be exemplified by some actually
existing object: perhaps these circumstances would obtain if
the Taj Mahal were green, for example. (Of course Ci could
be exemplified only if C were too. ) Now perhaps Kant means
to point out that existence differs from pinkness in the follow-
ing respect. If C is the whole concept of the Taj Mahal
diminished with respect to existence, there are no possible
circumstances in which C but not Ci has application; it is a
* Where a property P entails a property Q if and only if it is necessarily
true that whatever has P has Q.
Here I am indebted for a correction to Paul Mellema.
God and Other Minds
necessary truth that if C is exemplified, so is Q. Since the
converse is also true, Ci and C are, we might say, equivalent
concepts; in annexing existence to C we don't really get a
different concept. And if we add that a predicate (or property)
P is a real predicate (or property) only if it is not the case
that any whole concept diminished with respcct to P is equiva-
lent to the corresponding whole concept, we may conclude
that existence, unlike pinkness, is not a real predicate; it "is
not a concept of something which could be added to the
concept of a thing. " 6
Giving a clear explanation of the claim that existence is
not a real predicate, this interpretation also shows an inter-
esting respect in which existence differs from other predicates
or properties. Unfortunately, it seems to have no particular
bearing on Anselm's argument. For Anselm can certainly
agree, so far as his argument is concerned, that existence is not
a real predicate in the explained sense. Anselm maintains that
the concept the being than which none greater can be con-
ceived is necessarily exemplified; that this is so is in no way
inconsistent with the suggestion that the whole concept of
a thing diminished with respect to existence is equivalent to
the undiminished whole concept of that thing. Anselm argues
that the proposition God exists is necessarily true; but neither
this claim nor his argument for it entails or presupposes that
existence is a predicate in the sense just explained.
What does Kant's argument show then? How could anyone
be led to suppose that Kant's claim did dispose of the onto-
logical argument? This last question is not altogether easy to
answer. What Kant's argument docs show, however, is that
For a fuller and more detailed consideration of this objection, see my
"Kant's Objection to the Ontological Argument, " Journal of Philosophy,
LXIII (1966), 537-546.
The Ontological Argument (I)
one cannot "define things into existence"; it shows that one
cannot, by adding existence to a concept that has application
contingently if at all, get a concept that is necessarily exem-
plified. For let C' be any whole concept and C be that whole
concept diminished with respect to existence. If the proposition
There is an object to which C applies is contingent, so is
There is an object to which C' applies. Kant's argument shows
that the proposition There is an object to which C applies
is logically equivalent to There is an object to which C' applies;
hence if either is contingent, so is the other. And this result
can be generalized. For any concept C, singular or general, if
it is a contingent truth that C is exemplified, it is also a con-
tingent truth that the concept derived from C by annexing
existence to it is exemplified. From a concept which has appli-
cation contingently--for example, crow, we cannot, by annex-
ing existence to it, get a concept that necessarily applies; for if
it is a contingent truth that there are crows, it is also a con-
tingent truth that there arc existent crows.
But of course Anselm need not have thought otherwise.
Schopenhauer describes the ontological argument as follows:
"On some occasion or other someone excogitates a conception,
composed out of all sorts of predicates, among which, how-
ever he takes care to include the predicate actuality or exist-
ence, either openly or wrapped up for decency's sake in some
other predicate, such as perfection, immensity, or something
of the kind. " 7 If this were Anselm's procedure--if he started
with some concept that has instances contingently if at all
and then annexed existence to it--then indeed his argument
would be subject to Kant's criticism. But he didn't, and it isn't.
And Kant's objection shows neither that there are no necessary
The Ontological Argument, ed. A. Plantinga (New York, 1965), pp.
66-67.
God and Other Minds
existential propositions nor that the proposition God exists is
not necessary--any more than it shows that There is a prime
between fifty and fifty-five is a contingent proposition.
II
Kant's disapproval of the ontological argument centers on
his claim that existence is not a predicate or quality. Many
contemporary philosophers have followed Kant's lead here:
Ayer, Wisdom, and Broad substantially agree that--in Broad's
words--"The Ontological Argument presupposes that existence
is a quality or power, " and that
the assumption that existential propositions are of logically the
same form as characterizing propositions. .. makes the Ontologi-
cal Argument seem plausible. But it is certainly false. .. . Let us
begin with the two negative propositions Cats do not bark and
Dragons do not exist. It is obvious that the first is about cats. But,
if the second be true, it is certain that it cannot be about dragons,
for their will be no such things as dragons for it to be about. The
first might be expressed, on the conditional interpretation, by the
sentence "If there were any cats, none of them would bark. " On
the instantial interpretation it might be expressed by the sentence
"There are cats, and none of them bark. " Suppose you try to ex-
press the negative existential proposition the same way. On the first
alternative it would be expressed by the sentence "If there were
any dragons, none of them would exist. " On the second alternative
it would be expressed by the sentence "There are dragons, and none
of them exist. " Both these sentences are self-contradictory and
meaningless. So if you try to analyse negative existential proposi-
tions in the same way as negative characterizing propositions, you
will find that they are all self-contradictory. But it is plain that
Dragons do not exist is not self-contradictory. It is not only logically
possible but is almost certainly true.
Now consider the two affirmative propositions Cats scratch and
Cats exist. On the conditional interpretation the former would be
The Ontological Argument (I)
expressed by the sentence "If there were any cats none of them
would fail to scratch. " On the instantial interpretation it would be
expressed by the sentence "There are cats, and none of them fail
to scratch. " Suppose you try to express the affirmative existential
proposition in the same way. On the first alternative it would be
expressed by the sentence "If there were any cats, none of them
would fail to exist. " On the second alternative it would be ex-
pressed by the sentence "There are cats, and none of them fail to
exist. " Now both these sentences are mere platitudes. So if you try
to analyse affirmative existential propositions in the same way as
affirmative characterizing propositions, you will find that they are
all platitudes. But it is plain that Cats exist is not a mere plati-
tude. .. . So it is certain that existential propositions need a dif-
ferent kind of analysis. 8
Broad is arguing for the conclusion that existence is not a
quality. He takes it for granted, apparently, that if (and per-
haps only if) existence were a quality, then existential proposi-
tions (both affirmative and negative) would be about their
subjects. But negative existentials, he says, are not, if true,
about their subjects, for there would then be nothing for them
to be about. By the same token the contradictories of true
negative existentials are not about their subjects either. So
neither true negative existentials nor the corresponding affirm-
ative existential propositions are about their subjects. The
premise Broad appeals to, however, has a still more general
consequence: if Dragons do not exist is true, then no subject-
predicate propositions of any sort are about dragons. 9 And
this is plainly outrageous. For even if Dragons do not exist
C. D. Broad, Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research (London,
1953). pp. 182-183. Cf. A. J. Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic (Lon-
don, 1947), p. 43; and John Wisdom, Interpretation and Analysis (Lon-
don, 1931), p. 62.
Cf. R. Cartwright, "Negative Existentials, " Journal of Philosophy, LVII
(i960), 633.
God and Other Minds
were not about dragons (but surely it is) the same could not
be said for Dragons do not have fur or Dragons are beasts of
fable. One can hope for what docs not exist, and search for it,
as Ponce de Leon demonstrated. One can even draw pictures
of it. Why, then, cannot one talk about or refer to what does
not exist? The fact, of course, is that one can; it is not at all
difficult, for example, to tell stories about ghosts--indeed, I
have seen it done. And when one tells a story about ghosts,
then what one says is presumably about ghosts. Any objection
to the ontological argument requiring the premise that no
propositions are about ghosts or dragons is more than dubious.
But Broad has another and more important argument for
the conclusion that existential statements are not about their
subjects. He implicitly argues that if they were, they would
yield to the same kind of analysis as do what he calls charac-
terizing propositions. Now a negative characterizing proposition
--for example, Cats do not bark--is equivalent to a proposi-
tion of the same form as either
(a) There are some cats and none of them bark
or
(b) If there were any cats, none of them would bark.
But obviously the negative existential Dragons do not exist is
not equivalent to either of the corresponding propositions of
the indicated forms; for it is certainly contingent and probably
true, while they are both, Broad says, "contradictory and mean-
ingless. " Similarly for affirmative existentials: an affirmative
characterizing proposition--for example, Cats scratch--is equiv-
alent to a proposition of the form of
(c) There are some cats and all of them scratch
or
The Ontological Argument (I)
(d) If there were any cats, all of them would scratch.
Affirmative existentials do not yield to this analysis, for surely
Cats exist is equivalent neither to There are some cats and
all of them exist nor to If there were some cats, all of them
would exist. Cats exist is a synthetic proposition, while the
above two, Broad says, are "mere platitudes, " that is (as the
context makes clear) tautologies. 10
Is Broad right? We might note first that not nearly all
"characterizing propositions" (propositions about their sub-
jects) are of the forms (a)-(d). Buffalo once abounded on
the Great Plains, for example, does not say either that there
are some buffalo and all of them once abounded on the Great
Plains, or that if there were some buffalo all of them would
once have abounded on the Great Plains. The same holds for
Cats are more intelligent than dogs, Snakes come in many
colors, and Lions display varying degrees of friendliness. More
important (since the conclusion of the ontological argument
is a singular existential) Broad neglects singular characterizing
propositions altogether. No doubt he means to hold that propo-
sitions of the form A has P (where "A" does duty for singular
referring expressions and "P" for expressions denoting proper-
ties) are really of one of the following forms:
(e) A exists and A has P.
(f) If A existed, A would have P.
But not every singular proposition about its subject is of one
of these forms either: consider
(g) Cerberus is my favorite beast of fable.
This is true (let us suppose) and about Cerberus; but surely
Of course Biond is mistaken about There are some cats and all of
them exist; since it entails the contingent There are some cats, it is not a
tautology.
God and Other Minds
it is false that Cerberus exists and has the property of being
my favorite beast of fable. It is also false that if Cerberus
existed, he would have the property of being my favorite beast
of fable--if Cerberus existed I would be much less favorably
inclined toward him. If this is a material conditional, of course,
it is true; but in that case it is equivalent to Either Cerberus
does not exist or Cerberus is my favorite beast of fable, which,
since its first disjunct does not entail (g), is not equivalent to
the latter. Hence (g) is not equivalent to the corresponding
propositions of the forms (e) and (f).
So not all singular characterizing propositions are of the
indicated forms. Why, then, must existential propositions be
so, to be about their subjects? But suppose we grant for the
moment Broad's thesis about existential propositions. How,
exactly, is this thesis supposed to bear on Anselm's argument?
As follows, presumably. Essential to Anselm's argument is
some premise entailing the legitimacy of comparing an existent
with a nonexistent being. As I formulated the argument
(above, p. 29), that proposition is
(2) Existence in reality is greater than existence in the
understanding alone
which presumably entails that an existent being is greater
than a nonexistent one. Now Broad claims that
(1) no comparison can be made between a nonexistent term and
anything else except on the hypothesis that it exists and (2) on
this hypothesis it is meaningless to compare it with anything in
respect of the presence or absence of existence. 11
This follows, he believes from the supposed fact that existence
Op. tit. , p. 181.
The Ontological Argument (I)
is not a quality. Now it is not at all clear to me that this claim
does follow from it. But in any event the claim is surely false.
One certainly can compare, for example, Hamlet with Presi-
dent Johnson in point of the number of books written about
each; and when a man says More books have been written
about Hamlet than about Lyndon Johnson, he certainly need
not commit himself to If Hamlet had existed more books
would have been written about him than about Lyndon John-
son. And while it is true that Superman is a comic-book figure
much stronger than any actual man, it is no doubt false that
if Superman existed he would be a comic-book figure much
stronger than any actual man. Finally, one certainly can com-
pare a nonexistent thing to an existent thing with respect to
existence; to do this is simply to say that the one exists and
the other does not. One of the principal differences between
Cerberus and Louis XIV, for example, is that the latter (for
better or worse) really did exist.
Broad has not established, then, that existence is not a pred-
icate, or that existential propositions are not about their sub-
jects. It is perhaps possible to specify some sense of "about"
such that in that sense, existential propositions are not about
their subjects. But how may we be assured that Anselm's argu-
ment requires existential propositions to be about their subjects
in that sense of "about"--or, for that matter, in the ordinary
sense? Anselm needs some such premise as If A exists and B
does not, then A is greater than B. Why must he go on to
add that A exists is about A? It certainly appears to be about
A; but Anselm need not commit himself on that issue at all.
Broad has not shown that existence is not a quality; and what
he deduced from this--that no categorical comparison between
existents and nonexistents can be made--is false. Hence he has
not succeeded in refuting the ontological argument.
God and Other Minds
III
In "Existence, Predication and the Ontological Argument, "
Jerome Shaffer tries, like Kant and Broad, to furnish general
grounds for rejecting any argument relevantly like Anselm's. 12
Shaffer begins by pointing out that existential sentences can
be tautological. If, for example, we take "God" as an abbrevia-
tion for "an almighty being who exists and is eternal, " then
"God exists" is tautological in that it is equivalent to "an al-
mighty being who exists and is eternal, exists. " And here he is
surely correct. But he goes on to argue that even "if we are
given a tautological existential assertion like 'particulars exist'
(where 'particular' is defined as 'existent object') or 'God ex-
ists' this leaves open the question whether there is a God. "
How so? ". .. If someone uses the sentence 'God exists' tauto-
logically, he tells us only that being an existent is a logical re-
quirement for being God. .. . In the case of the Ontological
Argument the only valid conclusion is an intensional statement
about the meaning of the concept of God. " 13
The version of the ontological argument Shaffer considers
in his paper goes as follows:
Let the expression "God" mean "an almighty being who exists and
is eternal. " Therefore "God is an almighty being who exists and
is eternal, " is true by definition and that entails "God exists. " 14
Shaffer's comment is apposite with respect to this argument, for
Mind, LXXI (1962), 307.
"Ibid. ., p. 323. It does not seem to me that Shaffer has shown that
there are tautological existential assertions, if an existential assertion is
one that asserts the existence of some object or other (or asserts that some
concept has instances, as he puts it). What he has shown is that sentences
of the form x exists or There are x's can be used (given suitable defini-
tions) to make tautological assertions; but in none of the examples he
gives are these assertions existential in the sense just mentioned.
111 bid. , pp. 307-308.
The Ontological Argument (I)
its conclusion is the proposition that an almighty being who
exists and is eternal, exists--that is, anything that is an al-
mighty being who exists and is eternal, exists. And, indeed, as
Shaffer says, this does not entail that there are any almighty
beings who exist and are eternal. But this argument is not
Anselm's; the latter simply deduccs a contradiction from the
proposition The being than which it is not possible that there
be a greater exists in the understanding but not in reality,
together with the assertion that existents are greater than non-
existents. And if this procedure covertly involves annexing
existence to some concept such as almighty and eternal being,
that must be shown to be so.
But Shaffer maintains further that no extensional assertions
(i. e. , assertions entailing that some concept applies to some
actually existing object) can be necessarily true, 15 for "they do
not merely tell us what the requirements are for being an A,
but, starting with these requirements, tell us whether anything
meets these requirements. " 16 This is no doubt so; but one
wonders why it is taken to imply that no such propositions are
necessarily true. If it is a reason for supposing that no affirma-
tive extensional propositions are necessarily true, it is also a rea-
son for supposing that no negative existential propositions are
either; for the latter certainly tell us with respcct to a given
set of "requirements" whether anything meets them. But surely
it is necessarily true that nothing meets the requirements of
being a married bachelor or an octogenarian under the age of
sixty; that there are no such things is necessarily true if any-
thing is. Further: it certainly appears to be necessarily true that
the concept prime number between fifty and fifty-five has ex-
Ilis word here is "tautological"; but if he takes this term to be nar-
rower than "necessarily true, " his claim will have no bearing on Anselm's
argument.
Shaffer, op. cit. , p. 323.
God and Other Minds
tension; it is true that the number fifty-three exemplifies it; and
how could that truth be merely contingent? Shaffer recognizes
this difficulty and deals with it as follows:
What makes this case puzzling is that we have no idea what would
count as establishing that the concept of a number has extension
or that it does not have extension. We can investigate whether the
concept of a number is a legitimate one, clear and self-consistent;
we can note its logical connection with other mathematical con-
cepts; and we can frame propositions which state these connections,
even propositions like "there exists a number which is even and
prime. " But what would count as showing that the concept over
and above its intensional content, has extension as well? Where
would one look for traces, signs, evidences, intimations or testi-
monies of the nature of numbers? Nothing would count as showing
that the concept of numbers had extension over and above its in-
tensional content, and this is to say that the notion of extension
does not apply here. The most that can be said is that numbers are
intensional objects. 17
But can this really be true? One thing that ordinarily counts
as showing that a given concept has extension, is showing that
there is at least one thing to which the concept applies. Now
surely the least prime is a number; but there is a least prime;
hence there is at least one number; hence the concept number
has extension. And if we find special difficulties in the claim
that there are numbers, we may take instead the concept prime
number between fifty and fifty-five. Have we really no idea of
what would count as establishing whether this concept has
extension? Surely we do; we establish this by determining
whether it applies to something--that is, by determining
whether there is a prime between fifty and fifty-five. Here we
certainly have an idea of the appropriate procedure--it is not
even difficult, let alone impossible. "Nothing would count as
"Ibid. , pp. 324-325.
The Ontological Argument (I)
showing that the concept of number had extension over and
above its intensional content, and this is to say that the notion
of extension does not apply here" (my italics). If this means
that while we can easily enough show, with respect to the con-
cept prime between fifty and fifty-five that it has intensional
content, we nevertheless cannot show that it has extension, it is
clearly false. But perhaps it means that the intension of the
concept itself determines whether it has extension. This seems
to be so for the concept in question. But does it follow that the
notion of extension does not apply here? Only if, presumably,
we embrace a special sense of "extension" such that concepts
that necessarily have extension in the usual sense are said to
have none in the new sense. It will then indeed follow that if
Anselm is right, the concept God, since it necessarily has ex-
tension in the usual sense, has none in the new sense. But this
will leave Anselm utterly unruffled.
IV
The last contemporary refutation of the ontological argu-
ment I shall consider is William P. Alston's impressive "The
Ontological Argument Revisited. " 18 After rejecting traditional
explanations and arguments for the dictum that existence is not
a predicate, Alston suggests a more adequate reading of it
which, he thinks, really does refute Anselm's argument. In this
section I shall consider in detail both Alston's objection to
Anselm's argument and the relevant portions of the more gen-
eral doctrine of predication his article contains.
Alston begins by distinguishing several "modes of existence"
including existence in the understanding, existence in reality,
and legendary or fictional existence. The "standard objections"
18Philosophical Review, LXIX (i960), 452-474. Reprinted in The
Ontological Argument, ed. A. Plantinga (New York, 1965), pp. 86-110.
Page references are to this volume.
God and Other Minds
(to be found in Ayer, Wisdom, and Broad--sec above, p. 38)
are vitiated, he says, by a failure to make this distinction. For,
granted different modes of existence, we can restate the argument
in a form which is not open to the standard objections. We can
get our subjcct of predication by presupposing the existence of a
perfect being in some nonrcal mode, where the existence is obvious.
Then we can argue that an analysis of this being shows that it pos-
sesses the characteristic of real existence.
It is interesting that St. Anselm's version of the Ontological
Argument (in his Proslogium) is explicitly in this form. .. . In-
stead of saying, with Descartes, that existence is contained in the
idea of a perfect being, Anselm speaks of a being than which noth-
ing greater can be conceived, which he initially supposes to have a
certain kind of existence--existence in the understanding. .. . He
can then raise the question of what can (or must) be attributed
to this being; the argument is, of course, that real existence, on
pain of contradiction, must be attributed to it. .. . In this form
the argument has recognized the principle that all predication pre-
supposes the existence of a subject, and so is not subject to any
attack based on this principle. 19
Alston next suggests some general points about predication:
An existential statement has the function of setting up a subject
for predication. Now that we have recognized different modes of
existence, we can add a further stipulation: the kind of existence
which is being stated will place limits on the sorts of predication
that can be made with respect to that subject, that is, on the logical
status of statements which can be made about it. 20
Some examples follow. If a man says "old man Karamazov
had three sons, " what he says presupposes fictional existence
for old man Karamazov and his sons. This being so the propo-
sition Either all of old man Karamazov's sons have died or else
"Ibid. , pp. 94-95-
Ibid. , p. 99.
The Ontological Argument (I)
at least one is still living does not follow from what he says,
as it would if what his statement presupposed was the real ex-
istence of Karamazov and his sons. In general,
we can say that the kind of considerations which are relevantly ad-
duced in defending or attacking a subject predicate statement, and
the sorts of implications which can be drawn from it, are a function
(in part) of the kind of existence presupposed. .. .
An existential statement determines a logical framework within
which predications can be made of what has been said to exist. It
can be construed as a license to make certain sorts of subject predi-
cate statements, and not others. .. .
An existential statement has the same sorts of implications as the
subject predicate statements it licenses and to that extent falls
within the logical framework it determines. 21
Now how, exactly, does this bear on the ontological ar-
gument?
Anselm escapes the standard criticism by presupposing existence in
the understanding so as to get a subject of which he can show real
existence to be necessarily predicated. But. .. the statement
which he is claiming to be necessarily true is a statement about a
being in the understanding, and as such exhibits the logical fea-
tures of statements based on a presupposition of mental exist-
ence. .. . Existence in the understanding shares with other non-
real modes of existence the following features. For each existent
in some nonreal mode, we can specify two sorts of real existence.
First, there is some real existent of a given sort. .. the existence
of which is entailed by the nonreal existence of the thing in ques-
tion. .. . Whenever something exists in my understanding, there
are real thoughts, ideas, images and so forth, in my mind which
would ordinarily be said to be about this thing. .. . Let us call
such a real existent the real correlate of a nonreal existent. .. .
Now it seems to be a defining feature of all nonreal modes of
Ibid. , pp. 100-101.
God and Other Minds
existence that any statement about something which exists in such
a mode will have no implications with respect to real things, ex-
cept for its real correlate and any implications that might have. .. . Any statement which attaches a predicate to something which
exists in my understanding can have no implications for the real
world except for the fact that I have, or have had, certain thoughts.
This means that if "The being than which nothing greater can
be conceived exists in reality" is to be interpreted as the attribu-
tion of a predicate to a being in the understanding, it can have no
implications with respect to the real world other than the fact that
Anselm, or whoever else forms this concept, had a certain idea in
his mind. .. .
"The perfect being exists in reality" can only be claimed to be
necessarily true, at least on the grounds adduced by Anselm, pro-
vided we construe "exists in reality" as a predicate of the perfect
being, the existence of which in the understanding has been pre-
supposed. But this gives us a statement the logical status of which
sharply distinguishes it from an ordinary statement of real existence
and prevents it from having the sort of religious significance for the
sake of which the conclusion was sought. 22
Alston's criticism of Anselm's argument can be encapsulated
as follows:
(a) Anselm's argument is successful only if its conclusion
predicates real existence of a being assumed to have
existence in the understanding
and
(b) No statement about a being presupposed to have ex-
istence in the understanding entails that it really exists.
Suppose we begin with (b). Presumably it is to follow from
(bi) If real existence were predicated of a being assumed to
Ibid. , pp. 102-105.
The Ontological Argument (I)
have mental existence, the resulting proposition would
lack the entailments that make the proposition God
exists religiously interesting.
But (bi) is not entirely clear. The idea, presumably, is that
there is no difficulty in attributing real existence to a being B
assumed to exist in the understanding. The result of doing this,
however, is not equivalent to the proposition B exists in reality;
the former lacks the latter's entailments "for the real world. "
And so we can predicate either mythical or real existence of a
being existing in the understanding. The Chimera, for example,
exists in the understanding, and presumably mythical existence
ought to be predicated of it. But here a question arises: exactly
how does one predicate real existence of a being--for example,
God--presupposed to have existence in the understanding?
What is the resulting proposition--that is, the proposition that
God, presupposed to exist in the understanding, exists in real-
ity? Alston seems to suggest that there is such a statement.
What statement is it? Is there a clue in the fact that "the vari-
ous modes of existence. .. are carried over bodily into fiction
and dreams and exist there with all their interconnections in-
tact"? 23 Within the realm of fiction there are beings presented
as having real existence, and also beings presented as having
dream existence (such as the Grand Inquisitor, who is a figure
in a dream of Ivan's in The Brothers Karamazov). The Red
Queen was a character in Alice's dream; Alice herself has real
existence in the story. Similarly someone might write a novel
in which the main character writes novels about what is pre-
sented in the novel as a fictional character named Dead-eye
Dick.
Can we find an analogous situation in the case of existence in
the understanding? Can we see what it would be, for example,
Ibid. , p. 109.
God and Other Minds
to predicate dream existence of something presupposed to exist
in the mind? Suppose I imagine a certain egregious animal that
is a cross between a kangaroo and a dragon fly. Suppose I name
it Ferdinand. Then Ferdinand has existence in the mind. Sup-
pose further I report a dream I had about Ferdinand. Is this
a case where I am (in the relevant way) predicating dream ex-
istence of a being presupposed to exist in the understanding?
No. For the statement that I dreamt about that being Ferdi-
nand I imagined yesterday has the implications that any simi-
lar dream statement has--it entails that I really did have a
dream. But to be parallel to the fiction case, it can have no such
implications. So how can I predicate dream existence of a being
presupposed to exist in the mind?
The crucial case, however, is that of predicating real exist-
ence of a being B presupposed to exist in the understanding.
Now the result of the predication is not, according to Alston,
to entail that B really exists. Must we say that B, which exists
in the understanding, is thought of as existing in reality?
On this interpretation Anselm's conclusion would be equiva-
lent to the proposition that
(c) God exists in the understanding and is thought of as
existing in reality.
Now Alston concedes that the conclusion of Anselm's argu-
ment, if he is predicating real existence of a being existing in
the understanding, is necessarily true. And of course (c) is not
necessarily true; it entails that someone believes that God exists
in reality, which is certainly contingent. So apparently the state-
ment Anselm makes when he predicates real existence of a
being that exists in the understanding--the statement "the
logical status of which sharply distinguishes it from an ordinary
statement of real existence and prevents it from having the sort
of religious significance for the sake of which the conclusion
The Ontological Argument (I)
was sought"--is not (c). But what statement is it? What state-
ment is it that results when Anselm predicates real existence
of a being he presupposes to exist in the understanding?
Perhaps, then, we should understand Alston as holding
that one cannot predicate real existence of a being presupposed
to exist in the understanding. At any rate he certainly means to
hold that one cannot assert a proposition entailing that such
a being really exists by predicating real existence of it. Why not?
"It seems to be a defining feature of all nonreal modes of
existence that any statement about something which exists in
such a mode will have no implications with respect to real
things, except for its real correlate and any implications that
might have. " IIow arc we to take "implication" here? In ex-
plaining the notion of "real correlates, " Alston points out that
any statement about some being that exists in a nonreal mode
entails the real existence of the real correlate of that thing. So
presumably we may read "implications" in the quoted state-
ment above as "entailments. " So taken, the principle needs
more careful statement. For I am no part of the real correlate
of the Chimera; but the proposition The Chimera is my fa-
vorite beast of fable is about the Chimera and entails that I
exist. Similarly for such a statement as More books have been
written about Hamlet than about Lyndon Johnson; this is about
Hamlet and entails something about Lyndon Johnson. Fur-
ther, a man may mistakenly believe that Cerberus really exists;
in that case, no doubt, he might assert that Boston was once
really visited by Cerberus. Boston is certainly not the real cor-
relate of Cerberus.
We might note with respect to the first difficulty that the
counterexamples are about me and Lyndon Johnson as well as
the Chimera and Hamlet; they are not merely about beings
existing in some nonreal mode. And the second difficulty can
be met as follows: what is important here is not whether the
S3
God and Other Minds
being in question exists in some nonreal mode, but whether the
statement in question (or the maker of that statement) pre-
supposes that it does. Hence (b) can be restated:
(•b2) If p is any statement merely about some being presup-
posed to have existence in some nonreal mode, then
any statement about real things entailed by p will be
about the real correlate of p's subject.
There is another perplexing matter here, however. Why can-
not a statement presuppose both existence in reality and exist-
ence in the understanding for its subject? It is clear, I think,
that many beings exist both in the understanding (as Alston
understands that phrase) and in reality. For Alston apparently
means to use that phrase in pretty much the way Anselm does;
but in the latter's use, from the fact that someone hears and
understands the name "the Taj Mahal, " it follows that the
Taj Mahal exists in the understanding. But of course it also
exists in reality; so many things exist both in reality and in the
understanding. Anselm's proof is designed to show that God
has just this status. But if beings often exist both in the under-
standing and in reality, there seems to be no reason why a
statement might not presuppose such dual existence for its
subject: a statement like The Taj Mahal is generally but mis-
takenly believed to be pink is a good candidate for this status.
Such a statement, of course, is about a being presupposed to
have existence in the understanding; nevertheless it entails that
the Taj Mahal really is not pink. But no doubt (bs) can easily
be restated so as to accommodate this matter:
(b3) If p is a statement merely about some being presup-
posed to have some nonreal mode of existence, but not
presupposed to have existence in reality, then any state-
ment about real things entailed by p will be about the
real correlate of p's subject.
The Ontological Argument (II)
Is (b3) true? There is a question about entailment that must
be resolved before we can tell--a question interesting enough,
perhaps, to warrant a digression. If we take it that p entails
q just in case the conjunction of p with the denial of q is neces-
sarily false, then any necessary statement is entailed by any
statement whatever. Alston does not believe that what he says
constitutes an argument against the existence of necessary ex-
istential statements. But if we construe entailment as above,
then (bj) entails that there are no necessary existential state-
ments, that is, necessary statements attributing real existence
to something. For any necessary existential statement (e. g. ,
there is a least prime number) would then be entailed by any
statement at all and hence by any statement merely about a
being for which some nonreal mode of existence was presup-
posed. Now (b3) entails that any statement about the real
world entailed by such a statement would be about the real
correlate of the statement's subject; the least prime is not, pre-
sumably, the real correlate of any such statement; hence There
is a least prime--which is certainly a necessary existential if
there are any at all--could not be both necessary and existential.
But perhaps the inadequacy of this characterization of en-
tailment is revealed by the very fact that it implies that every
proposition entails every nccessary statement. There is no deny-
ing the oddity of supposing, for example, that All bachelors are
unmarried entails every truth of arithmetic, including either
Goldbach's conjecture or its denial. C. I. Lewis, however, once
restated a very simple argument that was known to the medie-
vals and has never, I think, been satisfactorily answered. Lewis
argues that a contradiction entails just any proposition as fol-
lows: An explicit contradiction consists in the conjunction of
a proposition p with its denial not-p. This conjunction, clearly
enough, entails p. But p entails the disjunction of itself with
any proposition q. The contradiction also entails the denial of
God and Other Minds
p; hence it entails the conjunction of p or q with the denial of
p. But this clearly entails q. Schematically, we can put the argu-
ment thus:
Suppose (1) p and not-p,
then (2) p (from 1)
and (3) p or q (from 2)
and (4) not-p (from 1);
hence (5) (p or q) and not-p (from (3) and (4));
and hence (6) q.
At what points is this argument vulnerable? It might be said
that a proposition p does not entail its disjunction with just
any proposition--after all Johnson will be elected does not
entail Either Johnson will be elected or else we will have a
communist president. But "or" in line (3) must be construed
"truth functionally"; line (3) asserts only that at least one of
its disjuncts is true. And certainly from the truth of a given
proposition it follows that at least one disjunct of any disjunc-
tion of which it is a disjunct, is true. So step (3) is certainly
entailed by step (2) and hence (by the transitivity of entail-
ment) by step (1). Again, the argument form by which (2) and
(4) follow from (1) certainly yields entailments; but (3) and
(4) certainly entail their conjunction (line (5)) which again
by the transitivity of entailment is entailed by line (1). 24 So
line (1) entails line (5). Alan Anderson and Nuel Belknap
deny that (5) entails (6). 25 But surely it does. If I am given
a pair (any pair) -of propositions p and q and am told that at
least one of them is true and p is false, I can certainly infer that
q is true. If this is not an entailment step, it is hard to see what
Or if this is objected to, we may note that (1) entails (5) (given that
it entails (3) and (4)) by the principle that if p entails q and also en-
tails r then p entails the conjunction of q with r.
2= "Tautological Entailments, " Philosophical Studies, XIII (1962), 9,
17-20.
The Ontological Argument (II)
would be one. But then since (1) entails (5), and (5) entails
(6), (1) entails (6).
Various attempts have been made to avoid Lewis' conclusion
by denying that one or another of his inferences is an entail-
ment step. But these denials have consequences quite as para-
doxical as the conclusion they are designed to avoid. The pro-
posal of Anderson and Belknap has the paradoxical conclusion
that the disjunctive syllogism is not in every case a valid entail-
ment step; other proposals entail that entailment is not transi-
tive; 20 still others reject the general validity of the step from
the conjunction of p with q to p and to q. But all of these are
quite as paradoxical as the admission that a contradiction really
does entail just any proposition. Indeed, the denial of any of
the principles involved in Lewis' argument--that p and q en-
tails p and entails q, that p entails that at least one of the pair
of propositions {p q} is true, that the argument forms conjunc-
tion and disjunctive syllogism are entailment steps, and that
entailment is transitive--will be at least as paradoxical as
Lewis' conclusion. No doubt we are not inclined initially to
think that a contradiction entails just any proposition you pick;
but why can we not discover (through discovering an argument
like Lewis') that our initial inclinations were mistaken?
It is therefore hard to avoid the conclusion that a contradic-
tion entails every proposition. But then by contraposition it fol-
lows that the denial of a contradiction is entailed by just any
proposition. Let us say that a proposition is formally true if it
is the denial of any proposition that formally (i. e. , by means of
the usual rules of logic) entails an explicit contradiction; then
every formally true proposition is entailed by every proposition.
This result does not, of course, entail that just any necessary
proposition is entailed by every proposition. For a proposition
See, for example, Timothy Smiley, "Entailment and Deducibility, "
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, LIX (1959), 233-254.
God and Other Minds
like There is no least prime does not formally entail a contra-
diction--to dcduce a contradiction from it we must employ as
additional premises certain truths of arithmetic which no doubt
are necessarily true but need not be taken as truths of logic.
Nonetheless if we admit that any formally true proposition is
entailed by every proposition, our objection to the suggestion
that every necessary proposition enjoys the same status pretty
much evaporates: and with it goes the objection to the above
characterization of entailment.
To return then to Alston's principle (b); if we characterize
entailment as I have been suggesting, (b3) has the consequence
that there are no necessary propositions asserting real existence.
But perhaps we can take advantage of the difference between
entailment and formal entailment to restate (b3) as (b^:
(b4) If p is any statement merely about a being presupposed
to have existence in some nonreal mode (but not pre-
supposed to have existence in reality as well), then any
statement about real things formally entailed by p will
be about the real correlate of p's subject.
This version of (b) no longer entails that there are no neces-
sary existential propositions. This is small consolation, however,
for Anselm can accept (b4) with utter equanimity. He main-
tains, not that God exists in reality formally follows from God
exists in the understanding alone, but from the latter together
with the principle that existence in reality is greater than exist-
ence in the understanding alone. And the latter principle, while
no doubt necessarily true, according to Anselm, need not be
supposed to be a truth of logic. Accordingly Anselm is not
refuted by the observation that God exists in reality is not
formally entailed by God exists in the understanding. And of
course it is obvious that we cannot strengthen (b4) by replac-
ing its consequent with "then any statement about real things
The Ontological Argument (I)
formally entailed by the conjunction of p with any necessary
statement will be about the real correlate of p's subject. " For
then once more the principle will entail that there are no neces-
sary existential statements; so revised the principle is equivalent
to (b^). But perhaps we might make one last attempt:
(b5) If p is any statement merely about a being presupposed
to exist in some nonreal mode (but not presupposed to
exist in reality as well) then any statement about real
things that is formally entailed by the conjunction of
p with a necessary statement, and is not about the real
correlate of p's subject, will be formally entailed by
the necessary statement in question alone.
If (b5) is true, Anselm's argument is unsuccessful: he sets
out to deduce a contradiction from the supposition that God
exists in the understanding alone, together with what he takes
to be the necessary truth that existence in reality is greater than
existence in the understanding alone. This deduction is possible
only if the conjunction of God exists in the understanding with
the necessary principle formally entails that God exists in real-
ity. But the latter is certainly not formally entailed by the neces-
sary principle alone, and is also not about the real correlate of
God. Hence if (b5) is true, Anselm's argument must be invalid.
Sadly enough, however, (b$) appears to be too strong. For
consider again the least prime. It certainly exists in the under-
standing. Now the proposition It is false that the least prime
exists in the understanding but not in reality is necessarily true
(since it is necessary that there is a least prime). Conjoined
with The least prime exists in the understanding, it formally
entails The least prime exists in reality, which by itself it does
not formally entail. So here we have a counter instance to (b5):
we have a proposition p {The least prime exists in the under-
standing) merely about some being presupposed to have exist-
God and Other Minds
ence in some nonreal mode (but not presupposed to exist in
reality) such that there is a statement that (1) is formally en-
tailed by p's conjunction with a necessary proposition, but not
by that necessary proposition alone, and (2) is not about the
real correlate of the subject of p. Indeed, (b5), though more
subtle than (b3), is like the latter in entailing that there are
no necessary existential statements.
The project of finding a satisfactory statement of (b)--that
is, one that will defeat Anselm's argument but not entail that
there are no necessary existential statements--is beginning to
look implausible. But suppose we did have an adequate state-
ment of it. Why should we accept it? What are the reasons in
its favor? Alston does not explicitly argue for b; his procedure
is to give some examples that illustrate it. 27 Presumably he
hopes that in reflecting upon these examples we will be led to
see that the principle holds quite generally. And, indeed, the
examples do illustrate the principle; restricted to cases of the
sort the examples typify, the principle would be sound. But as
a perfectly general principle, it seems to be without support
and without a great deal of initial plausibility; it is hard to see
that Anselm, for example, ought to feel even the smallest obli-
gation to accept it.
We recall that (b) was the support for Alston's claim that
real existence cannot be predicated of a being presupposed to
exist in some nonreal mode--that existence is not a predicate.
Since we have been able to find neither a satisfactory statement
of (b) nor any reason for accepting it, we cannot use it to ob-
ject to Anselm's argument. Now Alston maintains that existen-
tial statements in general are not predicative. But are there not
alternative accounts that seem just as plausible? If subject-predi-
cate propositions have presuppositions, presumably it is either
Op cit. , pp. 99-102.
The Ontological Argument (II)
the proposition itself or the person asserting it that does the
presupposing. Now why not suppose that on any occasion when
a man makes a subject-prcdicate statement he (or the statement
he makes) presupposes the existence in the understanding (or
the "existence in the conceptual realm") of the statement's sub-
ject? Consider the first alternative. If a man says The Taj
Mahal is green but the Taj Mahal has no existence in the
understanding, what he says is peculiar in the same way as
The Taj Mahal is green but I do not believe it. And if we take
the second alternative--that it is the propositions themselves
(rather than persons) that presuppose existence for their sub-
jects--then presumably the "conceptual existence" of a thing
follows from the fact that it is the subject of some subject-
prcdicate proposition. Hence The Taj Mahal is green but the
Taj Mahal does not have conceptual existence would be neces-
sarily false. But whether it be persons or propositions that pre-
suppose, on this account all attributions of real existence would
be subject-predicate propositions predicating real existence of
a being presupposed to exist in the understanding (or the con-
ceptual realm). It is only propositions ascribing existence in the
understanding (or conceptual existence) that could be con-
strued as impredicative. I mention this alternative account, not
because I believe that it is true, but because it seems quite as
plausible as the account Alston gives; and unlike the latter, it
docs not stigmatize Anselm's argument if we construe the latter
as essentially involving the predication of real existence of a
being presupposed to exist in the understanding.
Alston's objection to Anselm's argument could be encap-
sulated, I said, in the following two premises:
(r) Anselm's argument is successful only if it treats existence
as a predicate by predicating real existence of a being
assumed to have existence in the understanding, and
God and Other Minds
(2) No statement about a being having existence in the
understanding entails that the being in question really
exists.
We have found reason to mistrust (2); (1), it seems to me, is
also dubious. For Anselm proposes to show that the proposition
God exists in reality is true by showing that God exists in the
understanding but God does not exist in reality is necessarily
false. But how, exactly, does his procedure involve treating ex-
istence as a predicate? Not, surely, just in arguing that a propo-
sition of the form x exists in the understanding but not in
reality is necessarily false. But then how? Presumably the an-
swer is that Anselm is treating existence as a predicate in ascrib-
ing real existence to a being presupposed to exist in the under-
standing. Here we should note that Anselm's argument can
easily be restated so that the notion of existence in the under-
standing plays no part in it, in which case it cannot be thought
to involve predicating real existence of a being presupposed to
exist in the understanding:
(1) Suppose that the being than which it is not possible that
there be a greater does not exist--assumption for re-
ductio.
(2) Any existent being is greater than any nonexistent being.
(3) The Taj Mahal exists.
(4) Hence the Taj Mahal is greater than the being than
which it is not possible that there be a greater--(1),
(2), (3).
(4) is necessarily false; hence the conjunction of (1), (2), and
(3) is necessarily false; (2) is necessarily true; hence the con-
junction of (1) and (3) is necessarily false; hence The Taj
Mahal exists entails The being than which none greater can
be conceived exists. But the former proposition is obviously
true; hence the latter is too.
The Ontological Argument (II)
We have no reason to believe, therefore, either that existence
in reality cannot be predicated of a being presupposed to exist
in the understanding, or that Anselm's argument necessarily
involves predicating real existence of such a being. I think the
conclusion to be drawn is that we do not yet have a general
refutation of Anselm's ontological argument. 28
For a brief comment on Frege's objection (in the Foundations of
Arithmetic) to the ontological argument, see my "Kant's Objection to
the Ontological Argument, " op. cit.
Three
The Ontological Argument (II)
I ARGUED in Chapter Two that none of the attempts to give
a general or wholesale refutation of the ontological argument
and its variants has succeeded. No one has produced, it seems
to me, a sense for the term "predicate" such that in that sense
it is clear both that existence is not a predicate and that An-
selm's argument requires it to be one. Nor has anyone shown,
it seems to me, that existential statements (or an appropriate
subclass of them) are not necessary. Every general argument
of this sort with which I am acquainted involves some unsup-
ported premise that does not seem self-evident and that Anselm
would scarcely be obliged to accept. Why should Anselm not
reply in these cases that his argument shows the premise to be
mistaken? There is no substitute, I think, for tackling Anselm's
argument directly and in detail. In this chapter I shall not
argue that no version of the ontological argument can possibly
succeed, but only that none of the more obvious ways of stating
it do in fact succeed.
The Ontological Argument (II)
I
The essential portion of Anselm's argument (as I stated it
above, p. 29) goes as follows:
Let "God" be an abbreviation for "the being than which
none greater can be conceived. "
Then
(1) Suppose God exists in the understanding but not in
reality.
(2) Existence in reality is greater than existence in the un-
derstanding alone.
(3) A being having all of God's properties plus existence in
reality can be conceived.
Therefore,
(4) A being having all of God's properties plus existence in
reality is greater than God--(2), (1).
So
(5) A being greater than God can be conceived--(3), (4).
(5), however, appears to be self-contradictory; since it was de-
duced from (1) with the help of the allegedly necessarily true
premises (2) and (3) and the definition of "God, " it follows
that (1) is necessarily false. But God does exist in the under-
standing; hence he exists in reality as well.
Now when Anselm defines "God" as "the being than which
none greater can be conceived, " I think we can represent his
intent by replacing that phrase with "the being than which it
is not (logically) possible that there be a greater, " or "the
greatest possible being. " Some philosophers object that the no-
tion of a being than which it is not possible that there be a
God and Other Minds
greater is self-contradictory or nonsensical and that the ontologi-
cal argument is therefore wrecked before it leaves port. 1 But
this is far from obvious. As they correctly point out, it seems
impossible to state a set of principles enabling us to compare
just any two beings with respect to greatness. If this is true it is
not easy to see its relevance; for even if it is false that every pos-
sible being can be compared with every other possible being
with respect to greatness, it scarcely follows that there is no
possible being that can be thus compared with every other pos-
sible being. And how could a being be greater than the God of
Christianity: how could an eternal, omnipotent, omniscient,
morally perfect being whose essence is love be improved upon?
Given, then, that "being than which none greater can be con-
ceived" is to be read as "being than which it is not possible that
there be a greater, " step (3) of the argument becomes
(3') It is possible that there be a being having all of the
properties of the greatest possible being plus existence
in reality.
That is, step (3) simply asserts that it is possible that God (the
greatest possible being) exists. And (5) then becomes
(5') It is possible that there be a being greater than the be-
ing than which it is not possible that there be a greater
which certainly does not have the ring of truth. Indeed, on the
plausible doctrine that if a given proposition p is logically neces-
sary, then the proposition that p is logically necessary is itself
logically necessary, (5') seems necessarily false. Our problem,
then, in determining whether the argument is sound, is to de-
termine whether (2) is true and whether (4) follows from (1)
and (2).
1See, for example, C. D. Broad, Religion, Philosophy and Psychical
Research (London, 1953), pp. 177-180.
The Ontological Argument (II)
But first of all we must determine what (2) says. What is
it to say that existence in reality is greater than existence in the
understanding alone? Given step (3), the minimum premise
that can be used to deduce (4) will be something like
(2a) If A has every property (except for nonexistence and
any property entailing it) that B has and A exists but
B does not, then A is greater than B,
which is a relatively weak premise. It does not, of course, entail
that every existent being is greater than every nonexistent being.
The idea behind it is as follows: if a being A shares with a being
B all of the latter's properties that make for greatness and in
addition A exists while B does not, then A is greater than B.
So, for example, if there were an actual being that shared with,
say, Superman, all the latter's properties that make for great-
ness, that being would be greater than Superman.
Now according to (3) there is a possible being (call it R)
that has all of God's properties plus existence; the idea is to
go on from there to show that this being R would be greater
than God. To carry through the argument formally, we must
instantiate (2a) onto R and God by replacing "A" and "B" in
(2a) with "R" and "God":
(2b) If R has every property (except for nonexistence and
any property entailing it) that God has and R exists
but God does not, then R is greater than God.
But now consider the antecedent of (2b); it asserts that R has
every property (with the noted exception) that God has. One
property God has is that of being the being than which it is
not possible that there be a greater; hence R has this property
too. But then R is the being than which it is not possible that
there be a greater; since, furthermore, R exists, the being than
which it is not possible that there be a greater exists; hence the
antecedent of (2b) is self-contradictory.
God and Other Minds
The following consideration may mollify anyone who finds
the procedure of the last paragraph too highhanded: there is,
presumably, some set S of properties so connected with the
description the being than which it is not possible that there
exist a greater that a being meets or exemplifies that descrip-
tion just in case it has every property in S. But then by hypothe-
sis R has every property in S, in which case R is identical with
the being than which it is not possible that there exist a greater;
in which case the latter exists. The antecedent of (2b) is thus
self-contradictory.
But how does this affect the proof? Since we have already
conceded (above, pp. 55-58) that a self-contradictory proposi-
tion entails just any proposition, we must admit that the ante-
cedent of (2b) entails just any proposition, in which case it
entails the consequent of (2b); (2b), therefore, is true and
indeed necessarily true, as is (2a) as well. Accordingly we can-
not very gracefully object to it.
In trying to restate the proof more formally, then, we have
the following:
(1) God exists in the understanding but not in reality.
(2) If A has every property (except for nonexistence and
any property entailing it) that B has, and A exists and
B does not, then A is greater than B.
(3) It is possible that there be a being having all of the
properties of God plus existence in reality.
Now step (4) (A being having all of God's properties plus ex-
istence in reality is greater than God) was to follow from steps
(1) and (2). I think we can see that it does if we restate it:
(4a) If there is a being that has all the properties of God
plus existence in reality, then there is a being that is
greater than God.
The Ontological Argument (II)
It is a principle of logic that if a pair of propositions p and q
jointly entail r, then p entails that q implies r. 2 Now step (1)
asserts that God does not exist. The antecedent of (4a) (There
is a being having all of God's properties (with the noted excep-
tion) plus existence in reality), however, entails that God does
exist. Hence the antecedent of (4a) conjoined with (1) is self-
contradictory and entails every proposition including, of course,
the consequent of (4a). But then by the above principle it fol-
lows that (1) entails that if the antecedent of (4a) is true, so
is its consequent--that is, (1) entails (4a). Hence we can
scarcely object to (4) either.
To follow the proof further we must deduce
(5) It is possible that there is a being greater than God
from the preceding steps. And if we can deduce (5), then the
proof will apparently be successful. But can we? Consider this
tempting expedient: first we insert
(4b) If p is possible and p entails q, then q is possible.
Then from (4b) together with (3) and (4a) we deduce (5) as
follows:
(3) It is possible that there is a being having all of God's
properties plus existence in reality.
(4a) If there is a being having all of God's properties plus
existence in reality, then there is a being greater than
God.
(4b) If p is possible and p entails q, then q is possible.
Hence
(5) It is possible that there be a being greater than God,
which entails (since it is identical with) the proposition that it
God and Other Minds
is possible that there be a being greater than the being than
which it is not possible that there be a greater. What has gone
wrong? The error, of course, is in supposing that (4a) is an
entailment; we can deduce (4a) from (1), but to perform the
deduction we must construe (4a) as a material conditional.
The necessity of (4a) does not follow from (1); but it is the
latter that is needed if we are to deduce (5) from (3), (4a)
and (4b). The fact is that nothing of interest follows from
(i)-(4); the suggestion is good for nothing but bedeviling
graduate students.
The difficulty with this version of the proof obviously centers
on step (2). Indeed, it is bound to, since (1) is the hypothesis
of a reductio and thus quite beyond reproach, and (3) is quite
apparently true, saying only, as it does, that it is possible that
God exists. And the difficulty with (2) is that it has a self-con-
tradictory antecedent; this guarantees its truth, but precludes
its functioning in some of the important ways conditionals
typically function--(2b) cannot function, for example, as the
major premise of a sound modus ponens argument. More to
the present point, it cannot function as the conditional prem-
ise in a sound argument of the sort in which one demonstrates
the possibility of a proposition q by deducing it from p entails q
and it is possible that p. Suppose, therefore, we try replacing
(2b) by
(2c) If A has every property B has except for (1) nonex-
istence, (2) any property that entails nonexistence, and
(3) any property that entails that A is identical with
B, and A exists and B does not, then A is greater
than B.
This suggestion does not fall victim to the ills besetting the
previous version; for when we instantiate (2c) onto the greatest
possible being and R as we did before, its antecedent will not
The Ontological Argument (II)
oblige us to attribute to R the property of being the being than
which it is not possible that there be a greater. But if (2c) does
not share every defcct of (2b), it still shares the crucial one; its
antecedent is also self-contradictory. For consider the anteced-
ent of the appropriate instantiation of (2c). It attributes to R
every property of God that entails neither that R does not exist
nor the R is identical with God. Now the property is identical
with God or is worshiped by Voltaire does not entail either
nonexistence or identity with God; hence by (2c's) antecedent
R has that property. The same holds for the property is identi-
cal with God or is not worshiped by Voltaire; hence R has this
property too. Further, of course, God has either the property
of being worshiped by Voltaire or the property of not being-
worshiped by him; and by the antecedent of (2c) R shares that
property with him. But then obviously R has a pair of proper-
ties that entail its identity with God; hence the antecedent of
(2c) entails both that R is identical with God and that R exists;
hence it entails that God exists, but also, of course, that God
does not exist. So (2c) is no better than (2b).
The fate of (2c) naturally drives us on to
(2d) If A is distinct from B and has every property B has
except for nonexistence and any property B alone has,
and A exists but B does not, then A is greater than B.
A little reflection, however, reveals that (2d) is no better than
(2c); for God, presumably, is not alone in having the property
of either being God or-being prime; nor is he alone in not being
prime. Hence R would have each of these properties and so,
once more, would be identical with God, rendering the ante-
cedent of (2d) self-contradictory. 3 Hence (2d) will not do
either.
If this example is too bizarre, consider instead the property of being
divine or human.
God and Other Minds
So far then we have not succeeded in finding an appropriate
version of (2). Let us consider next the following three possi-
bilities:
(2e) If A exists and B does not, then A is greater than B.
(2f) If A does not exist, then it is possible that there exist
a being greater than A (since A itself would be greater
if it existed).
To state the third possibility, let us suppose that wc have com-
posed a list of properties that make for greatness, and let us
call the properties on this list "1-properties. " Then
(2g) If A has every 1-property that B has and A exists and B
does not, then A is greater than B. 4
I shall consider only (2e), although what I say about it will also
apply, for the most part, to (2f) and (2g).
Now (2e) is peculiar, but not wholly implausible or obviously
false. If we are at all willing to compare nonexistents with ex-
istents with respect to greatness (and the reasons for not doing
so are tenuous), then (2e) has something to recommend it.
After all, nonexistent objects really do not amount to much
when it comes to greatness. Is not the merest earthworm really
a good deal more impressive than the most exalted but merely
fictitious being? Perhaps so (and then again perhaps not); in
any event (2e) is not obviously false. And given (20), our argu-
ment can be restated as follows: suppose
(1) God does not exist in reality.
(20) If A exists and B docs not, then A is greater than B.
1 (2f) was suggested to me by Keith Lehrer and (2g) by Peter De Vos.
Gaunilo also attributes something like (2c), (2f), or (2g) to Anselm:
see "On Behalf of the Fool" in The Ontological Argument, ed. A. Plan-
tinga (New York, 1965)^. 11.
The Ontological Argument (II)
(3) The Taj Mahal exists. 5
(4) The Taj Mahal exists and God does not--(1), (3).
(5) If the Taj Mahal exists and God does not, then the Taj
Mahal is greater than God.
(6) The Taj Mahal is greater than God--(4), (5).
(7) It is false that the Taj Mahal is greater than God.
Propositions (6) and (7), of course, are inconsistent. Proposi-
tion (7) is presumably to be thought of as necessarily true, be-
ing equivalent to
(7') It is false that the Taj Mahal is greater than the being
than which it is not possible that there be a greater.
Proposition (5) appears to follow quite properly from (2e);
(3) is indisputable and (4) certainly follows from (1) and (3).
Hence the conjunction of (1), (2e), and (3) is inconsistent.
Since (2c) is allegedly necessary, (1) and (3) are inconsistent;
but (3) is obviously true; hence (1) is false.
The monk Gaunilo objected that if Anselm's argument is
acceptable, then so is this one: "You can no longer doubt that
this island which is more excellent than all lands exists some-
where, since you have no doubt that it is in your understanding.
And since it is more excellent not to be in the understanding
alone, but to exist both in the understanding and in reality, for
this reason it must exist. For if it does not exist, any land which
really exists will be more excellent than it; and so the island
already understood by you to be more excellent will not be more
excellent. " 6 This objection may or may not apply to the previ-
ous versions of Anselm's argument; it does apply to this one.
Perhaps we can restate it more formally. By employing (2e)
° If we take as our premise here The number seven exists, then we get
the conclusion that (1) is necessarily false.
" hoc. cit.
God and Other Minds
as a premise we can produce an argument of the very same form
as Anselm's, with a preposterous conclusion: suppose
(1) The greatest possible horse7 does not exist.
(2e) If A exists and B does not, then A is greater than B.
(3) The least impressive horse in Kentucky exists.
(4) Tire least impressive horse in Kentucky exists and the
greatest possible horse does not--(i) (3).
(5) If the least impressive horse in Kentucky exists and the
greatest possible horse does not, then the least impres-
sive horse in Kentucky is greater than the greatest pos-
sible horse--(2).
(6) The least impressive horse in Kentucky is greater than
the greatest possible horse--(4), (5).
(7) It is false that the least impressive horse in Kentucky is
greater than the greatest possible horse.
And obviously in this way we can go on to prove the existence
of the greatest possible thing of any kind you please. Even more
unsettling, perhaps, is the fact that, given the premise that
greater than is transitive, we can show that there is no greatest
actual being. For suppose there were a greatest actual being a.
Then it would follow that:
(1) The being greater than a does not exist.
(2e) If A exists and B does not, then A is greater than B.
(3) The Taj Mahal exists.
(6) The Taj Mahal is greater than the being greater than
(2e)> (3)-
7 "Greatest possible horse" is to be read as "the horse than which it is
pot possible that there be a greater. "
The Ontological Argument (II)
(7) The being greater than a is greater than a. 8
(8) The Taj Mahal is greater than a-- (6), (7).
But of course (8) tells us that the Taj Mahal is greater than the
greatest actual being and hence is false; so (1) is false. It fol-
lows, therefore, that if there were a greatest actual being a,
then the being greater than a would exist; hence there is no
greatest actual being. But if there is no greatest actual being,
then there is no such thing as the being than which it is not
possible that there be a greater either--for the latter, if it ex-
isted, would of course be the greatest actual being. Hence by
using this form of argument we can show that God both does
and does not exist. Obviously, then, this form is not altogether
impeccable.
Now it might be objected here that we ought to lay certain
restrictions on the range and substituend sets of the variables
"A" and "B" in our statement of (2e). After all, we got our
paradoxical results by substituting for "B" such expressions as
"the being greater than the greatest possible being, " "the being
greater than the greatest actual being, " "the being greater than
the being than which it is not possible that there be a greater, "
and the like. And these descriptions, it may be argued, are one
and all logically incapable of exemplification in the sense that
any proposition entailing that one of them is exemplified is
necessarily false. Perhaps, then, we can improve matters by
restricting the substituend sets of the variables "A" and "B"
in such a way that they contain no descriptions that are log-
ically incapable of exemplification. (We can accomplish the
same result by prefacing (2e) with "where A and B are possible
beings. ")
One may properly view this premise with suspicion; but as we shall
see the reasons for rejecting it are equally reasons for rejecting step (7)
in our statement of Anselm's argument.
God and Other Minds
This expedient does not accomplish much. In the first place
it seems dreadfully ad hoc. The basic idea of (2e) was that
existent objects are all greater than nonexistent ones; necessarily
nonexistent objects, one would think, would then be pretty
insignificant indeed--scarcely worth talking about, if not alto-
gether beneath notice. Any reason for thinking that every exist-
ing object is greater than any contingently nonexisting object
would (one would think) be as good a reason for supposing
that every existing object is greater than any object that neces-
sarily fails to exist. But the latter principle is just what is being
deleted from (2a) by the proposed restriction.
Even if we waive this objection, however, (2e) so amended
will be unsuccessful. For even if we respect the restriction we
can still use the argument form to produce outrageous results.
One thing we can show, for example, is that if there are any
Guatemalans at all, there are an infinite number of them. For
suppose there is at least one, and call him Hector. Now there
is a Guatemalan greater than Hector. For suppose there is none:
then the Guatemalan greater than Hector does not exist. But
then by (2e) Hector is greater than the Guatemalan greater
than Hector. Hence it is false that there is no Guatemalan
greater than Hector. Our proof, however, depended upon no
special facts about Hector; hence we can generalize our con-
clusion to the result that for any Guatemalan there is a greater.
Given that the relation greater than is transitive, irreflexive,
and asymmetrical, it follows that the set of Guatemalans is
infinite. Hence if there are any Guatemalans at all, there is an
infinite set of them.
By employing (ze) in an argument of the same form as An-
selm's we can deduce a preposterous conclusion; something is
amiss with this version of Anselm's argument. But what? What
are the possibilities? Step (1) (God docs not exist) is the hy-
The Ontological Argument (II)
pothesis of the reductio; steps (3) (The Taj Mahal exists)
and (4) (The Taj Mahal exists and God does not) are cer-
tainly beyond reproach. Apparently there are just three possi-
bilities. Either (5) (If the Taj Mahal exists and God does not,
then the Taj Mahal is greater than God) does not follow from
(2e), or (2e) is false, or (7) (It is necessarily false that the
Taj Mahal is greater than God) is false.
With respect to the first of these possibilities, it might be
pointed out that not every grammatically proper replacement
for variables like "A" and "B" in a statement like (2e) will
yield a true sentence, even if the statement in question is true.
It is true that if A can run the mile in three and a half minutes
and B cannot, then A is faster than B; but it scarcely follows
that if nobody can run a mile in three and a half minutes and
George cannot, then nobody is faster than George. Even if it
is true that if A exists and B does not, A is greater than B, it
surely does not follow that if Nick exists and nobody does not,
Nick is greater than nobody. But if not just any grammatically
admissible substitutes for "A" and "B" may appear in their
substituend sets, which must be ruled out? To hold that in-
stantiating a proposition containing variables onto names of
nonexistents is always unsound practice is just to reject (2e)
and is going too far: If Pegasus is mythological then Pegasus
does not really exist certainly follows quite properly from the
corresponding quantified statement containing a variable in
place of "Pegasus. "
It is no doubt true that any term which replaces "A" or "B"
in (2e) must be a "referring term"--but only in a sense of that
phrase in which "Pegasus" is (though "nobody" is not) a refer-
ring term. It is also reasonable to insist, perhaps, that any sub-
stituend for "A" and "B", though it need not name a being
having "existence in reality, " must name one having some kind
God and Other Minds
of status or other--fictional or legendary or "existence in the
understanding. "9 But obviously this will not disqualify the
move from (2e) to (5). Indeed, it might serve to defend the
argument against the Gaunilonian sort of objection: for while
it is not easy to characterize this condition on the substituend
set of "A" and "B, " it seems fairly clear that "God" meets it
while "the greatest possible horse, " "the being greater than the
being than which it is not possible that there be a greater, " "the
Guatemalan greater than Hector, " and so on, do not. To re-
strict the range of the variables involved in (2e), incidentally,
is equivalent to qualifying it by replacing its implicit, fully uni-
versal quantifier with some such restricted quantifier. And
hence the first possibility really reduces to the second; for if
(2e) is true as it stands, that is, with the understood strictly
universal quantifier for any objects A and B, then (5) certainly
does follow from it.
It is therefore hard to see any reason for rejecting the infer-
ence of (5) from (2e). Should we instead reject (2e)? It is
certainly hard to see that it is false or nonsensical, though also
hard to find much reason for supposing it true. Still it would be
disturbing if our only objection to the ontological argument
were that this premise, though not obviously false, is not obvi-
ously true either.
Accordingly, let us consider
(7) It is necessarily false that the Taj Mahal is greater than
the being than which it is not possible that there be a
greater.
Now if (6) (the proposition resulting from (7) by deleting "it
is necessarily false that") is, or is equivalent to
•Cf. R. Cartwright, "Negative Existentials, " Journal of Philosophy,
LVII (i960), 638.
The Ontological Argument (II)
(6') The Taj Mahal really exists and the being than which
it is not possible that there be a greater really exists and
the former is greater than the latter,
then (6) is self-contradictory and (7) is clearly true. But then
if the proof is to succeed, (6) so taken (i. e. , as (6')) must fol-
low from (4) and (5), in which case (5) must be equivalent to
(5') If the Taj Mahal exists and God does not, then there
really is such a thing as the Taj Mahal and there really
is such a thing as God and the former is greater than
the latter.
And (5') certainly does not appear to follow from (2e); a prop-
osition of this form would follow from (2e), it seems, only if
the range of the latter's variables were restricted to existent
beings, in which case (2e) could not be instantiated upon "the
Taj Mahal" and "God" without a prior proof that God exists.
If (2e) is understood in some outre fashion according to which
it does entail (5'), then in that same way of understanding it,
(2e) will entail the following: If the Taj Mahal exists and the
Chimera does not, then there really is such a thing as the Taj
Mahal and there really is such a thing as the Chimera and the
former is greater than the latter. This is clearly false. Hence if
(2e) entails it, (2e) is false. Hence either (2e) does not entail
(5') or else (2e) is false. And hence if we understand (6) in
such a way that (7) is clearly true, the rest of the proof falls
to pieces.
Is (6) necessarily false even if it is not to be construed as
(6')? It is a principle of logic that if a proposition is necessarily
false then so is its conjunction with any other proposition.
Hence if (6) is necessarily false, so is
(6") The greatest possible being does not exist and the great-
God and Other Minds
est possible being is (for that very reason) a lesser being
than the Taj Mahal.
But (6") does not at any rate appear to be necessarily false.
We can easily imagine someone who accepted (2e) as accept-
ing (6"), and indeed accepting its second conjunct on the
grounds that its first conjunct is true. Here I am inclined to
think that when we speak of the being than which it is not
possible that there be a greater, we mean to be talking about
a being such that if it exists there cannot be a greater being;
it does not follow that even if it fails to exist there cannot be
a greater. 10 If existent and nonexistent beings can be cate-
gorically compared, then perhaps the truth of the matter is
this: if the being than which it is not possible that there be a
greater really does exist, then indeed nothing can be greater
than it; but if it does not (e. g. , if it is merely fictional) then
many things may be its superior.
There are other propositions that resemble (6) in form and
are not necessarily false. Suppose the meanest man in North
Dakota is Dirk Miedema, a resident of Ypsilanti renowned
throughout the area for his meanness. Suppose also that Fred-
erick Manfred writes a story about a fictional Bismarck resident
named Larz, further characterized as (among other things)
the meanest man in North Dakota. Now suppose (as Anselm
does) that it is possible to compare categorically an existent
being with a nonexistent (with respect to meanness). If it is
possible, then what are we to say about Larz and Dirk? Of each
we can correctly predicate, it seems, being the meanest man in
North Dakota. Is Larz meaner than Dirk? or vice versa? If the
categorical comparison is possible, then either
Unless comparisons involving nonexistent terms are necessarily hypo-
thetical (see above, p. 42) in which case (2e) will be of no use to the
argument anyway.
The Ontological Argument (II)
(a) The meanest man in North Dakota is not meaner than
(or identical with) Dirk Miedema, who lives in North
Dakota,
01"
(b) The meanest man in North Dakota is not meaner than
(or identical with) Larz, a North Dakota resident
will be true and hence consistent.
Suppose there were a story about the (merely fictional)
greatest man in the state of Washington. If we agree, again,
that existent and nonexistent beings may be compared with
respect to greatness, would we be obliged to claim that the
greatest man in Washington is really greater than, say, Jim
Whittaker, one of America's leading mountain climbers? Surely
not. Similarly for the greatest possible being: if it does not exist
then if one can compare existents with nonexistents (with re-
spect to greatness) at all, there may be many things superior
to it.
The difficulty with this version of the ontological argument,
then, is that if the relevant propositions of the form a is greater
than h are so construed that they do not entail the existence of
a and b, then (6) is not necessarily false and (7) is not true. 11
Now what we need for a really thorough examination of this
issue is a complete and accurate account of the predication of
properties of nonexistent beings. Unfortunately I am not able to
give such an account. Nonetheless this last form of the onto-
logical argument is as specious as the preceding one. No doubt
there are other reasonable interpretations of this Anselmian
argument; I can scarcely claim to have refuted the argument
"And this suggestion also disposes of the versions of the ontological
argument that replace (2e) by (zt) and (2g) (above, p. 72).
8l
God and Other Minds
iiberhaupt. But until other interpretations are suggested, the
verdict must be that the ontological argument is unsuccessful.
II
Charles Hartshorne and Norman Malcolm maintain that
Anselm stated two quite different ontological arguments. 12
Like Kant, they reject one of these arguments (roughly on the
grounds that it necessarily involves what they take to be the
false proposition that existence is a predicate). They believe,
however, that the other one is a perfectly sound argument for
the existence of God. In this section I shall consider this second
ontological argument as Malcolm states it.
I shall not be concerned with the question whether Malcolm
has interpreted Anselm correctly; instead I shall stick to Mal-
colm's exposition of this version of the ontological argument,
hoping to show that the argument is invalid. In essence, the
proof is an attempt to deduce God's necessary existence from
our conception of Him as a being than which none greater can
be conceived by showing "that the notion of contingent exist-
ence or of contingent nonexistence cannot have any applica-
tion to God. " 13 Malcolm's account of the proof falls into two
parts: an exposition and expansion of Anselm's argument and
a summary of it. In order to get the argument in its entirety
before us, I shall begin by examining the summary.
Let me summarize the proof. If God, a being a greater than which
cannot be conceived, does not exist then He cannot come into
existence. For if He did He would either have been caused to come
See, for example, Hartshorne, Man's Vision of God (New York, 1941),
and Anselm's Discovery (La Salle, 1965), which are entirely devoted to
this argument, and Malcolm, "Anselm's Ontological Arguments, " Philo-
sophical Review, LXIX (i960), 41-62 (reprinted in The Ontological
Argument, ed. Plantinga (New York, 1965), pp. 136-59),
Malcolm, op. cit. , p. 49.
The Ontological Argument (II)
into existence or have happened to come into existence, and in
either case He would be a limited being, which by our conception
of Him He is not. Since He cannot come into existence, if He does
not exist His existence is impossible [my italics--A. P. ]. If He does
exist He cannot have come into existence (for the reasons given),
nor can He cease to exist, for nothing could cause Him to
cease to exist nor could it just happen that he ceased to exist. So
if God exists His existence is necessary [my italics--A. P. ]. Thus
God's existence is either impossible or necessary. It can be the for-
mer only if the concept of such a being is self-contradictory or in
some way logically absurd. Assuming that this is not so, it follows
that He necessarily exists. 14
The structure of the main argument here seems to be the fol-
lowing:
(1) If God does not exist, His existence is logically impos-
sible.
(2) If God does exist, His existence is logically necessary.
(3) Hence either God's existence is logically impossible or
it is logically necessary.
(4) If God's existence is logically impossible, the concept
of God is contradictory.
(5) The concept of God is not contradictory.
(6) Therefore God's existence is logically necessary.
I take it that (3) is equivalent to the assertion that "the no-
tion of contingent existence or of contingent nonexistence can-
not have any application to God" 15; and in fact (3) follows
from (1) and (2). Before examining the argument for (1) and
(2), however, I wish to consider the intended meaning of the
phrase "logically necessary" as it occurs in the proof. It seems
reasonable to understand the assertion God's existence is log-
Ibid. , pp. 49-50.
Ibid. , p. 49.
God and Other Minds
ically necessary as equivalent to the assertion The proposition
"God exists" is logically necessary. I think this is Malcolm's
intention:
It may be helpful to express ourselves in the following way: to say,
not that omnipotence is a property of God, but rather that neces-
sary omnipotence is; and to say, not that omniscience is a prop-
erty of God, but rather that necessary omniscience is. We have
criteria for determining that a man knows this and that and can
do this and that, and for determining that one man has greater
knowledge and abilities in a certain subject than another. .. .
That God is omniscient and omnipotent has not been determined
by the application of criteria: rather these are requirements of our
conception of Him. They are internal properties of the concept, al-
though they are also rightly said to be properties of God. Necessary
existence is a property of God in the same sense that necessary
omnipotence and necessary omniscience are His properties. 16
It is a requirement of our conception of God that He is
omnipotent; it is merely putting this point a different way, I
believe, to say that the proposition God is omnipotent is log-
ically necessary. The sense in which necessary omnipotence is
a property of God is that the proposition God is omnipotent is
necessary. And necessary existence, says Malcolm, is a property
of God in the same sense in which necessary omnipotence and
necessary omniscience are. To say "God necessarily exists, "
then, is to say the same as "God exists is a necessary proposi-
tion. " This interpretation receives confirmation from the fol-
lowing sentence: "The a priori proposition 'God necessarily
exists' entails the proposition 'God exists, ' if and only if the
latter also is understood as an a priori proposition: in which
case the two propositions are equivalent. " 17 Taking "logically
necessary" and "a priori" as synonyms here, this passage seems
Ibid. , p. 50.
Ibid.
The Ontological Argument (II)
to mean that God necessarily exists is equivalent to "God ex-
ists" is necessary. I am assuming further that for Malcolm a
proposition is logically necessary if and only if its contradic-
tory is self-contradictory. If Malcolm's reconstruction of An-
selm's argument is correct, therefore, the proposition God does
not exist is self-contradictory.
I turn now to premises (1) and (2) of the argument as out-
lined above. The first step in the argument given in the sum-
mary for (1) is to show that from the conception of God as
the greatest conceivable being it follows that it is logically im-
possible for God to come (or to have come) into existence.
For if He had either been caused to come into existence, or
merely happened to come into existence, He would be a lim-
ited being. This inference seems quite correct; it follows from
our conception of God that:
(a) N 18 (God never has and never will come into exist-
ence).
In the summary Malcolm apparently deduces (r) from (a).
But this seems to be a mistake; for (a) does not entail (1)
although it entails a proposition similar in some respects to the
latter. Taking (a) and the antecedent of (1) as premises and
the consequent of (1) as the conclusion, the deduction of (1)
from (a) is equivalent to the following argument:
(a) N (God never has and never will come into existence).
(1a) God does not exist--antecedent of (1).
Therefore
(IC) N (God does not exist)--consequent of (1).
But (ic) does not follow from (a) and (ra). What does fol-
low is (ic'): God never will exist. That is, the proposition It
18 "N (. .. )" is to be read as "It is necessarily true that. .. "
God and Other Minds
is logically necessary that God never comes into existence en-
tails:
(1') N (If there is a time at which God does not exist, then
there is no subsequent time at which He does exist).
But (1'), of course, cannot play the role assigned to (1) in
Malcolm's argument, for (1') cannot help to show that the
notion of contingent existence does not apply to God. The ar-
gument for (1) in the summary seems invalid, then.
In the exposition of the proof there seem to be two different
though related arguments whose conclusions entail (1). I be-
lieve that Malcolm's reply to the above criticism would be to
appeal to one of these arguments. The one I am referring to
runs along the following lines: if God did not exist, and if the
fact that lie did not were merely contingent, then either He is
prevented from existing or He merely happens not to exist.
But it is contrary to the concept of God to suppose that any-
thing could prevent Ilim from existing; and if the supposition
that lie merely happens not to exist is consistent, then if He
did exist He would have "mere duration rather than eternity. "
But it is a requirement of our concept of God that He is an
eternal Being; hcncc it cannot be true both that God does not
exist and that the proposition God does not exist is logically
contingent. I shall consider this argument after examining the
argument in the summary for premise (2) of the proof.
Proposition (2) is deduced from (a) (see above) together
with
(b) N (God never has ceased and never will cease to exist).
Proposition (b), like (a), is deduced from the proposition that
God is a being than which no greater can be conceived. Taking
(a) and (b) together with the antecedent of (2) as premises
and the consequent of (2) as conclusion wc get the following
inference:
The Ontological Argument (II)
(a) N (God never has begun and never will begin to exist).
(b) N (God never has and never will cease to exist).
(2a) God exists--antecedent of (2).
Therefore
(2c) N (God exists)--consequent of (2).
Once again it is apparent that (2c) does not follow from (a),
(b), and (2a). What does follow is:
(2c') God always has existed and always will exist.
To put it differently, (a) and (b) together entail the follow-
ing necessary conditional:
(2') N (If at any time God exists, then at every time God
exists).
If God cannot (logically) come into or go out of existence, it
is a necessary truth that if He ever exists, He always exists.
But it does not follow that if He exists, the proposition God
exists is necessary. The correct definition of "God" might con-
tain or entail that He never comes into or goes out of existence,
in which case it would be a necessary truth that He never has
and never will cither begin or cease to exist. But nothing has
been said to show that the fact, if it is a fact, that there is a
being so defined is a ncccssary fact. The argument given in the
summary for (2), then, is also invalid.
Allow me to venture a guess as to the origin of the con-
fusion here. One way of advertising the neccssary truth of a
conditional, in English, is to inject some modal term into the
consequent. We might say, for example, "If Jones is a bach-
elor, he cannot be married"; and in so saying, of course, we do
not mean to assert that if Jones is a bachelor, the proposition
Jones is unmarried is neccssary. What we do mean is that If
Jones is a bachelor, he is unmarried is neccssary. Similarly here:
God and Other Minds
it is a necessary truth that if God exists, He always has and
always will. A proper (though misleading) way of putting this
is to say: if God exists, He cannot fail to exist eternally. But
this assertion, which is equivalent to my (2') above, and which
does follow from (a) and (b), should not be confused with
(2), which does not so follow.
Now the argument given in the summary for (1) and (2)
contains an omission. Malcolm argues that God cannot merely
happen to begin to exist nor merely happen to cease to exist,
and also that He cannot have been caused either to begin to
exist or to cease to exist. But he does not consider the possi-
bility that it just happens that God always has and always will
exist (and so happens neither to begin nor cease existing, nor
is caused either to begin or cease existing), nor does he con-
sider the possibility that it just happens that God never has
existed and never will exist. Malcolm's reply, as I have inti-
mated, is that if either of these were the case, then if God exists,
He has mere duration rather than eternity. After arguing that
it is contrary to the concept of God to suppose that He depends
upon anything for existence or that He could be prevented
from existing, Malcolm considers the possibility that God just
happens to exist;
Some may be inclined to object that although nothing could pre-
vent God's existence, still it might just happen that He did not
exist. And if He did exist that too would be by chance. I think,
however, that from the supposition that it could happen that God
did not exist it would follow that, if He existed, He would have
mere duration and not eternity. It would make sense to ask, "How
long has He existed? " "Will He still exist next week? " "He was
in existence yesterday but how about today? " and so on. It seems
absurd to make God the subject of such questions. According to our
ordinary conception of Him, He is an eternal being. And eternity
does not mean endless duration, as Spinoza noted. To ascribe
The Ontological Argument (II)
eternity to something is to exclude as senseless all sentences that
imply that it has duration. 19
The principle of this argument seems to be the contention
that if God merely happened to exist He would have duration
rather than eternity. In order to see whether the argument
holds up we must ask what it is to "happen to exist" and what
it is to have mere duration rather than eternity. Now Malcolm
appears to be using the locution "happens to exist" in such a
way that the sentence God just happens to exist is equivalent to
the conjunction of the following four sentences:
God just happens to exist = (a) God exists,
(b) God exists is logically con-
tingent,
(c) God is not caused to exist,
and
(d) God is not caused to exist
is logically necessary.
I am not sure about the inclusion of (d), but my argument
will hold without it. The situation with respect to the terms
"duration" and "eternity" is not quite so clear, unfortunately.
But at any rate the last sentence of the above quotation makes
it apparent that if something has eternity, it does not have
duration. We must therefore inquire what it is to have duration.
First of all it appears that if God had duration it would make
sense to ask "How long has He existed? " "He was in existence
yesterday, but how about today? " and so forth. Now Malcolm
is quite correct, surely, in holding that such questions cannot
sensibly be asked about God. But he seems mistaken in infer-
ring the sensibility of these questions from the proposition
that God just happens to exist. Let us agree that our normal
'Op. cit. , p. 48.
God and Other Minds
conception of God includes or entails that He is not caused to
exist and that His existence has neither beginning nor end.
It will then be true and necessarily true that
(7) If God exists, then there is a being whose existence is
not caused and who has neither beginning nor end.
The whole conditional is necessary, but we have no reason so
far for supposing that either its antecedent or its consequent is.
It may be a logically contingent truth, if it is a truth, that
there actually is a being so conccivcd. And if God, so defined,
does exist, the four conditions I suggested as constituting the
meaning of "God happens to exist" will all be fulfilled. But
the question "How long has God existed? " will not "make
sense. " For in asking the question one implies that He does
exist. And the assertion that God exists entails the assertion
that He has always existed. Hence anyone who understands
the question already knows the answer; to ask that question
seriously is to betray misapprehension of the concept of God.
Similarly the question "Will He still exist next week? " will be
absurd. For it also implies that He does exist; but in the con-
ception suggested above the conjunction He does exist now,
but next week He will no longer exist is contradictory. Hence
I conclude that God merely happens to exist does not entail
that God has duration in any sense involving the logical propri-
ety of questions of the sort Malcolm mentions.
Further on in the same passage, however, Malcolm seems to
introduce a slightly different sense of "duration":
If a thing has duration then it would be merely a contingent fact,
if it was a fact, that its duration was endless. The moon could have
endless duration but not eternity. If something has endless duration
it will make sense (although it will be false) to say that it will cease
to exist, and it will make sense (although it will be false) to say
The Ontological Argument (II)
that something will cause it to cease to exist. A being with endless
duration is not, therefore, an absolutely unlimited being. 20
Here it is suggested that the assertion God has duration has
three components. That assertion entails (a) that any state-
ment specifying the temporal limits of God's existence is con-
tingent, (b) that God will cease to exist is sensible, and (c)
that God will be caused to cease to exist is sensible, (c) appears
to entail (b); perhaps it is also meant to entail (a), but I leave
that question on one side. Now it seems clear that the proposi-
tion God merely happens to exist, understood as above, does
not entail (b). If an adequate definition of "God" includes
or entails that He never comes into or goes out of existence,
it obviously will not "make sense" to suppose that God will
cease to exist. For God will cease to exist entails There is a
time at which God exists and a later time at which He does not.
But under the definition in question that proposition is con-
tradictory. Hcnce the supposition that God merely happens to
exist does not entail (b). Nor does it entail (c), since (c)
entails (b).
The situation with respect to (a) is a bit more complicated.
Suppose we take the assertion
(8) God has neither beginning nor end
as a specification of God's temporal limits in the somewhat
Pickwickian sense that it denies any such limits to His exist-
ence. There are two possible interpretations of this proposition:
(8a) If God exists, then He always has existed and always
will exist,
and
(8b) God does exist and He always has existed and always
will exist.
Ibid.
9i
God and Other Minds
On the interpretation I have been suggesting, (8a) is logically
necessary; (8b) is contingent, though each of its conjuncts
entails the remaining two. Accepting the second interpretation
of (8), then, we might say that the proposition God merely
happens to exist entails that God has duration. But this is a
weak sense indeed of "duration"; in fact to say that God has
duration in that sense is to say no more than that God exists
is logically contingent--which, after all, was the essential com-
ponent of the contention that God merely happens to exist.
In particular this in no way implies that questions of the sort
Malcolm mentions are legitimate; nor does having duration
in this sense constitute a limitation. It is a mistake, therefore,
to suppose that God's happening to exist is inconsistent with
His being "that than which none greater can be conceived. "
Malcolm supports the argument I have just criticized by an
exegesis of a passage in Anselm's Responsio I:
In Responsio I Anselm adds the following acute point: if you can
conceive of a certain thing and this thing does not exist then if it
were to exist its nonexistence would be possible. It follows, I be-
lieve, that if the thing were to exist it would depend on other things
both for coming into and continuing in existence, and also that it
would have duration and not eternity. Therefore it would not be,
either in reality or in conception, an unlimited being. 21
The first point here seems to be that the proposition God
can be conceived but does not exist entails the proposition
If God existed, His nonexistence would be possible. This seems
correct. But Malcolm draws the further inference that if God
were to exist, then He would "depend upon other things" and
would have mere duration rather than eternity. This argument
comes to the following:
Ibid.
The Ontological Argument (II)
(9) If the existence of God were logically contingent, God
would depend upon other beings both for coming into
existence and for continuing in existence, and God
would have duration rather than eternity.
I believe I have already shown that from the supposition
that God's existence is logically contingent it does not follow
that He has duration rather than eternity, except in the trivial
sense in which predicating duration of God is saying no more
than that the proposition God exists is logically contingent. But
it seems equally clear that God's dependence upon other things
does not follow from the supposition that His existence is
logically contingent. Malcolm states his argument in such a
way that any statement of contingent existence entails that
the subject of the statement depends upon other things both
for coming into and for continuing in existence. But this is
surely a mistake. For suppose that certain elementary physi-
cal particles--for example, electrons--have always existed (in
which case they surely do not depend upon anything for com-
ing into existence) and that there is nothing upon which they
depend for their continued existence: it would not follow that
the statement "Electrons do not exist" is self-contradictory, or
that the existence of electrons is logically necessary.
Perhaps Malcolm had the following in mind here: even if
electrons depend upon nothing at all for coming into or con-
tinuing in existence the assertion that they do not so depend
is contingent. But the assertion that God does not depend
upon anything is necessary. And it is inconsistent to hold both
that God's existence is contingent and that it is a necessary
truth that He depends upon nothing at all either for coming
into or for continuing in existence. I think this is the heart of
Malcolm's argument. But I must confess inability to see the
inconsistency. Malcolm is entirely correct in taking it that the
God and Other Minds
proposition God does not depend upon anything for coming
into or continuing in existence is logically necessary. As he says,
the necessity of this proposition follows from the fact that God
is conceived, in the Hebraic-Christian tradition, as a being
than which nothing greater can be conceived. And hence an
adequate definition of the word "God" must include or entail
that He is dependent upon nothing whatever. But the assertion
that a being so defined exists, that the definition actually ap-
plies to something, may well be, for all that Malcolm and
Anselm have said, a contingent assertion. It is a necessary truth
that if God exists, then there is a being who neither comes
into nor goes out of existence and who is in no way dependent
upon anything else. But from this it does not follow, contrary
to Malcolm's argument, that the proposition There is a being
who neither comes into nor goes out of existence and who
depends upon nothing is necessary; nor does it follow that
God exists is necessary. Malcolm's reconstruction of the onto-
logical argument therefore fails.
F our
The Teleological Argument
IF the ontological argument smacks of trumpery and word
magic, the teleological proof is as honest and straightforward
as a Norman Rockwell painting. No doubt it is on this account
that it has enjoyed a wide popular appeal. Kant, who had little
but contempt for the ontological and cosmological arguments,
believed that the teleological proof
always deserves to be mentioned with respect. It is the oldest, the
clearest, and the most accordant with the common reason of man-
kind. It enlivens the study of nature, just as it itself derives its ex-
istence and gains ever new vigor from that source. .. . Reason,
constantly upheld by this ever-increasing evidence which, though
empirical, is yet so powerful, cannot be so depressed through doubts
suggested by subtle and abstruse speculation, that it is not at once
aroused from the indecision of all melancholy reflection, as from
a dream, by one glance at the wonders of nature and the majesty
of the universe--ascending from height to height up to the all-
highest. 1
Critique of Pure Reason, tr. N. Smith (London,
K. 1953), p. 520.
God and Other Minds
In many ways the teleologieal argument is more difficult to
discuss and assess than are the two theistic proofs already
examined. This difficulty arises mainly, perhaps, from the cir-
cumstance that it is an inductive or analogical argument; and
the logic of such argumentation is not nearly as well under-
stood as the logic of deductive argument. Furthermore, ques-
tions involving degrees of difference between widely disparate
classes of things (does the universe resemble a machine more
than it does an animal? or is it more like a vegetable? ) become
essentially relevant; and it is hard indeed to see how to answer
them.
A classic statement of the argument is to be found in David
Hume's Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion:
Look round the world: contemplate the whole and every part of it:
you will find it to be nothing but one great machine, subdivided
into an infinite number of lesser machines, which again admit of
subdivisions, to a degree beyond what human faculties can trace
and explain. All these various machines, and even their most mi-
nute parts, are adjusted to each other with an accuracy, which
ravishes into admiration all men, who have ever contemplated
tliem. The curious adapting of means to ends, throughout all nature,
resembles exactly, though it much exceeds, the productions of
human contrivance; of human design, thought, wisdom and intelli-
gence. Since therefore the effects resemble one another, we are led
to infer, by all the rules of analogy, that the causes also resemble;
and that the author of nature is somewhat similar to the mind of
man; though possessed of much larger faculties, proportioned to the
grandeur of the work, which he has executed. 2
Hume's treatment of the argument in the Dialogues is
widely hailed as a masterpiece of philosophical criticism.
"Hume's destructive criticism of the argument, " says Norman
Ed. with an introduction by Norman Kemp Smith (New York, 1947),
p. 143.
The Ontological Argument (II)
Kemp Smith, "was final and complete. " 3 And there is much
to be said for this estimate--Hume's discussion is matchless
for clarity, imagination, and grace. Since contemporary dis-
cussion of the argument is sparse we can probably do no better
than to consider carefully what Hume has to say about it. He
presents essentially two objections to the argument from design;
I shall argue that one of these is finally inconclusive while the
other is sound.
I
I begin with a connected system of objections whose unity
is easier to see than to characterize. The design argument as
stated is an argument by analogy and may be put schematically
as follows:
(r) The "productions of human contrivance" are the prod-
ucts of intelligent design.
(2) The universe resembles the productions of human con-
trivance.
(3) Therefore probably the universe is a product of intelli-
gent design.
(4) Therefore probably the author of the universe is an
intelligent being.
The objection is that the universe is not, after all, very much
like the productions of human design and intelligence--not
enough like them to support the argument. Why not?
But can you think, Cleanthes, that your usual phlegm and philoso-
phy have been preserved in so wide a step as you have taken, when
you compare to the universe houses, ships, furniture, machines; and
from their similarity in some circumstances infer a similarity in
their causes? .. . But can a conclusion, with any propriety, be
transferred from parts to the whole? Does not the great dispropor-
Ibid. , p.
God and Other Minds
tion bar all comparison and inference? From observing the growth
of a hair, can we learn anything concerning the generation of a
man? 4
Although this objection is not easy to evaluate, taken by
itself it does not seem very strong. Philo, in that dialogue,
apparently suggests that no whole can resemble its parts (or
some set of its parts) sufficiently to support an analogical in-
ference. But surely this is not so. I know that large parts of
the North Cascades Wilderness Area contain more than seven
Douglas firs to the acre (and have no contrary evidence);
I can reasonably conclude that the North Cascades Wilderness
Area itself probably contains seven or more Douglas firs to the
acre. On just the information cited, my conclusion certainly
seems to be more probable than not. The general conclusion
that one cannot properly argue from parts to whole is false.
Everything depends upon the specific whole and parts in
question.
Philo follows this objection with one that does take into
account the nature of the relevant whole:
When two species of objects have always been observed to be con-
joined together, I can infer, by custom, the existence of one when-
ever I see the existence of the other. And this I call an argument
from experience. But how this argument can have place, where the
objects, as in the present case, are single, individual, without paral-
lel, or specific resemblance, may be difficult to explain. And will
any man tell me with a serious countenance, that an orderly uni-
verse must arise from some thought and art, like the human; be-
cause we have had experience of it? To ascertain this reasoning, it
were requisite that we had experience of the origin of worlds; and
it is not sufficient, surely, that we have seen ships and cities arise
from human art and contrivance. 5
Ibid. , p. 147.
Ibid. , p. 150.
The Ontological Argument (II)
There are several suggestions contained here. One is that we
could arrive at inductive conclusions about the origin of the
universe only if we had had experience of the origin of various
universes, which, of course, would be difficult to manage. But
this suggestion is too strong; it implies that we could make
no sound inductive inference concerning the origin, for exam-
ple, of the largest crow in the Amazon jungle, since we obvi-
ously cannot have had experience of various largest crows in
the Amazon. The passage also suggests that the universe is
unique and singular, hence not sufficiently like the products
of human contrivance (or anything else, presumably) to sup-
port an analogical argument whose conclusion ascribes some
property to it. Again, if the suggestion is that nothing unique
and singular can figure as the subject of a sound analogical
argument, the suggestion is too strong; for surely we can reason
in this way about the largest crow in the Amazon jungle.
And why can we not evade the objection altogether? Note,
first, that there are certain connections between analogical
and straightforward inductive arguments. An analogical argu-
ment may have the following form:
(a) (5) The members of class y have A.
(6) a resembles the members of y.
(7) Therefore probably a also has A.
Now if a resembles the members of y, there will be some
(possibly complex) property that it shares with them. This
property will determine a class; wherever there is an argument
of form (a), therefore, there will be one of the following form:
(b) (8) The members of y are members of /? and have A.
(9) a is a member of /? .
(10) Probably a has A.
And the argument from design as stated by Cleanthes can
God and Other Minds
easily be recast so as to fit this form: y would be the class of
"objects of human contrivance"; /3 would be the class of things
"exhibiting the curious adaptation of means to ends" or the
"nice adjustment of means to ends"; A would be the property
of being the product of intelligent design and a would be the
universe.
Now if it happens that the members of y are the only mem-
bers of /? of which we know whether or not they have the
property A, we can restate the argument as follows:
(c) (11) Every member of /? of which we know whether
or not it has A, in fact has A.
(12) a is a member of /J.
(13) Therefore probably a has A. 6
The argument of form (c) is a good deal stronger than the
corresponding arguments of forms (a) and (b). And the
mentioned condition is satisfied in the case of the argument
from design. Clearly we do not know of any member of the
class of things exhibiting curious adaptation of means to ends
that is not the product of conscious and intelligent design:
even if we know that a thing was not designed by man we do
not know that God did not design it, unless we already know
that God did not design the universe (in which case it is
pointless to consider the teleological argument). Hence the ar-
gument may be restated as follows:
(14) Everything that exhibits curious adaptation of means
to ends and is such that we know whether or not it
was the product of intelligent design, in fact was the
product of intelligent design. 7
In an argument of this form, (3 will be the reference class, A the
sample property, and those members of /3 of which we know whether they
have A constitute the sample class.
'Why not cast (14) in the more familiar form: (11') All examined
IOO
The Ontological Argument (II)
(15) The universe exhibits curious adaptation of means to
ends.
(16) Therefore the universe is probably the product of in-
telligent design.
This is perhaps the strongest version of the teleological argu-
ment. And it may appear that the objection we are now con-
sidering--that the universe is unique, does not much resemble
machines, and so on--has no bearing at all upon it. That this
is so, however, is not clear. How does the fact that the universe
is single or unique affect the argument? It would seem to be
relevant only if it implies that there are no classes of which the
universe is a member (or perhaps no classes which contain it
and other things), and hence no reference class for the argu-
ment. But, of course, there are any number of classes to which
both the universe and many other things belong: the class of
very large things, for example, or of things more than fifty years
old. The mere fact that a thing is unique does not of course
entail that it has no property in common with anything else.
The fact that the universe is single or unique, therefore, does
not invalidate the argument. But perhaps we should construe
Hume's objection as a query: is there an appropriate reference
class for the argument? To investigate this question we might
try taking as its reference class the union of the class of, say,
Chevrolets with the unit class of the universe. Then our argu-
ment will proceed as follows:
(17) Every member of the class of Chevrolets plus the uni-
verse, of which we know whether or not it is the prod-
A's are B? Because this asserts more than the teleological arguer can
claim to know. There are many members of the reference class--eyes,
for example--that he has examined without discovering either that they are
or that they are not products of intelligent design. The class of examined
members of the reference class is not always identical with the sample
class; in these cases an argument of the form (11') cannot be used.
IOI
God and Other Minds
uct of intelligent design, is indeed the product of in-
telligent design.
(18) The universe is a member of the class of Chevrolets
plus the universe.
(19) Probably the universe is the product of intelligent de-
sign.
Here our argument is of the proper form and has true premises;
it is none the less preposterous. Why? We might consider the
following analogue: suppose I do not know whether Julius
Caesar was snub-nosed. I can then construct a class K by annex-
ing Julius Caesar to the class of snub-nosed persons and argue
as follows:
(20) Every member of K such that I know whether or not
he is snub-nosed, is.
(21) Julius Caesar is a member of K.
(22) So probably Julius Caesar is snub-nosed.
On the other hand, I can construct a class H by annexing
Julius Caesar to the class of non-snub-nosed persons, and by
an argument exactly paralleling (20)-(22) with H replacing
K, conclude that Julius Caesar is not snub-nosed. But it is not
easy to see just what is shown by the fact that it is possible to
construct these two arguments. That the argument {20)-(22)
can be paralleled by another inductive argument with a con-
clusion inconsistent with (22) docs not show that (2o)-(22)
is not an acccptable argument. For the perfectly proper argu-
ment whose conclusion is that the largest crow in the Amazon
is black (and whose major premise is that all observed crows
have been black) may be paralleled in similar fashion by an
argument whose reference class is the class I of white birds
plus the largest crow in the Amazon jungle. In this latter case
one of these arguments is stronger than the other in that its
The Teleological Argument
rcfcrence class--the class of crows--is somehow more appro-
priate or proper: but it is certainly not easy to say what this
appropriateness consists in.
Hume, indeed, in the passage quoted above (p. 98) may be
taken to suggest that in a good inductive argument the refer-
ence class is always a species or some other natural kind. No
doubt this would rule out arguments (iy)-(i9) and (14)-
(r6), as well as the argument from design; but it is much too
strong. There certainly are proper inductive arguments with
reference classcs such as the class of houses built between 1925
and 1935, the class of overweight adult human males, and the
class of crcosotcd railroad ties and telephone poles.
Nevertheless, the class of crows is a better reference class
than I is; an argument with I as its reference class is prepos-
terous. Perhaps the reason is that for every argument of this
sort (i. e. , with a reference class like I) for the conclusion that
the crow in question is not black, there is another just like it,
and just as strong, for the opposite conclusion. The objection
to (20)-(22) as a reason for supposing that (22) (Julius Caesar
is snub-nosed) is more probable than not on our total evidence
is just that the same total evidence yields an argument exactly
analogous to it, and of the same strength, for the denial of (22).
Is this objection available in the ease of the argument (17)-
(19)? If so, there must be available a nonempty class of ob-
jects known not to be the products of intelligent design; from
this we may then construct our reference class by taking its
union with the unit class of the universe. But what class would
this be? Mountains, plants, and the like will not serve, since we
do not know that they are not the products of God's intelligent
design. Taking such objects as numbers and propositions to
exist necessarily (and hence not by design) we might conceiv-
ably try to construct an appropriate reference class by annex-
ing the universe to--for example--the set of prime numbers.
God and Other Minds
This argument is utterly outrageous, but perhaps deserved by
anyone who suggests an argument like (i7)-(ig). On the other
hand, (iy)-(i9) could then be replaced by (23)-(25):
(23) Every contingent object such that we know whether or
not it was the product of intelligent design, was the
product of intelligent design.
(24) The universe is a contingent object.
(25) So probably the universe is designed.
To this argument certainly, and possibly to (i7)-(i9), the
objection to (2o)-(22) cannot be sustained. So we still do not
have a clear objection to either. Nevertheless (i7)-(i9) (and
possibly (23)-(25)) is preposterous, and its eccentricity cer-
tainly arises from the bizarre character of its reference class.
Even if we are unable to specify an acceptable general rule that
eliminates it, (i7)-(i9) must be rejected.
A very great deal of Hume's criticism of the argument is
devoted to the claim that the universe does not really resemble
the "objects of human contrivance" to which Cleanthes likens
it. Philo suggests that the world resembles an animal more than
a machine, and a vegetable more than either. 8 Will this sugges-
tion rule out (i7)-(i9)? And how, exactly, is it relevant to the
argument from design restated as an inductive argument with
"things that exhibit curious adapting of means to ends" as its
reference class? Perhaps as follows: if the reference class of an
inductive argument can be partitioned into a pair of classes of
objects widely disparate in character, the argument is to a cer-
tain degree weakened. If in addition all the members of its
sample class are of a sort very different from some of the ref-
erence class minus the sample class, the argument is weaker still.
In the extreme case, where the reference class is the set of Chev-
rolets plus the universe, or crickets plus Martians, and the
Op. cit. , pp. 171, 172, 176.
The Ontological Argument (II)
sample class consists exclusively in each case of objects from
just one of the two classes whose union forms the reference
class, it may be maintained reasonably, perhaps, that the argu-
ment is altogether worthless. The members of the reference
class must themselves resemble each other to some degree and
in particular the members of the sample class must resemble,
to some degree, the members of the reference class minus the
sample class. 9 If I argue that all adult lions are over five feet
long on the basis of my examination of some lions in Krueger
Park, my argument is not very strong. If I argue that all adult
animals are over five feet long on the same basis, my argument
is weaker still, if not worthless.
No doubt all this is so. Still, it is not of much help. For
naturally enough the members of any class resemble each other
in some respect; the problem is to specify how much and in
what respects the members of the sample class must resemble
those of the reference class minus the sample class. If my sam-
ple class consists of crows observed in Washington's Whatcom
County and my reference class is that of crows in the state gen-
erally, the fact that some members of my reference class but
none of my sample class reside outside Whatcom County is of
little consequence; not so if my sample class consists only of
crows and my reference class is animals generally. But it is
difficult if not altogether impossible to give rules for detecting
the sorts of differences that disqualify an argument; and in
criticizing the argument from design Hume does not do so.
Still, even if we cannot give rules for detecting relevant dif-
ferences or for determining appropriate degrees of similarity,
we are able to do this in practice; the fact is that we often
recognize, as in the case of some of the arguments mentioned,
that the sample class does not resemble the reference class
minus the sample class in the relevant respects. No doubt. But
'Ibid. , p. 144.
God and Other Minds
what, exactly, is the trouble with the reference class of the
teleological argument? True enough, the universe does not
greatly resemble a spring loom or a golf club. It may even be,
as Hume suggests, that it resembles an animal or a plant more
than the products of human contrivance--or at any rate that
there are some products of human contrivance to which it bears
less similarity than it does to some plants or animals. This, how-
ever, is not to the point, since plants and animals themselves
(as well as some of their parts) have the reference property:
they too exhibit the curious adaptation of means to ends. Eyes,
for example, are often cited as having this property.
The upshot of this objection about the reference class of the
argument from design is best construed, I think, as the question
whether its sample class resembles the reference class minus
the sample class sufficiently to support an inference of any
strength at all: Hume has given us no answer to this question.
And how are we to decide whether the admitted differences do
or do not disqualify the argument? Philo concedes that the
universe certainly seems initially to resemble things we know
to be designed; the impression that the universe has been de-
signed is hard to avoid: "A purpose, an intention, or design
strikes everywhere the most careless, the most stupid thinker;
and no man can be so hardened in absurd systems, as at all
times to reject it. " 10 Kant thinks the analogy of the universe
(or the parts we are acquainted with) to the products of de-
sign is sufficient to support some such argument and at any
rate better than any thing else at hand: "But at any rate we
must admit that, if we are to specify a cause at all, we cannot
here proceed more securely than by analogy with those pur-
posive productions of which alone the cause and mode of ac-
tion are fully known to us. " 11 And the fact is that the universe
Ibid. , p. 214.
Kant, op. cit. , p. 522.
The Teleological Argument
does seem to resemble in certain important respects, and with
certain qualifications, things we know to be designed. Perhaps it
also resembles such things as animals and trees; and surely there
are the differences Hume points out between the universe and
things we know to be designed. But there seems to be no reason
to think that these differences ruin the argument.
The just conclusion is that the teleological argument is
weaker, perhaps much weaker, than the inferences by which
we establish that almost all crows are black; but there is no
justification here for taking the further step of claiming that it
has no force at all. This objection is therefore inconclusive.
II
Hume's second objection begins with the existence of evil in
the world. Philo suggests at two points that the existence of
evil (or at any rate of the amount and variety of evil we actu-
ally find) is logically inconsistent with the existence of God. 12
If true, this would of course be an utterly devastating objection
to the argument from design: it would then follow that the
evidence at our disposal precludes instead of supports its con-
clusion. Cleanthes, indeed, appears to agree with Philo that the
existence of an all-powerful, omniscient, and perfectly good
deity is inconsistent with the existence of evil; 13 he therefore
proposes to discuss the existence of a deity not so exalted but
nonetheless "finitely perfect" I think this claim is entirely mis-
taken, but since it is more naturally regarded as an independent
argument against the existence of God, I shall defer what I
have to say about it to Part II (see below, pp. 1^-155). But
this is not the extent of Hume's objection from evil:
Let us allow, that, if the goodness of the Deity (I mean a good-
ness like the human) could be established on any tolerable reasons
Hume, op. cit. , pp. 199, 201.
"Ibid. , p. 203.
God and Other Minds
a priori, these phenomena, however untoward, would not be suffi-
cient to subvert that principle; but might easily, in some unknown
manner, be reconcilable to it. But let us still assert, that as this
goodness is not antecedently established, but must be inferred from
the phenomena, there can be no grounds for such an inference,
while there are so many ills in the universe, and while these ills
might so easily have been remedied, as far as human understanding
can be allowed to judge on such a subject. I am skeptic enough to
allow, that the bad appearances, notwithstanding all my reasonings,
may be compatible with such attributes as you suppose: But surely
they can never prove these attributes. 14
Just how is this to be understood? There seem to me to be
two possibilities. In the first place, Philo may be asserting that
the existence of evil disconfirms the existence of God; that is,
offers evidence for the proposition that there is no God. This
alone would not refute the argument, however, for even if what
we know about the world contains a set of propositions discon-
firming the existence of God, it may contain another set con-
firming it. My total evidence may give me some reason for
supposing that proposition false, but a stronger reason for sup-
posing it true. Does Hume mean to add that the negative evi-
dence from evil is so strong that the rest of our knowledge, no
matter what it was, could not possibly furnish stronger evidence
for God's existence? Although this seems a fairly natural read-
ing of Hume, it is dubious indeed--or at any rate is much too
strong a claim if the existence of God is logically compatible
with the existence of evil. 15
Hume's argument can be so stated as to avoid this extrava-
gant claim. For we may understand him as contending, not
that there could not be any evidence which, when conjoined
Ibid. , p. 211.
"A proposition p confirms a proposition q so strongly that there is no
proposition r (consistent with p) such that the conjunction of p with r
confirms the denial of q, only if p entails q.
The Ontological Argument (II)
with the existence of evil, confirms the existence of God, but
rather that the conjunction of evil with the evidence actually
at our disposal does not support this conclusion. On the evi-
dence to which the teleological argument draws our attention,
says Hume, the existence of a powerful designer who is morally
indifferent is as probable as the existence of God; but then on
that evidence it is not more probable that God exists than that
he does not. And this objection certainly has a great deal of
force. It is an instance of a more general objection that seems
to me correct.
In arguing that God exists, the theist typically means to ar-
gue for a proposition equivalent to a conjunction of which the
following are conjuncts:
(a) The universe is designed.
(b) The universe is designed by exactly one person.
(c) The universe was created ex nihilo.
(d) The universe was created by the person who designed it.
(e) The creator of the universe is omniscient, omnipotent,
and perfectly good.
(f) The creator of the universe is an eternal spirit, without
body, and in no way dependent upon physical objects.
Now we can put the objection as follows: the teleological ar-
guer may have some evidence (not very strong, perhaps, but
not completely negligible) for (a); but with respect to (b)-
(f) our evidence is altogether ambiguous. In the case of propo-
sitions (b)-(f) our total evidence affords in each case an argu-
ment against it as strong as any it yields for it.
Consider (b), for example. In many cases things exhibiting
the degree of unity the universe exhibits (supposing we could
ascertain this) have been designed by just one person; but in
just as many, such things (e. g. , Chevrolets) are the work of
several persons. Perhaps, Philo suggests, the universe was de-
God and Other Minds
signed by a committee of deities of some sort. (Or perhaps it
is the first unsteady attempt of an infant deity, or the last fee-
ble effort of a superannuated one. 10) The point is that on our
evidence a proposition inconsistent with (b) i? just as probable
as is (b) itself; but then it follows that (b) is not more prob-
able than not on our evidence. The same comment holds for
(c)-(f). Consider the conjunction of (d) witU saYs Philo:
our evidence affords an argument against it in that every intel-
ligent person we know about has had a body; so probably all
intelligent persons have bodies, in which c; ise the designer-
creator of the universe does too. In the same w; ay we may argue
that he is dependent upon physical objects in various ways, and
had parents.
Qean&es, Yo be sure, "cries to rep1! } 'to ftris Ymfc tfi rarstmrrrg-:
"You start abstruse doubts, cavils and objections: You ask me,
what is the cause of this cause? I know not; I care not; that con-
cerns not me. I have found a deity; and here I stop my enquiry.
Let those go farther, who are wiser or more enterprising. " 17
But of course the point is that if (b)-(f) are flo more probable
on his evidence than their negations, Cleanthes has not really
found a deity at all. His evidence supports the claim that the
universe was designed, but nothing stronger.
Philo himself carries this objection too far; he tries to em-
ploy it against (a) as well: "The world plainly resembles more
an animal or a vegetable than it does a watch or knitting loom.
Its cause, therefore, it is more probable, resembles the cause of
the former. The cause of the former is generation or vegetation.
The cause, therefore, of the world, we may infer to be some-
thing similar or analogous to generation or vegetation. " 18 As
Demea points out, however, that the world has a vegetative or
Hume, op. cit. , p. 167.
"Ibid. , p. 163.
Ibid. , p. 177.
The Ontological Argument (II)
generative origin is not inconsistent with (a); 19 hence the fact
that our evidence supports that proposition as strongly as it
does (a), does nothing to show that it does not support (a). It
is not as if we know that things with a vegetative or generative
origin are not the product of intelligent design.
If Philo's first objection to the argument from design is in-
conclusive, his second is much stronger. And so that argument
seems no more succcssful, as a piece of natural theology, than
the cosmological and ontological arguments. Now of course
these three are not the only arguments of their kind; there are
also, for example, the various sorts of moral arguments for God's
existence. But these are not initially very plausible and do not
become more so under close scrutiny. And so it is hard to avoid
the conclusion that natural theology does not provide a satis-
factory answer to the question with which we began: Is it ra-
tional to believe in God?
Ibid. , pp. 178-179.

Part II
NATURAL ATHEOLOGY

Five
The Problem of Evil
IF natural theology cannot answer our question, perhaps nat-
ural atheology--the attempt to prove the central beliefs of
theism false--can. Like the natural theologian, the natural
atheologian draws his premises from the class of propositions
that are necessarily true or accepted by common sense; his con-
clusions, however, are quite different.
The most impressive argument of natural atheology has to do
with the problem of evil. Many philosophers have held that
the existence of evil constitutes, in one way or another, a prob-
lem for those who accept theistic belief. 1 Those contemporary
philosophers who here find a difficulty for the theist claim, for
the most part, to detect logical inconsistency in the beliefs he
typically accepts. So H. J. McCloskey:
Evil is a problem for the theist in that a contradiction is involved
David Hume and some of the French Encyclopedists, for example, as
well as F. H. Bradley, J. McTaggart, and J. S. Mill.
"5
God and Other Minds
in the fact of evil, on the one hand, and the belief in the omnipo-
tence and perfection of God on the other. 2
And J. L. Mackie:
I think, however, that a more telling criticism can be made by way
of the traditional problem of evil. Here it can be shown, not that
religious beliefs lack rational support, but that they are positively
irrational, that the several parts of the essential theological doc-
trine are inconsistent with one another. 3
Essentially the same charge is made by Henry Aiken in an ar-
ticle entitled "God and Evil. " 4
These philosophers, then, and many others besides, hold that
traditional theistic belief is self-contradictory and that the prob-
lem of evil, for the theist, is that of deciding which of the rele-
vant propositions he is to abandon. But just which propositions
are involved? What, according to these authors, is the set of
theistic beliefs whose conjunction yields a contradiction? The
authors referred to above take the following five propositions
to be essential to traditional theism: (a) that God exists, (b)
that God is omnipotent, (e) that God is omniscient, (d) that
God is wholly good, and (e) that evil exists. Here they are cer-
tainly right; each of these propositions is indeed an essential
feature of orthodox theism. And it is just these five proposi-
tions whose conjunction is said by our atheologians to be self-
contradictory.
The first point to note is that of course these five propositions
do not by themselves formally entail a contradiction; to get a
formally contradictory set the atheologian must add some
proposition or other. But of course he cannot add just any
proposition he pleases. What conditions must be met by
2 "God and Evil, " Philosophical Quarterly, X (i960), 97.
3 "Evil and Omnipotence, " Mind, LXIV (1955), 200.
'Ethics, XLVIII (1957-58), p. 79.
The Problem of Evil
the proposition he adds (which I shall call (f)) if his accu-
sation is to be made good? First, the conjunction of (f)
with (a)-(e) must formally entail a contradiction. But what
further condition must it meet? If (f) were necessarily true
then (a)-(e) would formally entail the denial of (f); and
perhaps we could say of any proposition which formally entails
the denial of a necessarily true proposition that it is self-con-
tradictory, at any rate in a broad sense of that term. On the
other hand, if (f) were an essential part of theism, then, al-
though it would not follow that there is a contradiction in
(a)-(e), there would be one in some larger set of beliefs ac-
cepted by any theist. So to make good his claim the atheologian
must provide some proposition which is either necessarily true,
or essential to theism, or a logical consequence of such propo-
sitions. And none of the atheologians I quoted above seems to
have realized the difficulty of that task. Certainly none of them
has succeeded in producing such a proposition. McCloskey, for
example, seems not to have noticed that an additional premise
is required in order to deduce a contradiction, so (naturally
enough) he makes no attempt to provide one. Mackie, how-
ever, recognizes that
the contradiction does not arise immediately; to show it we need
some additional premises, or perhaps some quasi-logical rules con-
necting the terms "good, " "evil, " and "omnipotent. " These addi-
tional premises are that good is opposed to evil, in such a way that
a good thing always eliminates evil as far as it can, and that there
are no limits to what an omnipotent thing can do. 5
And Aiken, in the passage referred to above, tacitly adds two
premises that come to the same as Mackie's.
Now Mackie's second additional premise, if a bit imprecise,
is on the whole unexceptionable. It needs a small qualification
Op. cit. , p. 200-201.
God and Other Minds
that Mackie himself no doubt intended; what we must say is
that there are no nonlogical limits to what an omnipotent being
can do. God is omnipotent only if God can perform any action
that it is logically possible for him to perform. But the other
additional premise suggested by Mackie--that a good thing al-
ways eliminates evil as far as it can--does not seem to be true
at all, let alone necessarily true. For both the theist and his op-
ponent presumably regard any case of pain as an evil; but if
so, then the proposition in question is clearly false. A physician
who can eliminate the pain in your knee only by removing your
leg does not forfeit his claim to moral excellence by failing to
do so. It will be objected, of course, that since God, unlike the
physician, is omnipotent, the case stands very differently with
him. And so it docs. Still, the proposition suggested by Mackie
does not meet the conditions mentioned above; it must be qual-
ified or restricted in some way. How?
The physician escapes culpability bccause he cannot, or justi-
fiably believes that he cannot, eliminate the evil in question
without also eliminating a greater good. 6 So perhaps we can
say that a person is not morally culpable in producing an evil
E, if he justifiably believes that he can produce G, a good that
outweighs E, only by producing E; nor culpable in failing to
eliminate an evil if he justifiably believes that he can eliminate
it only by eliminating a greater good. Perhaps we can restate
Mackie's proposition in the following way:
(fi) A person P is wholly good only if
(1) P holds no belief such that his holding it is morally
censurable, and there is no belief he fails to hold
such that his failing to hold it is morally censur-
able, and
(2) P tries to eliminate every state of affairs that he
° I. e. , a good state of affairs that outweighs the evil state of affairs.
Il8
12J
The Problem of Evil
believes is evil, and that he believes he can elim-
inate without eliminating a greater good.
Now what Mackie needs is a necessary proposition that con-
nects (b), (c), and (d) on the one hand with (e) on the other
--that is, one connecting God's goodness, omniscience, and
omnipotence with the existence of evil. Proposition (fi), how-
ever, says nothing about omniscience and Omnipotence. As a
step toward repairing that dcfcct we might note that an omnis-
cient person automatically satisfies the first condition laid down
in (fi); for it is hard to see how a person could be morally
censurable for holding a belief he knows to be true or for fail-
ing to hold a belief he knows to be false. And the second condi-
tion can be stated more simply, since a reference to belief is
no longer needed:
(f) An omniscient person P is wholly god only if he tries
2 0
to eliminate every evil state of affairs that he can elim-
inate without eliminating a greater good.
An omnipotent being in the sense mentioned above can per-
form (roughly) any logically consistent action; hence either it
is a logically necessary truth that evil exists C) else God is able
r
to eliminate any case of evil whatever. No refutable theologian,
so far as I know, has held that the proposition There is evil is
logically necessary; accordingly, I shall assume henceforth that
God can eliminate every case of evil whatever. On the other
hand, we cannot blithely assume that every case of evil is one
which an omnipotent being can eliminate without eliminating
a greater good. It has been held, for example, that in some
cases a display of courage and fortitude in th face of suffering
e
outweighs the suffering in question; and nt even God can
eliminate Jones's suffering without eliminating Jones's courage
and fortitude in his suffering. Under what Conditions will an
God and Other Minds
omnipotent being be unable to eliminate one state of affairs
without also eliminating another? Since such a being can per-
form (roughly) any logically consistent action, the atheologian
might be inclined to hold that God is unable to eliminate a
state of affairs S without eliminating a state of affairs S' only
if S is a logically necessary condition of S'; that is, only if the
proposition S' obtains entails the proposition S obtains. 7 Fol-
lowing this line of thought, he might be tempted to restate (f)
for an omnipotent, omniscient being as follows:
(f) An omnipotent, omniscient person is all good only if
s
he eliminates every evil state of affairs which is not a
logically necessary condition of a good state of affairs
that outweighs it.
This, however, is too liberal. Consider any evil state of affairs
E such that there is a good state of affairs G which outweighs
it. G-and-E (the state of affairs that obtains just in case both
G and E obtain) is a good state of affairs, and it is also a log-
ically sufficient condition of E. Hence, any evil E which is out-
weighed by at least one good G, is a logically necessary condi-
tion of a good state of affairs (G-and-E) which outweighs it.
But this means that an omnipotent and omniscient being could
permit as much evil as he pleased, without, under (f), forfeit-
ing his claim to omnibenevolence, so long as for every evil state
of affairs he permits, there is a greater good. That is to say, he
could permit as much evil as he pleased, provided that there
was a balance of good over evil in the universe as a whole; and
this would be so even if it were within his power to create a
better universe just by excising some or all of the evil states of
And wherever a state of affairs S' is a logically necessary condition of
a state of affairs S I shall say that S entails S'.
The Problem of Evil
affairs which in fact obtain. Therefore (f) is not the proposi-
a
tion for which the atheologian is looking.
How can we repair (fa)? Its inadequacy lies in its suggestion
that an evil state of affairs E is not a good candidate for elim-
ination if at least one good state of affairs G entails it; this is
too weak, for there may be a state of affairs better than G that
does not entail E, which state of affairs would then be prefer-
able to G. To strengthen (f) we must add that an evil need
not be eliminated only if some good G entails it, such that
every state of affairs better than G also entails it; an all-good
being will eliminate every evil E such that for every good en-
tailing E, there is a greater good that does not entail it. Here
one is inclined to object that perhaps some conjunctive state of
affairs which included some of the goods which entail E, as well
as those which do not, might be better than any good state of
affairs composed solely of goods which do not entail E. To raise
this objection, however, is to forget that by hypothesis for
every good state of affairs which entails E, there is a better state
of affairs which does not. So, in particular, for any good state of
affairs containing conjunctively some good state of affairs en-
tailing E, there is a better state of affairs which does not con-
tain any good entailing E. It seems, therefore, that what follows
is at least part of the proposition the atheologian is looking for:
(f) An omnipotent, omniscient person is wholly good only
if he eliminates every evil which is such that for every
good that entails it, there is a greater good that does not
entail it.
The atheologian may be saddened to note, however, that the
conjunction of (a)-(e) and (f) is not a formally contradictory
set either. If it were formally contradictory, (a)-(d) and (f)
would jointly entail the denial of (e)--that is, they would en-
12J
God and Other Minds
tail that there is no evil at all. But they do not entail that; what
they entail is
(g) Every evil E is entailed by some good G such that every
good greater than G also entails E.
And hcnce the atheologian must add still another proposition
to the set (a)-(c) and (f) in order to get a formally contra-
t
dictory set. The proposition he adds must, of course, meet the
very same conditions that (f ) had to meet; it must be neces-
sarily true or an essential part of theism or a conscqucnce of
such propositions. Furthermore, this proposition must entail,
in conjunction with (a)-(e) and (f ), the denial of (g):
There is at least one evil state of affairs such that for
every good that entails it, there is a greater good that
does not.
Let us say that an evil state of affairs is justified just in case it
is false that for every good that entails it there is a greater good
that does not. To convict the theist of inconsistency, the athe-
ologian must deduce the proposition that there is unjustified
evil from (a)-(e) and (f ) together with propositions which
are necessarily true or essential to theism or consequences of
such propositions. Now it looks very much as if the only prop-
osition that is essential to theism and relevant to the deduction
in question is (e) itself--the proposition that evil exists. Hence,
it looks as if the atheologian must deduce the existence of un-
justified evil from (e) together with necessary propositions. But
if this is so, then he must hold that
(h) If there is any evil, there is unjustified evil
is entailed by some set of necessary propositions and is itself,
therefore, necessarily true. Here some contemporary atheolo-
gians apparently mistake the logic of the situation. They seem
12J
The Problem of Evil
to suppose that the theist, if he doesn't wish to accept the
charge of inconsistency, must show that every evil state of af-
fairs is justified. McCloskey, for example, says that a certain
argument proposed by some theists,
if valid, justifies only some evil. A belief that it justifies all the evil
in the world is mistaken, for a second argument, by way of supple-
ment to it, is needed. This supplementary argument would take
the form of a proof that all the evil that occurs is in fact valuable
and necessary as a means to greater good. Such a supplementary
proof is in principle impossible; so, at best this fifth argument can
be taken to show only that some evil may be necessary for the pro-
duction of good, and that the evil in the world may perhaps have
a justification on this account. 8
But if the argument in question does show that the evil in the
world may perhaps have a justification, then surely it suffices
to rebut the charge of contradiction. What McCloskey must
show is that it is logically impossible that there is evil and that
all of it is justified; if it is even possible that all evil is justified,
then, surely, there is no contradiction in the joint assertion of
(a)-(e).
No atheologian, so far as I know, has proved or even tried
to prove that the proposition If there is any evil in the world,
then there is unjustified evil is necessarily true. Indeed, it is
hard to see what form such a proof could take. In an admirable
reply to the article by Aiken mentioned above, Nelson Pike
claims that no such proof could be given:
If the proposition "There is good reason for evil in the theistic uni-
verse" (i. e. , "there are motives or other factual considerations
which, if known, would render blaming God for evil inappropri-
ate") could be true, then the logic of the phrase "perfectly good
person" allows that the propositions "God is a perfectly good per-
Op. cit. , p. 105.
God and Other Minds
son" and "God allows evil in the world although he could prevent
it" could be true together. This point rests on the fact that a per-
fectly good person can allow evil, provided he has a good reason.
Since the first of the three propositions just mentioned is clearly
not contradictory and thus could be true, the conjunction of the
latter propositions is also free of contradiction and the contention
that a perfectly good person would of necessity prevent evil if he
could is shown, beyond question, to be in error. 9
Pike does not here explain what, in his view, might constitute
good reasons for God's allowing evil to occur; but let us sup-
pose for the moment that in his view the only good reason an
omnipotent and omniscient being could have for allowing an
evil state of affairs would be that the evil in question is not
such that for every good which entails it there is a greater good
that does not. So taken, Pike's position amounts to the claim
that
(h) If there are any evil states of affairs, there are unjusti-
fied evils
is not a necessary proposition.
If this is Pike's meaning, then I think he is right; but perhaps
this is not an altogether foregone conclusion. At any rate it
may be worth while asking what sort of argument the atheolo-
gian could produce for the necessity of (h). He might try
arguing first that if a state of affairs is evil then it cannot be
a logically necessary condition of a good state of affairs. But
this is not true at all, let alone necessarily true. Any pair con-
sisting of a good G and an evil E where G outweighs E will
provide a counterexample, for G-and-E will be a good of which
E is a necessary condition.
'"God and Evil: A Reconsideration, " Ethics, LXVIII (1957-1958),
119. Cf. also Pike's "Hume on Evil, " Philosophical Review, LXXII
(1963), 184-188.
The Problem of Evil
Taking his cue from this objection to his first try, the atheo-
logian might assert that (i) is necessarily true:
(i) Any good G which entails an evil E is or is equivalent10
to a conjunctive state of affairs one conjunct of which
is E and the other a good that (1) outweighs and is
logically independent of E, and (2) is better than G.
Proposition (i) evidently entails
(j) Every evil state of affairs is such that for every good
that entails it, there is a greater good that does not,
and (j), asserting as it does that every evil state of affairs is
unjustified, surely entails (h).
But is (i) necessarily true? The answer seems to be that
we have already noted one apparent counterexample to it:
the case of the man whose magnificent bearing of pain out-
weighs the evil of the pain itself. It seems impossible to analyze
this situation into a conjunctive state of affairs one conjunct
of which is Jones's being in pain while the other is some good
state of affairs which outweighs and is logically independent of
Jones's being in pain, and is better than his magnificent bearing
of the pain. On the other hand, however, the atheologian
might protest that
(k) Someone's bearing pain is never a good state of affairs;
that at best the bearing of pain, no matter what noble qualities
of character are exhibited, is a matter of making the best of
a bad situation. And, indeed, (k) appears to be entailed by
(i), since no good state of affairs consisting in someone's bear-
ing pain (magnificently, or in some other laudable way) meets
States of affairs S and S' are equivalent if and only if S entails and
is entailed by S'; they are logically independent if neither S nor the
complement of S (the state of affairs which obtains just in case S does
not) either entails or is entailed by S'.
God and Other Minds
the condition laid down in (i). Hence if (k) is false, so is
(i). Now (k), of course, is a moral or ethical judgment.
At this point it may be helpful to review the logic of the
situation. The atheologian claims that the set of propositions
(a)-(e), admittedly an essential part of theistic belief, is con-
tradictory. It is evident at first sight that the set is not formally
contradictory; some proposition must be added to the set if
a contradiction is to be deduced from it formally. This prop-
osition must, if the atheologian's claim is to be vindicated,
be either necessarily true or an essential part of theism or a
consequence of such propositions. Now (f ) appeared to be
the appropriate necessary proposition connecting omniscience,
omnipotence, omnibenevolence, and the elimination of evil.
However, (a)-(e) + (f ), is not a formally contradictory set
either; a further proposition must be added. This further prop-
osition, whatever it is, must of course meet the very same con-
dition (f ) had to meet; it too must be necessary, or an es-
sential part of theism, or a consequence of propositions falling
into those two classes; and in conjunction with (a)-(e) +
(f ) it must entail
(g) There is some unjustified evil.
The only proposition essential to theism and relevant to the
deduction of (g) from propositions which are either necessary
or essential elements of theism, however, appears to be (e)
itself. Since that is so the atheologian must find a necessary
premise from which
(h) If there is any evil then there is unjustified evil
follows; and this necessary proposition is to be added to the
set (a)-(e) + (f ). The last suggestion was that it is (i)
which is to be added; and (a)-(e) + (f ) + (i) clearly is a
contradictory set. (i), however, appears to entail (k), an ethical
The Problem of Evil
proposition which the theist may well dispute. The question
before us, then, is this: Can the atheologian justifiably add
moral judgments (or propositions that entail moral judgments)
to the set (a)-(e) + (f) in attempting to deduce a con-
tradiction from the theist's position? And if he may, what con-
ditions must these moral judgments meet?
Some philosophers have thought that some moral judgments,
at any rate, are, if true, necessarily true. Even if this view were
correct, however, the atheologian could not properly add just
any necessary moral judgment to (a)-(e) + (f) in attempting
to show that the theist's position is necessarily false. For after
all, the point of his whole endeavor is to show that the theist's
beliefs are irrational; but moral judgments are notoriously the
sort of propositions about which careful and rational people
can and do disagree. Let us say that a moral judgment is self-
evident if no reasonable person who understood and carefully
considered it would believe its denial. Now any moral judgment
the atheologian can justifiably add to (a)-(e) + (f) must be,
I should think, either self-evident or an essential part of theism;
nor may he add any proposition (whether a moral judgment
or not) nontrivially entailing a moral judgment that meets
neither of these conditions. 11 This criterion may not always be
And this requires a revision in our statement of the conditions which
must be met by any proposition the atheologian can justifiably add to the
set (a)-(e) in order to show that the theist's position is contradictory.
These conditions may be stated more accurately as follows:
The atheologian can justifiably add a set S of statements to (a)-(e)
if and only if
(1) Each of S's members is either necessarily true or an essential
element of theism or self-evident or a deductive consequence of
such propositions, and
(2) The only moral judgments nontrivially entailed by the set S
are self-evident or essential elements of theism
where a proposition p nontrivially entails a moral judgment m if and only
if there is an argument such that its only premise is p, its conclusion is m,
12J
God and Other Minds
easy to apply; but at any rate it does rule out many moral
judgments.
In particular, it rules out (k). Reasonable persons who un-
derstand and carefully consider it do sometimes deny (k).
Hence the atheologian cannot justifiably add any proposition
entailing (k) to (a)-(e) + (f ) in order to deduce a contra-
diction from the theist's position; he cannot, therefore, add (i).
So far, then, we have not been able to find a proposition,
necessarily true or an essential part of theism or a consequence
of such propositions, which in conjunction with (a)-(e) +
(f ) entails a contradiction. Indeed, we have not so much as
produced a plausible candidate. If this does not show that
there is no such proposition, it suggests that finding one is
much more difficult than most atheologians seem to suppose.
There is another matter of interest here. One may distinguish
a priori atheological arguments, whose main counterpart in
natural theology is the ontological argument, from a posteriori
atheological arguments, which correspond to such arguments
as the cosmological and teleological proofs. What we have
been considering so far is an a priori atheological argument,
one whose conclusion is that the theist's position is self-con-
tradictory. But an a posteriori argument from evil may also
be given. The atheologian might hold, for example, that we
actually find certain kinds of evil that no good state of affairs,
no matter how impressive, could possibly outweigh--severe,
protracted, and involuntary human pain, for example. That
there is severe, protracted, and involuntary human pain is an
obvious fact of experience, on a par, roughly, with such vener-
able premises of natural theology as that there are objects
standing in causal relations with one another. But if it is true
and each of its steps follows from preceding steps by an argument form
whose corresponding conditional is self-evident.
The Problem of Evil
that no good state of affairs ever outweighs such a case of pain,
then no good state of affairs ever entails an evil state of affairs
consisting in such a case of pain; and hence no such evil state
of affairs is ever justified. And from the fact that unjustified
evil occurs, it follows that there is no omnipotent, omniscient,
wholly good being. This argument is an a posteriori one, for
one of its premises--that there is severe, protracted, involun-
tary human pain--is clearly not a priori (nor an essential part
of theism).
The tricky premise, of course, is the claim that
(1) No case of severe, protracted, involuntary human pain
is ever outweighed by any good state of affairs.
The theist will certainly deny that (1) is true; and it is very
difficult indeed to see how one could show it to be true. Tire
atheologian cannot, of course, advance his case by maintaining
that (1) is analytic or true by definition in the sense in which
a proposition is analytic just in case it can be reduced to a
truth of logic by replacing some of its terms with their defini-
tions. For suppose he succeeded in producing some reasonably
plausible definition of, say, "good state of affairs" such that
the result of substituting it for "good state of affairs" in (1)
was a truth of logic; the theist would then retort that the sug-
gested definition does not express what he means by "good
state of affairs"; and if the atheologian were to convince him
that the definition was correct with respect to the ordinary use
of that phrase, the theist would simply admit that he had been
misusing the phrase in question, retract his agreement to (f)
(a wholly good, omnipotent, omniscient being would eliminate
every evil state of affairs which is such that for every good state
of affairs that entails it, there is a better state of affairs that
does not) and replace (f) by something like
God and Other Minds
(f) A wholly good, omnipotent, omniscient being would
eliminate every state of affairs which is such that for
every valuable state of affairs that entails it, there is
a more valuable state of affairs that does not.
Further, he would add, although perhaps no good state of af-
fairs can ever outweigh protracted and severe human pain,
valuable states of affairs can perfectly well do so. And now,
the argument is exactly where it was before the atheologian
made his claim of analyticity.
The atheologian's only recourse at this point is to claim that
(1), though not analytic, is nonetheless necessarily true. He
might argue, for example, that it is utterly inconceivable that
any good state of affairs outweigh protracted and severe human
pain. The theist, of course, will demur; and here the disputants
seem to reach an impasse. The most that can be said for the
atheologian who accepts (1) is, I think, that the existence of
protracted and severe human pain provides him with a decisive
reason for believing that God does not exist; but he could
hardly claim that the theist is involved in any difficulty here.
For he cannot claim (without stooping to name-calling) that
(1) is a proposition which no reasonable person who under-
stood it would deny; one of the hallmarks of such moral judg-
ments as (1) is just that reasonable persons can and sometimes
do disagree about them.
Six
The Free Will Defense
CHAPTER FIVE suggests that the set of propositions (a)-
(e) (above, p. 116) is, contrary to the atheologian's claim,
consistent. And in Chapter Five we assumed, for purposes of
argument, that a morally perfect, omniscient, and omnipo-
tent being would permit an evil state of affairs to exist only
if that evil state of affairs were a logically necessary condition
of a good which outweighed it. This assumption is by no
means self-evident, however, and apologists for traditional theism
have often denied it; they have suggested that perhaps there
are certain good states of affairs that an omnipotent God can-
not bring about without permitting evil, despite the fact that
these goods are not a logically sufficient condition of any evil
at all. This suggestion on their parts is sometimes called the
free will defense; in this chapter I shall explain and examine
it.
First of all, a distinction must be made between moral evil
and physical evil. The former, roughly, is the evil which results
God and Other Minds
from human choice or volition; the latter is that which does
not. Suffering due to an earthquake, for example, would be
physical evil; suffering resulting from human cruelty would be
moral evil. This distinction, of course, is not very clear and
many questions could be raised about it; but perhaps it is not
necessary to deal with these questions here. Given this distinc-
tion, the free will defense is usually stated in something like
the following way. A world containing creatures who freely
perform both good and evil actions--and do more good than
evil--is more valuable than a world containing quasiautomata
who always do what is right because they are unable to do
otherwise. Now God can create free creatures, but He cannot
causally or otherwise determine them to do only what is right;
for if He does so then they do not do what is right freely.
To create creatures capable of moral good, therefore, He must
create creatures capable of moral evil; but He cannot create
the possibility of moral evil and at the same time prohibit
its actuality. And as it turned out, some of the free creatures
God created exercised their freedom to do what is wrong: hence
moral evil. The fact that free creatures sometimes err, however,
in no way tells against God's omnipotence or against His good-
ness; for He could forestall the occurrence of moral evil only
by removing the possibility of moral good.
In this way some traditional theists have tried to explain or
justify part of the evil that occurs by ascribing it to the will
of man rather than to the will of God. At least three kinds of
objections to this idea are to be found in both traditional
and current writings. I shall try to develop and clarify the free
will defense by restating it in the face of these objections.
I
The first objection challenges the assumption, implicit in the
above statement of the free will defense, that free will and
The Free Will Defense
causal determinism are logically incompatible. So Antony
Flew:
To say that a person could have helped doing something is not to
say that what he did was in principle unpredictable nor that there
were no causes anywhere which determined that he would as a
matter of fact act in this way. It is to say that if he had chosen to
do otherwise he would have been able to do so; that there were al-
ternatives, within the capacities of one of his physical strength, of
his I. Q. , of his knowledge, open to a person in his situation. .. .
There is no contradiction involved in saying that a particular ac-
tion or choice was: both free, and could have been helped, and so
on; and predictable, or even foreknown, and explicable in terms of
caused causes. .. .
If it is really logically possible for an action to be both freely
chosen and yet fully determined by caused causes, then the key-
stone argument of the Free Will Defence, that there is contradic-
tion in speaking of God so arranging the laws of nature that all
men always as a matter of fact freely choose to do the right, cannot
hold. 1
Flew's objection, I think, can be dealt with in fairly summary
fashion. He does not, in the paper in question, explain what
he means by "causal determination" (and of course in that
paper this omission is quite proper and justifiable). But pre-
sumably he means to use the locution in question in such a
way that to say of Jones's action A that it is causally deter-
mined is to say that the action in question has causes and that
given these causes, Jones could not have refrained from doing
A. That is to say, Flew's use of "causally determined" is pre-
sumably such that one or both of the following sentences, or
some sentences very much like them, express necessarily true
propositions:
1 "Divine Omnipotence and Human Freedom, " in New Essays in Philo-
sophical Theology, ed. A. Flew and A. Maclntyre (London, 1955), pp.
150, 151, 153.
God and Other Minds
(a) If Jones's action A is causally determined, then a set
S of events has occurred prior to Jones's doing A such
that, given S, it is causally impossible for Jones to re-
frain from doing A.
(b) If Jones's action A is causally determined, then there
is a set S of propositions describing events occurring
before A and a set L of propositions expressing natural
laws such that
(1) The conjunction of S's members does not entail
that Jones does A, and
(2) The conjunction of the members of S with the
members of L does entail that Jones does A.
And Flew's thesis, then, is that there is no contradiction in say-
ing of a man, both that all of his actions are causally deter-
mined (in the sense just explained) and that some of them are
free.
It seems to me altogether paradoxical to say of anyone all of
whose actions are causally determined that on some occasions
he acts freely. When we say that Jones acts freely on a given
occasion, what we say entails, I should think, that either his
action on that occasion is not causally determined, or else he
has previously performed an undetermined action which is a
causal ancestor of the one in question. But this is a difficult and
debatable issue; fortunately we need not settle it in order to
assess the force of Flew's objection to the free will defense.
The free will defender claims that the sentence "If there are
free actions, not all of them are causally determined" expresses
a necessary truth; Flew denies this claim. This strongly suggests
that Flew and the free will defender are not using the words
"free" and "freedom" in the same way. The free will defender
apparently uses the words in question in such a way that the
The Free Will Defense
sentences "Some of Jones's actions are free" and "Jones did
action A freely" express propositions inconsistent with the prop-
osition that all of Jones's actions are causally determined. Flew,
on the other hand, claims that with respect to the ordinary use
of these words, there is no such inconsistency. It is my opinion
that Flew is mistaken here; I think it is he who is using these
words in a nonstandard, unordinary way. But we need not try
to resolve that issue; for the free will defender can simply make
Flew a present of the word "freedom" and state his case using
other locutions. He might now hold, for example, not that God
made men free and that a world in which men freely do both
good and evil is more valuable than a world in which they un-
freely do only what is good; but rather that God made men
such that some of their actions are unfettered (both free in
Flew's sense and also causally undetermined) and that a world
in which men perform both good and evil unfettered actions is
superior to one in which they perform only good, but fettered,
actions. By substituting "unfettered" for "free" throughout his
account, the free will defender can elude Flew's objection alto-
gether. 2 So whether Flew is right or wrong about the ordinary
sense of "freedom" is of no consequence; his objection is in an
important sense merely verbal and thus altogether fails to dam-
age the free will defense.
II
Flew's objection, in essence, is the claim that an omnipotent
being could have created men who were free but nonetheless
causally determined to perform only right actions. According
to a closely allied objection, an omnipotent being could have
made men who, though free, and free from any such causal
Since this is so, in what follows I shall continue to use the words
"free" and "freedom" in the way the free will defender uses them.
God and Other Minds
determination, would on every occasion freely refrain from per-
forming any evil actions. Here the contemporary spokesman
is Mackie:
If God has made men such that in their free choices they some-
times prefer what is good and sometimes what is evil, why could
he not have made men such that they always freely choose the
good? If there is no logical impossibility in a man's freely choosing
the good on one, or on several occasions, there cannot be a logical
impossibility in his freely choosing the good on every occasion.
God was not, then, faced with a choice between making innocent
automata and making beings who, in acting freely, would some-
times go wrong; there was open to him the obviously better pos-
sibility of making beings who would act freely but always go right.
Clearly, his failure to avail himself of this possibility is inconsistent
with his being both omnipotent and wholly good. 3
This objection is more serious than Flew's and must be dealt
with more fully. The free will defense is an argument for the
conclusion that
(a) God is omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good, and
God creates free men who sometimes perform morally
evil actions
is not contradictory or necessarily false. 4 What Mackie says,
I think, may best be construed as an argument for the conclu-
sion that (a) is necessarily false; in other words, that God is
omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good entails No free men
He creates ever perform morally evil actions. Mackie's argu-
ment seems to have the following structure:
(1) God is omnipotent and omniscient and wholly good.
3 "Evil and Omnipotence, " Mind, LXIV (1955), p. 209.
And of course if (a) is consistent, then so is the set (a)-(e) (above,
p. 116), for (a) entails each member of that set.
The Free Will Defense
(2) If God is omnipotent, He can create or bring about any
logically possible state of affairs.
(3) God can create any logically possible state of affairs--
(1), (*)•
(4) That all free men do what is right on every occasion is
a logically possible state of affairs.
(5) God can create free men such that they always do what
is right--(4), (3).
(6) If God can create free men such that they always do
what is right, and if God is all good, then any free men
created by God always do what is right.
(7) Any free men created by God always do what is right--
(5), (6).
(8) No free men created by God ever perform morally evil
actions--(7).
Doubtless the free will defender will concede the truth of
(4). There is a difficulty with (2), however, for
(a) That there is a state of affairs that is not created by God
is a logically possible state of affairs
is clearly true. But (2) and (a) together entail
(b) If God is omnipotent, God can create a state of affairs
that is not created by God.
And (b), of course, is false; (2) must be revised. The obvious
way to repair it seems to be something like
(2') If God is omnipotent, then God can create any state
of affairs S such that God creates S 5 is consistent.
Similarly, (3) must be revised:
BAnd even this is really too strong; certain restrictions must be laid
upon the substituend set of "S" (see below, p. 170).
God and Other Minds
(3') God can create any state of affairs S such that God
creates S is consistent.
(2') and (3') do not seem to suffer from the faults besetting
(2) and (3); but now it is not at all evident that (3') and (4)
entail
(5) God can create free men such that they always do what
is right
as the original argument claims. To see this, we must note that
(5) is true only if
(5a) God creates free men such that they always do what is
right
is consistent. But (5a), one might think, is equivalent to
(5b) God creates free men and brings it about that they al-
ways freely do what is right.
And (5b), of course, is not consistent; for if God brings it about
that the men He creates always do what is right, then
they do not do what is right freely. So if (5a) is taken to ex-
press (5b), then (5) is clearly false and clearly not entailed by
(3') and (4)
On the other hand, (5a) could conceivably be used to ex-
press
(5c) God creates free men and these free men always do
what is right,
which is surely consistent; it is indeed logically possible that
God create free men and that the free men created by Him al-
ways do what is right. And conceivably the objector is using
(5) to express this possibility--that is, it may be that (5) is
meant to express
The Free Will Defense
(5d) The proposition God creates free men and the free men
created by God always do what is right is consistent.
If (5) is equivalent to (5d), then (5) is true--in fact, neces-
sarily true (and hence trivially entailed by (3') and (4)). But
now the difficulty crops up with respect to (6), which, given
the equivalence of (5) and (5d) is equivalent to
(6') If God is all good and the proposition God creates free
men and the free men He creates always do what is
right is consistent, then any free men created by God
always do what is right.
Mackie's aim is to show that the proposition God is omnipo-
tent, omniscient, and all good entails the proposition No free
men created by God ever perform morally evil actions. His at-
tempt, as I outlined it, is to show this by constructing a valid
argument whose premise is the former and whose conclusion is
the latter. But then any additional premise appealed to in the
deduction must be necessarily true if Mackie's argument is to
succeed. And although (6') is one such additional premise,
there seems to be no reason for supposing that (6') is true at
all, let alone necessarily true. Whether the free men created
by God would always do what is right would presumably be up
to them; for all we know they might sometimes exercise their
freedom to do what is wrong. Put in a nutshell the difficulty
with the argument is the following. Proposition (5a) (God
creates free men such that they always freely do what is right)
is susceptible of two interpretations ((5b) and (5c)). Under
one of these interpretations (5) turns out to be false and the
argument therefore fails. Under the other interpretation (6)
turns out to be contingent, and again the argument fails.
So far, then, the free will defense has emerged unscathed
from Mackie's objection. One feels, however, that more can
*39
God and Other Minds
be said here, that there is something to Mackie's argument.
What more? Well, perhaps something along the following
lines. It is logically possible that all men always do only what
is right. Now God is said to be omniscient and hence knows,
with respect to any person he proposes to create, whether that
person would or would not commit morally evil acts. For every
person P who in fact performs morally evil actions, there is,
evidently, a possible person P' who is exactly like P in every
respect except that P' never performs any evil actions. If God
is omnipotent, He could have created these possible persons in-
stead of the persons He did in fact create. And if He is also
wholly good, He would, presumably, have created them, since
they differ from the persons He did create only in being morally
better than they are.
Can we make coherent sense out of this revised version of
Mackie's objection? What, in particular, could the objector
mean by "possible person"? and what are we to make of the sug-
gestion that God could have created possible persons? I think
these questions can be answered. Let us consider first the set
of all those properties it is logically possible for human beings
to have. Examples of properties not in this set are such proper-
ties as being over a mile long, being a hippopotamus, being a
prime number, and being divisible by four. Included in the set
are such properties as having red hair, being present at the
Battle of Waterloo, being President of the United States, being
born in 1889, and being a pipe smoker. Also included are such
moral properties as being kind to one's maiden aunt, being a
scoundrel, and performing at least one morally wrong action.
Let us call the properties in this set II properties. The com-
plement F of an H property P is the property a thing has just
in case it does not have P. And a consistent set of H properties
is a set of H properties such that it is logically possible that
The Free Will Defense
there be a human being having every property in the set. Now
we can define "possible person" in the following way:
x is a possible person = def. x is a consistent set of H prop-
erties such that for every H property P, either P or P is a
member of x.
To instantiate a possible person P is to create a human being
having every property in P. And a set S of possible persons is a
co-possible set of possible persons just in case it is logically pos-
sible that every member of S is instantiated. 6
Given this technical terminology, Mackie's objection can be
summarily restated. Everyone grants that there is no absurdity
in the claim that some man who is free to do what is wrong
never, in fact, performs any wrong action; it follows that there
are many possible persons containing the property is free to do
wrong but always does right. And since it is logically possible
that all men always freely do what is right, there are presumably
several co-possible sets of possible persons all of whose mem-
bers contain the property in question. Now God, if He is om-
nipotent, can instantiate any possible person and any co-pos-
sible set of possible persons he chooses. Hence, if He were all
good, He would have instantiated one of the sets of co-possible
persons all of whose members freely do only what is right.
In spite of its imposing paraphernalia the argument, thus
restated, suffers from substantially the same defect that afflicts
Mackie's original version. There are some possible persons God
obviously cannot instantiate--those, for example, containing
the property is not created by God. Accordingly it is false that
God can instantiate just any possible person He chooses.
But of course the interesting question is whether
"The definiens must not be confused with: for every member M of S,
it is logically possible that M is instantiated.
1 1
God and Other Minds
(9) God can instantiate possible persons containing the
property of always freely doing what is right
is true; for perhaps Mackie could substitute (9) for the premise
just shown to be false. Is (9) true? Perhaps we can approach
this question in the following way. Let P be any possible per-
son containing the property always freely does what is right.
Then there must be some action A such that P contains the
property of being free with respect to A (i. e. , the property of
being free to perform A and free to refrain from performing
A). The instantiation of a possible person S, I shall say, is a
person having every property in S; and let us suppose that if
P were instantiated, its instantiation would be doing something
morally wrong in performing A. And finally, let us suppose that
God wishes to instantiate P. Now P contains many properties
in addition to the ones already mentioned. Among them, for
example, we might find is born in 1910, has red hair, is born in
Stuttgart, has feeble-minded ancestors, is six feet tall at the age
of fourteen, and the like. And there is no difficulty in God's
creating a person with these properties. Further, there is no dif-
ficulty in God's bringing it about that this person (let us call
him Smith) is free with respect to A. But if God also brings it
about that Smith refrains from performing A (as he must to be
the instantiation of P) then Smith is no longer free with re-
spect to A and is hence not the instantiation of P after all.
God cannot cause Smith to refrain from performing A, while
allowing him to be free with respect to A; and therefore
whether or not Smith does A will be entirely up to him; it will
be a matter of free choice. Accordingly, whether God can in-
stantiate P depends upon what Smith would freely decide to do.
This point may be put more accurately as follows: First, we
shall say that an H property Q is indeterminate if God creates
a person and causes him to have Q is necessarily false; an H
The Free Will Defense
property is determinate if it is not indeterminate. Of the prop-
erties we ascribed to P, all arc determinate except freely re-
frains from doing A and always freely does what is right. Now
consider P any set of determinate members of P that is maxi-
h
mal with respect to the property of entailing no indeterminate
member of P. 7 In order to instantiate P God must instantiate
Pi. It is evident that there is at most one instantiation of Pi,
for among the members of Pi will be some such individuating
properties as, for example, is the third son of Richard and
Lena Dykstra. P also contains the property of being free with
x
respect to A; and if P is instantiated, its instantiation will
x
either perform A or refrain from performing A. It is of course
possible that Pi is such that if it is instantiated its instantiation
I will perform A. If so, then if God allows I to remain free with
respect to A, I will do A; and if God prevents I from doing A,
then I is not free with respect to A and hence not the instantia-
tion of P after all. Hence in neither case does God succeed in
instantiating P. And accordingly God can instantiate P only
if Pi is not such that if it is instantiated, its instantiation will
perform A. Hence it is possible that God cannot instantiate
P. And evidently it is also possible, further, that every possible
person containing the property always freely does what is
right is such that neither God nor anyone else can instantiate
it. 8
It is possible, then, that God cannot instantiate any possible
person containing the property always freely does what is right.
It is also possible, of course, that He can instantiate some such
possible persons. But that He can, if indeed He can, is a con-
tingent truth. And since Mackie's project is to prove an entail-
I. e. , such that the addition of any member of P yields a set that en-
tails some indeterminate member of P.
For a moderately different version of this argument see my "Pike and
Possible Persons, " Journal of Philosophy, LXIII (1966), 106.
God and Other Minds
ment, he cannot employ any contingent propositions as added
premises. Hence the reconstructed argument fails.
The difficulty with the reconstructed argument is the fact
that God cannot instantiate just any possible person He
chooses, and the possibility that God cannot instantiate any
possible persons containing the property of always freely doing
what is right. Perhaps the objector can circumvent this diffi-
culty.
The H properties that make trouble for the objector are the
indeterminate properties--those which God cannot cause any-
one to have. It is because possible persons contain indeter-
minate properties that God cannot instantiate just any possible
person He chooses. And so perhaps the objector can reformu-
late his definition of "possible person" in such a way that a
possible person is a consistent set S of determinate properties
such that for any determinate H property P, either P or P is a
member of S. Unfortunately the following difficulty arises.
Where I is any indeterminate H property and D is a deter-
minate H property, D-or-I (the property a person has if he has
either D or I) is determinate. And so, of course, is D. The same
difficulty, accordingly, arises all over again--there will be some
possible persons God cannot instantiate (those containing the
properties is not created by God or has red hair and does not
have red hair, for example). We must add, therefore, that no
possible person entails an indeterminate property.
Even so our difficulties are not at an end. For the definition
as now stated entails that there are no possible free persons;
that is, possible persons containing the property on some occa-
sions free to do what is right and free to do what is wrong. 9
We may see this as follows. Let P be any possible free person.
P then contains the property of being free with respect to some
This was pointed out to me by Lewis Creary. I am also indebted to
Mr. Creary for a correction in the next paragraph.
The Free Will Defense
action A. Furthermore, P would contain either the property of
performing A (since that is a determinate property) or the
property of refraining from performing A. But if P contains
the property of performing A and the property of being free
with respect to A, then P entails the property of freely per-
forming A, which is an indeterminate property. And the same
holds in case P contains the property of refraining from per-
forming A. Hence in either case P entails an indeterminate
property and accordingly is not a possible person.
Clearly the objector must revise the definition of "possible
person" in such a way that for any action with respect to which
a given possible person P is free, P contains neither the prop-
erty of performing that action nor the property of refraining
from performing it. This may be accomplished in the following
way. Let us say that a person S is free with respect to a property
P just in case he can freely choose whether or not to have P. 10
So, for example, if a person is free to leave town and free to
stay, then he is free with respect to the properties leaves town
and does not leave town. And let us say that a set of properties
is free with respect to a given property P just in case it contains
the property is free with respect to P. Now we can restate the
definition of "possible person" as follows:
x is a possible person = def. x is a consistent set of deter-
minate H properties such that (r) for every determinate
H property P with respect to which x is not free, either
P or F is a member of x, and (2) x does not entail any
indeterminate property.
More accurately, S is free with respect to P if and only if (either there
is some action A such that S is free with respect to A, and such that if S
performs A he has P, or there is an action with respect to which S is
free such that if he refrains from performing it he has P) and (either
there is an action with respect to which S is free such that if he per-
forms it he has P, or there is an action with respect to which S is free
and such that if he refrains from performing it he has P).
*5
God and Other Minds
And let us add the following new definition:
Possible person P has indeterminate property I = def. if
P were instantiated, P's instantiation would have I.
Under the revised definition of "possible person" it seems ap-
parent that God, if He is omnipotent, can instantiate any pos-
sible person, and any co-possible set of possible persons, he
chooses. But, the objector continues, if God is also all good, He
will, presumably, instantiate only those possible persons that
have some such indeterminate H property as that of always
freely doing what is right. And here the free will defender can
no longer make the objection which held against the previous
versions of Mackie's argument. For if God can instantiate any
possible person he chooses, he can instantiate any possible free
persons he chooses.
The free will defender can, however, raise what is essentially
the same difficulty in a new guise: what reason is there for sup-
posing that there are any possible persons, in the present sense
of "possible person, " having the indeterminate property in
question? For it is clear that the proposition Every possible
free person has the property of performing at least one morally
wrong action is possibly true. But if every possible free person
performs at least one wrong action, then every actual free per-
son also freely performs at least one wrong action; hence if
every possible free person performs at least one wrong action,
God could create a universe without moral evil only by refus-
ing to create any free persons at all. And, the free will defender
adds, a world containing free persons and moral evil (provided
that it contained more moral good than moral evil) would be
superior to one lacking both free persons and moral good and
evil. Once again, then, the objection seems to fail.
The definitions offered during the discussion of Mackie's ob-
jection afford the opportunity of stating the free will defense
The Free Will Defense
more formally. I said above (p. 136) that the free will defense
is in essence an argument for the conclusion that (a) is con-
sistent:
(a) God is omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good, and
God creates persons who perform morally evil actions.
One way of showing (a) to be consistent is to show that its
first conjunct does not entail the negation of its second con-
junct; that is, that
(b) God is omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good
does not entail
(c) God does not create persons who perform morally evil
actions.
Now one can show that a given proposition p does not entail
another proposition q by producing a third proposition r whose
conjunction with p is consistent and entails the denial of q.
What we need here, then, is a proposition whose conjunction
with (b) is both logically consistent and a logically sufficient
condition of the denial of (c).
Consider the following argument:
(b) God is omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good,
(ri) God creates some free persons.
(r ) Every possible free person performs at least one
wrong action.
(d) Every actual free person performs at least one wrong
action--(r ). .'. (e) God creates persons who perform morally evil ac-
tions-- (ri), (d).
This argument is valid (and can easily be expanded so that it
is formally valid). Furthermore, the conjunction of (b), (ri),
God and Other Minds
and (r ) is evidently consistent. And, as the argument shows,
(b), (rj), and (r ) jointly entail (e). But (e) is the denial of
(c); hence (b) and (r) jointly entail the denial of (c). Ac-
cordingly (b) does not entail (c); and (a) (God is omnipotent,
omniscient, and wholly good, and God creates persons who per-
form morally evil acts) is shown to be consistent. So stated,
therefore, the free will defense appears to be successful.
At this juncture it might be objected that even if the free will
defense, as explained above, shows that there is no contradic-
tion in the supposition that God, who is wholly good, omnip-
otent, and omniscient, creates persons who engage in moral
evil, it does nothing to show that a wholly good, omnipotent,
and omniscient being could create a universe containing as
much moral evil as this one seems to contain. The objection
has a point, although the fact that there seems to be no way of
measuring or specifying amounts of moral evil makes it exceed-
ingly hard to state the objection in any way which does not
leave it vague and merely suggestive. But let us suppose, for
purposes of argument, that there is a way of measuring moral
evil (and moral good) and that the moral evil present in the
universe amounts to <j>. The problem then is to show that
(b) God is omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good
is consistent with
(f) God creates a set of free persons who produce <j> moral
evil.
Here the free will defender can produce an argument to show
that (b) is consistent with (f) which exactly parallels the ar-
gument for the consistency of (b) with (c):
(b) God is omnipotent, omniscient, and wholly good.
(r ) God creates a set S of free persons such that there is a
The Free Will Defense
balancc of moral good over moral evil with icspeet to
the members of S.
(r ) There is exactly one co-possible set S' of free possible
persons such that there is a balance of moral good over
moral evil with respect to its members; and the mem-
bers of S' produce <f> moral evil.
Set S is evidently the instantiation of S' (i. e. , every member of
S is an instantiation of some member of S' and every mem-
ber of S' is instantiated by some member of S); hence the
members of S produce <£ moral evil. Accordingly, (b), (r ),
and (r ) jointly entail (f); but the conjunction of (b), (r ),
4 3
and (r ) is consistent; hence (b) is consistent with (f).
Ill
The preceding discussion enables us to conclude, I believe,
that the free will defense succeeds in showing that there is no
inconsistency in the assertion that God creates a universe con-
taining as much moral evil as the universe in fact contains.
There remains but one objection to be considered. McCloskey,
Flew, and others charge that the free will defense, even if it is
successful, accounts for only part of the evil we find; it ac-
counts only for moral evil, leaving physical evil as intractable
as before. The atheologian can therefore restate his position,
maintaining that the existence of physical evil, evil which can-
not be ascribed to the free actions of human beings, is incon-
sistent with the existence of an omniscient, omnipotent, and
all-good deity.
To make this claim, however, is to overlook an important
part of traditional theistic belief; it is part of much traditional
belief to attribute a good deal of the evil we find to Satan, or
to Satan and his cohorts. Satan, so the traditional doctrine goes,
is a mighty nonhuman spirit who, along with many other
God and Other Minds
angels, was created long before God created men. Unlike most
of his colleagues Satan rebelled against God and has since been
creating whatever havoc he could; the result, of course, is physi-
cal evil. But now we sec that the moves available to the free will
defender in the case of moral evil are equally available to him
in the case of physical evil. First he provides definitions of "pos-
sible nonhuman spirit, " "free nonhuman spirit, " and so on,
which exactly parallel their counterparts where it was moral evil
that was at stake. Then he points out that it is logically pos-
sible that
(r ) God creates a set S of free nonhuman spirits such that
the members of S do more good than evil,
and
(r) There is exactly one co-possible set S' of possible free
e
nonhuman spirits such that the members of S' do more
good than evil,
and
(r ) All of the natural evil in the world is due to the actions
of the members of S.
He points out further that (r ), (r«), and (r ) are consistent
3 7
with each other and that their conjunction is consistent with
the proposition that God is omnipotent, omniscient, and all
good. But (r ) through (r ) jointly entail that God creates a
5 7
universe containing as much natural evil as the universe in fact
contains; it follows then, that the existence of physical evil is
not inconsistent with the existence of an omniscient, omnipo-
tent, all-good deity.
Now it must be conceded that views involving devils and
other nonhuman spirits do not at present enjoy cither the ex-
tensive popularity or the high esteem of, say, quantum me-
chanics. So, for example, Flew:
The Free Will Defense
To make this more than just another desperate ad hoc expedient
of apologetic it is necessary to produce independent evidence for
launching such an hypothesis (if 'hypothesis' is not too flattering a
term for it). 11
But in the present context this claim is surely incorrect; to
rebut the charge of contradiction the theist need not hold that
the hypothesis in question is probable or even true. He need
hold only that it is not inconsistent with the proposition that
God exists. Flew suspects that "hypothesis" niay be too flatter-
ing a term for the sort of view in question. Perhaps this sus-
picion reflects his doubts as to the meaningfulness of the pro-
posed view. But it is hard to see how one conld plausibly argue
that the views in question are nonsensical (in the requisite
sense) without invoking some version of the verifiability
criterion, a doctrine whose harrowing vicissitudes are well
known. 12 Furthermore, it is likely that any premises worth con-
sidering which yield the conclusion that hypotheses about
devils are nonsensical will yield the same conclusion about the
hypothesis that God exists. And if God exists is nonsensical,
then presumably theism is not self-contradictory after all.
We may therefore conclude that the free ill defense suc-
w
cessfully rebuts the charge of contradiction brought against the
theist. The problem of evil (if indeed evil Constitutes a prob-
lem for the theist) does not he in any inconsistency in the
belief that God, who is omniscicnt, omnipotent, and all good,
has created a world containing moral and physical evil.
IV
But even if there is no contradiction in the assertion that
God has created a world containing moral and physical evil, is
Op. cit. , p. 14811.
See below, pp. 156-168.
God and Other Minds
it not clear that the existence of evil is evidence against the
existence of God? It is not clear. The view that evil disconfirms
theistic belief is not often explicitly stated, but it is widely held.
Hume suggests it, Nelson Pike seems to endorse it, and John
Wisdom also accepts it. 13
To facilitate stating the view and its various versions, sup-
pose we say that a proposition p confirms a proposition q just
in ease q is more probable than not on p--that is, just in case
q would be more probable than not on what we knew if p were
all we knew relevant to q. Further, p disconfirms q if p con-
firms the denial of q. Now an obvious and attractive inter-
pretation of the atheologian's current claim is that
(E) there is evil
disconfirms
(G) God exists
where we shall take (G) to be equivalent to or entail the prop-
osition that there is a wholly good, omniscient, omnipotent
spirit.
But does (E) disconfirm (G)? How is this atheological posi-
tion to be developed--that is, what are the grounds for this
claim? Certainly not, for example, that nine out of ten uni-
verses created by an omnipotent, omniscient, and perfectly
good being contain no evil; our evidence is a bit scanty for that.
The argument will have to be indirect in some way; and it is
not easy to see how it will go. Waiving that difficulty for the
moment, perhaps we may still find an approach to this position.
Suppose we state the free will hypothesis as follows:
(Fi) A world containing moral good (provided that it con-
Hume, Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion (London, 1947), p.
211; Pike, "Hume on Evil, " Philosophical Review, LXXII (1963), 195-
197; Wisdom, "God and Evil, " Mind, XLIV (1935), pp. 1-20.
The Free Will Defense
tains more moral good than moral evil) is better (other
relevant factors being equal) than one containing nat-
ural good alone; and every co-possible set of possible
free persons whose members freely perform substan-
tially more good than evil, has members who perform
evil as well as good actions. 14
Now it is apparent, I think, that (E) does not disconfirm
the conjunction of (E) with (F ); (E) seems to have no
x
direct bearing on (F ) alone, although the conjunction of
x
(Fi) with the proposition that in fact there exist free per-
sons whose members freely perform substantially more good
than evil entails (E). Nor does (E) appear to disconfirm
the conjunction of (E) and (Fj) with (G) if (Fi) were true, ;
God could not crcate a universe containing moral good without
permitting evil. It is a generally accepted principle of inductive
logic that a proposition confirms the logical consequences of
any proposition it confirms--that is, if p confirms q and q
entails r, then p confirms r. But it follows from this "conse-
quence condition" that if p disconfirms q, then p disconfirms
the conjunction of q with any other proposition. Since, in the
present case, (E) does not disconfirm the Conjunction of (E)
with (Fj) and (G), it follows that it docs not disconfirm (G).
So stated, therefore, this atheological claim seems to be false.
But if this atheological position fails, perhaps it is only be-
cause ft faiJs to take into account the fuJJ range of our evi-
dence; it altogether neglects the variety and extent of the evil
we find. (E), after all, asserts merely that there is evil in the
world, which would be true if the total extent of evil were an
insignificant peccadillo on the part of an otherwise admirably
disposed angel. Suppose we explicitly recognize, then, that
there is both natural and moral evil; and suppose we say that
See above, p. 148.
God and Other Minds
the evil we know to exist amounts to We may then rewrite
(E) as
(E') There is both natural and moral evil and the evil in
the world amounts to <f>.
And, it is added, although perhaps (E) does not disconfirm
(G), (E') certainly appears to. 15
Reflection on the procedure by which I argued that the exist-
ence of physical evil is not logically incompatible with the exist-
ence of God (above, p. 149) discloses that a similar argument
is available here. Let us replace (F, ) by
(F ) The evil in the world is due to the free actions of per-
sonal beings (nonhuman spirits as well as human per-
sons); a world containing a balance of moral good over
moral evil is better (other relevant factors being equal)
than one containing no moral good; there is a balance
of moral good over moral evil in the universe at large;
and every co-possiblc set S of possible free personal
beings with respect to the actions of the members of
which there is a balance of moral good over moral evil
as great as the one that actually obtains, is such that
the members of S produce evil amounting to or more.
(Fo) is an unwieldy item. Nonetheless it is evident, I think,
that (E') alone does not disconfirm it; nor does (E') discon-
firm the conjunction of (E') with (F ) and (G). But then
(E') does not disconfirm (G).
There is one more manuever open to the atheologian. We
can imagine him rejoining as follows: Although (E') does not
disconfirm (F ), other things we know do; we know that phys-
ical evil (e. g. , deaths resulting from the Lisbon earthquake)
is not to be attributed to the actions of men; and we have
15This is Wisdom's view (op. cit. ).
The Free Will Defense
every reason to doubt that there are any nonhuman personal
beings whose actions could produce natural evil. Hence what
we know disconfirms one of the conjuncts of (F); hence it
disconfirms (F) and the conjunction of (F) with (E) and
2 2
(G). Here the atheologian is claiming that our total evidence,
the set of propositions we (i. e. , you and I) know to be true,
disconfirms (G)-and-(F)-and-(E'), even if (E') alone does
not, on the grounds that our total evidence disconfirms the
supposition that nonhuman personal beings (devils, perhaps)
cause natural evil. But docs it? Do we have evidence for the
proposition that the Lisbon earthquake was not caused by the
activity of some disaffected fallen angel? I certainly do not
know of any such evidence. To be sure, we do not usually think
of the Lisbon earthquake as the result of such activity; the
idea is perhaps repugnant to "modern" habits of thought. But
this is scarcely evidence against it. No doubt the Lisbon earth-
quake can be explained as the result of purely natural causes;
we have no need, it may be said, of the devil hypothesis. But
again this is no evidence against it; the fact that we "have no
need" of a given hypothesis shows perhaps that we have no
evidence for it, but it hardly shows that we do have evidence
against it. If there is evidence against this hypothesis, it is not
easy to find. Nevertheless there is perhaps an air of paradox
about claiming that we have no evidence against the supposi-
tion that some devil caused the Lisbon earthquake. Further-
more our total evidence is such a vast and variegated affair that
it is never easy to determine what it supports and what it does
not. I shall claim, therefore, not that our total evidence does
not disconfirm the conjunction of (E') with (G) and (F),
but only that it is by no means clear that it does. But then it is
by no means clear that our total evidence disconfirms (G); and
hence this atheological argument is inconclusive.
Seven
Verificationism and
Other Atheologica
IN this chapter I shall examine a miscellany of atheological ar-
guments, beginning with the claim that the unverifiability of
religious assertions renders them in some way suspect.
I
"The main danger to theism today comes from people who
want to say that 'God exists' and 'God does not exist' are
equally absurd. " 1 That the most important questions about
religious belief, these days, are questions of meaning and sig-
nificance rather than truth, is repeated often enough. 2 It seems
J. J. C. Smart, "The Existence of God, " in New Essays in Philo-
sophical Theology, ed. A. Flew and A. Maclntyre (London, 1955).
See for example, Ronald Hepburn, Christianity and Paradox (London,
1958), pp. 6, 15; R. B. Braithwaite, An Empiricist's View of the Nature
of Religious Belief (Cambridge, 1955); John Wilson, Language and
1$6
Verificationism and Other Atlieologica
to be widely believed that certain developments in twentieth-
century philosophy (particularly twentieth-century "linguistic"
philosophy) have shown that there is something semantically
improper about typical religious utterances. Certainly this sus-
picion is not altogether misplaced; the writings of many theolo-
gians are of a granitic opacity designed, it may seem, more to
conceal than to reveal their author's thought. And (as the
Christian tradition has insisted from the beginning) some of
the central concepts and doctrines of Christian theism as found
in the Bible and the creeds are difficult to grasp. This much is
undeniable. But just how is contemporary philosophy relevant
here? How, exactly, have contemporary "linguistic" philoso-
phers raised this ancient problem in a new and acute form?
Most of the discussion has concerned alleged difficulties in
verifying or falsifying typical religious and theological utter-
ances. And here a focal point of discussion has been Antony
Flew's "Theology and Falsification. " 3 Let us look carefully at
what Flew says.
Flew begins the centra] part of his argument by stating the
law of double negation:
Now to assert that such and such is the case is necessarily equiva-
lent to denying that such and such is not the case. 4 Suppose then
we are in doubt as to what someone who gives vent to an utterance
is asserting, or suppose that, more radically, we are skeptical as to
whether he is really asserting anything at all, one way of trying to
understand (or perhaps it will be to expose) his utterance is to
Christian Belief (London, 1958), Chapter I; W. Blackstone, The Prob-
lem of Religious Knowledge (Englewood Cliffs, 1953), Introduction.
Most of the authors in New Essays in Philosophical Theology seem to
share this opinion.
New Essays in Philosophical Theology, p. 96.
Here Flew helpfully adds (in a footnote): "For those who prefer
symbolism: p = ~ ~ p. "
God and Other Minds
attempt to find what he would regard as counting against, or as
being incompatible with, its truth. 5
So far, quite unexceptionable. It is doubtless true (if less
than exciting) that one way to understand an assertion is to
see what is incompatible with it. But Flew goes on to give for
this truism an argument the first premise of which is again the
law of double negation:
For if the utterance is indeed an assertion it will necessarily be
equivalent to a denial of the negation of the assertion. And any-
thing which would count against the assertion, or which would
induce the speaker to withdraw it and to admit that it had been
mistaken, must be part of (or the whole of) the meaning of the
negation of that assertion. 6
If the first premise of the argument is unexceptionable, the sec-
ond is not nearly so innocent. Although Flew does not explain
"count against, " what he says suggests that anything incom-
patible with an assertion counts against it. Again, Flew does
not explain what it is for something to be part of the meaning
of an assertion. But presumably anything that is part of the
meaning of an assertion is contained in or entailed by that as-
sertion. If so, however, certain curious consequences ensue.
Consider, for example, the assertion
(A) Feike Vander Horst is in Zeeland.
Now many things are incompatible with (and hence count
against) A--for example,
(B) Feike Vander Horst is in Australia
and
(C) Feike Vander Horst is in Paterson, New Jersey.
6 hoc. cit.
" Ibid.
Verificationism and Other Atlieologica
(B) and (C), then, must be part of the meaning of the denial
of (A); hence on this showing, Feike Vander Florst is not in
Zeeland entails that Feike is both in Australia and in Paterson,
New Jersey. But then the denial of (A) is logically inconsistent
in that it entails the (inconsistent) conjunction of (B) with
(C)7 (A), therefore, is necessarily true; it is logically impos-
sible that Feike be anywhere but in Zeeland. But of course by
the very same sort of reasoning it will follow that (A) is log-
ically inconsistent; both
(D) Feike Vander Horst is in the northern quarter of Zee-
land
and
(E) Feike Vander Horst is in the southern quarter of Zee-
land
are incompatible with (hence count against) the denial of (A);
therefore they are part of the meaning of (and hence entailed
by) the denial of (A)'s denial--that is, by (A); hence (A) is
inconsistent as well as necessary. Flew's second premise, there-
fore, seems to entail a contradiction.
This is indeed a beguiling spectacle; Flew evidently means
to prove a truistic conclusion by deducing it from a self-contra-
dictory premise. The argument is certainly valid (if a contradic-
tion entails just any proposition) but things do not auger well
for its soundness. Perhaps Flew is not being entirely serious.
Or perhaps I have misunderstood his argument. In any event,
the theist will be happy to accept its conclusion, as well as the
consequence that
if there is nothing which a putative assertion denies, then there
'The purist who objects that (B) and (C) is not, in fact, logically
inconsistent may be mollified if we conjoin the denials of (C) and (B)
to (B) and (C) respectively.
God and Other Minds
is nothing which it asserts either: and so it is not really an asser-
tion. 8
A theist who claimed that some of his assertions denied noth-
ing at all--not even their own negations--would be backward
and benighted indeed. Even Heidegger, the verificationist's
favorite whipping-boy, would no doubt concede that "the not
negates itself" is inconsistent with its contradictory.
Having exegeted his text, Flew proceeds to the application:
Now it often seems to people who are not religious as if there was
no conceivable event or series of events the occurrence of which
would be admitted by sophisticated religious people to be a suffi-
cient reason for conceding 'there wasn't a God after all' or 'God
does not really love us then'. .. . Just what would have to hap-
pen not merely (morally and wrongly) to tempt us but also (logi-
cally and rightly) to entitle us to say 'God does not love us' or even
'God does not exist'? I therefore put to the succeeding symposi-
asts the simple central questions, 'What would have to occur or
to have occurred to constitute for you a disproof of the love of, or
of the existence of, God? ' 9
Numberless hosts of writers (including some theologians)
have repeated this challenge and found in it a real difficulty for
the theist. 10 And several writers, both believers and unbelievers,
have suggested that religious beliefs be reinterpreted in such a
way that they turn out to be verifiable. A. C. Maclntyre in
Metaphysical Beliefs suggests a way of understanding religious
beliefs which, he thinks, shows that one can accept the beliefs
and still hold to the view that all significant statements are
"Flew, op. cit. , p. 98.
81 bid.
"E. g. , R. Hepburn, op. cit. , p. 11; W. Blackstonc, op. cit. , p. 53;
R. B. Braithwaite, op. cit. , p. 6; John Wilson, op. cit. , pp. 7-8; and
Duff-Forbes, in "Theology and Falsification Again, " Australasian Journal
of Philosophy, XXXIX (1961), 143.
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
verifiable. 11 In An Empiricist's View of the Nature of Religious
Belief R. B. Braithwaite offers a reinterpretation of Christian be-
liefs according to which they are consistent with the verification-
ist thesis. Sometimes these rcintcrpretations assume truly heroic
proportions, as, for example, when David Cox helpfully suggests
that Christians resolve henceforth to use the statement "God
exists" to mean "some men and women have had, and all may
have, experiences called 'meeting God. '" 12 He also suggests
that when we say "God created the world from nothing" what
we should mean is "everything we call 'material' can be used in
such a way that it contributes to the well-being of men. " (I
might remark here that certain Christian theologians--Bult-
mann and some of his followers in particular--seem to me to
be doing something quite as outrageous. )
But the first thing to note is that the legitimacy of this chal-
lenge does not follow from what was previously established.
No doubt the assertion that there is a God, if it is meaningful,
must deny many other assertions and exclude many states of
affairs; but it does not follow that it must exclude some con-
ceivable happening or event or series of events--unless, in-
deed, we allow such Pickwickian events as God's going out of
existence or his revealing to us that he no longer loves us. (Of
course if "event" is to include these, then the challenge is
easily answered. ) Nonetheless the theist can perhaps meet the
challenge head on. My discovering a contradiction in the
proposition God exists would constitute a disproof of it; and if
after death I were to meet Father Abraham, St. Paul, and St.
John (I think I could recognize them), who united in declaring
they had been duped, perhaps I should have sufficient reason
for conceding that God does not love us after all.
But clearly enough this is not at all the sort of event or hap-
London, 1957.
12 "The Significance of Christianity, " Mind, LIX (1950), 47.
God and Other Minds
pening Flew has in mind. What he means is that meaningful
assertions must be falsifiable by some empirical state of affairs,
or some proposition with empirical content. What is empirical
content and under what conditions does a proposition have it?
Duff-Forbes takes Flew to be chiding the religious for trying
to make assertions that no observation statements count
against. 13 It appears, then, that according to Flew a meaning-
ful (contingent) proposition must be falsifiable by observation
statements; there must be some finite and consistent set of ob-
servation statements that entails its denial. If so, Flew is em-
bracing a version of the famous verifiability criterion of mean-
ing.
Oddly enough, a number of theologians have apparently
joined forccs with Flew. Paul van Buren, for example, declares
that
The empiricist in us finds the heart of the difficulty not in what
is said about God but in the very talking about God at all. We do
not know "what" (sic) God is and we cannot understand how the
word "God" is being used.
The problem of the Gospel in a secular age is a problem of its
apparently meaningless language, and linguistic analysts will give
us help in clarifying it. 14
What sort of help will they give us?
The heart of the method of linguistic analysis lies in the use of the
verification principle--that the meaning of a word is its use in its
context. The meaning of a statement is to be found in, and is iden-
Op. cit. , p. 143. An observation statement is "any sentence which--
correctly or incorrectly--asserts of one or more specifically named objects
that they have, or that they lack, some specified observable characteristic"
(cf. Carl Hempel, "Problems and Changes in the Empiricist Criterion of
Meaning" in Leonard Linsky, ed. , Semantics and the Philosophy of
Language [Urbana, 1952], p. 165).
" The Secular Meaning of the Gospel (New York, 1963), p. 84.
Verificationism and Other Atlieologica
tical with, the function of that statement. If a statement has a
function, so that it may in principle be verified or falsified, the
statement is meaningful, and unless or until a theological state-
ment can be submitted in some way to verification, it cannot be
said to have a meaning in our language game. 15
One might expect a theologian to have about as much sym-
pathy for verificationism as a civil rights worker for the Ku
Klux Klan; yet van Buren is by no means the only theologian
who believes that "linguistic analysis" has shown that we must
accept the verifiability criterion. But in fact the lot of the veri-
ficationist has been far from enviable. The many attempts to
state the verifiability criterion have met a common fate; each
has been so restrictive as to exclude statements the verifica-
tionists themselves took to be meaningful, or so liberal as to
exclude no statements at all. Here I cannot trace the detailed
history of these attempts; 10 but Flew, his numerous epigoni,
and their theological allies, seem to have neglected this study al-
together. The version Flew apparently accepts was recognized
very early to be unsatisfactory. As Plempel remarks in a slightly
different connection, one must suppose that if a given state-
ment is meaningful, so is its denial. Flew's criterion does not
meet this condition: for (as Hempel remarks) although a uni-
versal statement like All crows are black passes the test, its
existential denial does not. There is at least one pink unicorn
is consistent with any finite and consistent set of observation
statements. (Apparently it is Flew rather than the theologian
who is holding that some propositions have no denials. ) So
we must add--as the second clause of a recursive definition--
that if a statement is meaningful, so is its denial. But the re-
sult is still far too restrictive; for now, as Hempel points out,
statements of mixed quantification (For every substance there
Ibid. , pp. 104-105.
See the Hempel article mentioned above, n. 13.
God and Other Minds
is a solvent, Every tree is about the same size as some other
tree) turn out to be meaningless.
We could repair this difficulty, perhaps, by adding further
that the logical consequences of a meaningful statement are
meaningful; but then our criterion no longer rules anything
out. For consider such a "statement" as The not regularly noth-
ings itself and call it N. Its conjunction with any falsifiable
statement S will be meaningful (in that any set of observation
statements inconsistent with S will be inconsistent with
S and N); since it will entail N, the latter too is meaningful.
Upon perceiving the futility of some earlier versions (includ-
ing the one Flew appears to adopt) A. }. Ayer restated the
verifiability criterion as follows:
A statement p is meaningful if and only if there is a statement q
such that the conjunction of p with q entails an observation state-
ment not entailed by q alone. 17
It was quickly pointed out, however, that this confers meaning
upon every statement: where N is The not nothings itself and
S is any observation statement, N and if N then S entails S;
since if N then S alone does not, N is meaningful.
In the introduction to the second edition of Language, Truth
and Logic Ayer hoped to repair this difficulty as follows:
I propose to say that a statement is directly verifiable if it is
either itself an observation-statement, or is such that in conjunc-
tion with one or more observation-statements it entails at least one
observation-statement which is not deducible from these other
premises alone; and I propose to say that a statement is indirectly
verifiable if it satisfies the following conditions: first, that in con-
junction with certain other premises it entails one or more directly
verifiable statements which are not deducible from these other
premises alone; and secondly, that these other premises do not in-
" Language, Truth and Logic, 2nd ed. (New York, 1946), p. 39.
Verificationism and Other Atlieologica
elude any statement that is not either analytic, or directly verifiable,
or capable of being independently established as indirectly verifi-
able. 18
But in a review of the revised edition of Language, Truth and
Logic Alonzo Church pointed out that this revision is no im-
provement:
Let 0 and 0, and 0 be three 'observation-statements'. ..
1; 2 3
such that no one of the three alone entails any of the others.
Then using these we may show of any statement S whatever that
either it or its negation is verifiable, as follows: Let ~'0 and ~S
be the negations of C^ and of S respectively. Then (under Ayer's
definition) (~Oi • 0) v (0 • ~S) is directly verifiable, because
2 3
with Ox it entails 0. Therefore (under Ayer's definition) S is
indirectly verifiable--unless it happens that (~Oi • 0) v (0 •
2 3
<--'S) alone entails 0, in which case <~S and 0 together entail
2 3
0, so that ~S is directly verifiable. 19
Here the matter rested until 1961, when Professor Peter Nid-
ditch issued a rebuttal of Church's objection:
Let p, q, and r, be any three specific observation-statements such
that no one of them alone entails any of the others, and let s be
any statement whatever. Church's thesis is that, on Ayer's defini-
tion, s, or its negation ~s, is always verifiable. If this is correct,
then it obviously completely destroys the point and utility of the
Verifiability Principle.
(a) To begin with, Church points out that
p and (~p • q) v (r • ~s) jointly entail r. (A)
Since r is not entailed by p alone, it results from the second clause
of Ayer's definition of directly verifiable statements that
(~P ' cl) v (r ' ~s) >s directly verifiable (B)
wlbid. , p. 13.
10Journal of Symbolic Logic (1949), p. 53.
God and Other Minds
I certainly grant the correctness of (A) and (B).
(b) The next stage of the argument has two parts.
(bi) According to Church, if (~p • q) v (r • ~s) does not alone
entail q, then
s and (~p • q) v (r • ~s) jointly entail q, (C)
and from this, together with Ayer's definition, he concludes that
s is indirectly verifiable. (D)
This allegation is easily disposed of. Looking at Ayer's two con-
ditions for indirectly verifiability, we can see that, in view of (B)
and (C), s satifies the first condition, while, unless s is analytic
or verifiable, it cannot satisfy the sccond condition. (I assume
that Ayer's "include" means "include intra se" and not "include
inter se". If it does mean the latter, Church's criticism is very
easily sidestepped by amending the original to mean "include
intra se". )20
Now presumably a group of premises contains a proposition
p inter se if p is one of the group; it contains p intra se if p
is one of the group or a component of one of the group (as
s is a component of • q) v (r • ~s). But this suggestion
fares no better than its forebears. Where N is the not nothings
itself and Oi and 0 are any observation statements logically
independent of each other and of N, N and Oi is directly veri-
fiable, since in conjunction with 0 it entails Oi. But then
N is indirectly verifiable, for together with Oi it entails the di-
rectly verifiable N and Oi. Here the "other premises" men-
tioned in Ayer's definition obviously include, inter se, or intra
se, or in any other way, only Oi.
It was suggested to me21 that the definition of direct verifi-
ability be revised as follows:
20Mind (1961), pp. 88-89.
By Messrs. Michael Slote, Michael Stocker, and Robert Shope.
Verificationism and Other Atlieologica
p is directly verifiable if p is an observation statement or there is
an observation statement q such that (1) p and q entails an ob-
servation statement r that neither p nor q alone entails, and (2)
the argument from p and q to r is minimal in the sense that if any
conjunct of p or q is deleted, the resulting argument is invalid.
This avoids the preceding difficulty (as well as some difficulties
that arise if the second clause is not added) but is still vulner-
able: N • (~Oi v v 0) will be directly verifiable, for con-
joined with 01 it entails 0> in such a way that conditions
(r) and (2) of the definition are met. And again N will
be indirectly verifiable, for conjoined with 0 it entails
N • (~Oi v -N v 0).
The fact is that no one has succeeded in stating a version of
the verifiability criterion that is even remotely plausible; and
by now the project is beginning to look unhopeful. 22
But suppose the criterion could be stated in a way which
satisfied the verificationist. (We could, after all, say simply that
the statements of science and "common sense" are meaningful
and those of transcendental metaphysics and theology mean-
ingless. ) Why should anyone accept it? Why should the theist
not retort as follows: "Your criterion is obviously mistaken; for
many theological statements are not empirically verifiable; but
theological statements are meaningful; hence it is false that all
and only verifiable statements are meaningful"? What could
the verificationist reply? What sort of argument could he bring
forward to show the theologian that he ought to accept the
verifiability criterion and stop proclaiming these meaningless
theological pseudo-statements? About all he could say here
would be that his criterion docs fit scientific and common-
sense statements and does not fit theological statements. And
to this the theologian could agree with equanimity; there are,
See James Cornman, "Indirectly Verifiable: Everything or Nothing, "
Philosophical Studies (forthcoming).
God and Other Minds
no doubt, many properties which distinguish scientific and
commonsense statements from theological statements. But of
course that does not suffice to show that theological statements
are meaningless or logically out of order or anything of the sort.
In the light of this and of the fact that it seems impossible
to state the verifiability criterion the question becomes acute:
how are we to understand Flew's challenge? What exactly is
he requiring of theological statements? Is he chiding the theist
for ignoring some version of the verifiability criterion? If so,
which version? Until these questions are answered it is impos-
sible to determine whether his challenge is legitimate or even
what the challenge is. If the notion of verifiability cannot so
much as be explained, if we cannot so much as say what it is
for a statement to be empirically verifiable, then we scarcely
need worry about whether religious statements are or are not
verifiable. How could we possibly tell? As a piece of natural
atheology, verificationism is entirely unsuccessful. 23
II
J. L. Mackie finds the concept of omnipotence incoherent:
This leads to what I call the Paradox of Omnipotence: can an
omnipotent being make things which he cannot control? It is
clear that this is a paradox; the question cannot be answered
satisfactorily either in the affirmative or in the negative. If we
answer "Yes, " it follows that if God actually makes things which
he cannot control, he is not omnipotent once he has made them:
there are then things which he cannot do. But if we answer "No, "
we are immediately asserting that there are things which he cannot
do, that is to say that he is already not omnipotent. 24
And this makes the dizzy gyrations of those theologians who accept
it more puzzling than ever; perhaps they would do well to study it be-
fore rushing to embrace it.
21 "Evil and Omnipotence, " Mind, LXIV (1955), 210.
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
Perhaps we can set out the alleged paradox in more detail
as follows:
(1) Either God can make things He cannot control or God
cannot make things He cannot control.
(2) If He can, then if He did, He would not be omnipotent.
(3) If He cannot, then there are things He cannot do and
hence lie is not omnipotent.
Now (2) as it stands does not contribute its share to the para-
dox; it says only that if God can make things He cannot con-
trol then He could lose his omnipotence--from which it does
not obviously follow that He is not now omnipotent. Perhaps
(2) could be revised as follows:
(2') If God can make things He cannot control, then it is
possible that there be things He cannot control, in
which case God is not omnipotent. 25
(1), (2'), and (3) together entail that God is not omnipotent.
But are (2') and (3) true? One thinks immediately of consult-
ing an appropriate definition of omnipotence. This easy course
has an important drawback; no appropriate definition of om-
nipotence seems to be available.
No one, presumably, expects an omnipotent being to be ca-
pable of performing such logically impossible actions as creating
a square circle. We might therefore attempt the following defi-
nition:
(Di) x is omnipotent if and only if x is capable of perform-
ing any logically possible action.
But the action of making a table God did not make is surely
a logically possible action; hence by (Di) God can perform it,
See George Mavrodes, "Some Puzzles Concerning Omnipotence, "
Philosophical Review, LXXII (1963), 221.
God and Other Minds
if He is omnipotent; since He cannot, He is not, under (D^,
omnipotent. This difficulty suggests (Do):
(D) x is omnipotent if and only if x is capable of perform-
ing any action A such that the proposition x performs
A is logically possible.
(D) seems too liberal. Consider the man who is capable
only of scratching his ear. For any action A, if the proposition
The man who is capable only of scratching his ear performs A
is consistent, then the man who is capable only of scratching
his ear will, presumably, be able to perform A, thus turning
out, under (D), to be omnipotent. But perhaps this difficulty
could be resolved by proposing, not a definition of omnipo-
tence, but an explanation of the statement that God is omnip-
otent; even if we cannot give a general explanation of omnipo-
tence, we may be able to say what God is omnipotent comes to:
(D) God is omnipotent if and only if God is capable of
performing any action A such that the proposition
God performs A is logically possible.
But suppose I am thinking of the action of creating a square
circle. Then God cannot perform the action I am thinking of,
despite the contingency of the proposition God performs the
action I'm thinking of. Hence by (D), once more, God is not
omnipotent.
Presumably the solution lies in somehow limiting the sub-
stituend set of the variable "A" in (D): it ought to include
such expression as "the action of creating a square circle" but
exclude "the action I am thinking of. " Just how this is to be
accomplished is not easy to say. And hence, it seems, we can-
not test (2') and (3) by resorting to a definition of omnipo-
tence.
Verificationism and Other Atlieologica
Bernard Mayo and George Mavrodes agree that (3) ought
to be rejected. 20 Mavrodes puts it as follows:
On the assumption that God is omnipotent, the phrase "a stone
too heavy for God to lift" (or "a being God can't control") be-
comes self-contradictory. For it becomes "a stone which cannot
be lifted by Him whose power is sufficient for lifting anything. "
But the "thing" described by a self contradictory phrase is abso-
lutely impossible and hence has nothing to do with the doctrine
of omnipotence. 27
Hence (3) is false. The action of making a being God cannot
control is a logically impossible action; hence God's inability
to perform it does not entail that he is not omnipotent.
This solution to the paradox involves an assumption that
Mayo and Mavrodes do not make explicit: the assumption that
the proposition God is not omnipotent is necessarily false. The
phrase "a stone too heavy for God to lift" is equivalent to "a
stone which cannot be lifted by Him whose power is sufficient
for lifting anything" only if it is necessarily true that if God
exists, then his power is sufficient for lifting anything; that is,
only if the proposition God is not omnipotent is necessarily
false. There is a stone that God cannot lift entails There is a
stone that an omnipotent being cannot lift only if it is neces-
sarily false that God is not omnipotent. We might put the
assumption by saying that God is necessarily omnipotent. 28
But is the assumption true?
Fortunately we need not argue that issue: there is another
way of resolving the paradox. For consider
Mayo, "Mr. Keene on Omnipotence, " Mind, LXX (1961), 249;
Mavrodes, op. cit.
Op. cit. , p. 222.
See below, pp. 173-183.
God and Other Minds
(4) It is possible that (God is omnipotent and it is possible
that there is a being God cannot control). 29
(4) asserts that the conjunction of God is omnipotent with
It is possible that there is a being God cannot control is con-
sistent. And (4) is either true or false. If (4) is false, then (3)
is utterly groundless and pretty clearly false. We may see this
as follows: (3) asserts that
(a) God cannot make things God cannot control
entails
(b) God is not omnipotent.
Now if (4) is false, then if God is omnipotent, the proposition
There is a being God cannot control is necessarily false. But
then the action of creating a being God cannot control is not
logically possible. And then, clearly enough, (a) does not en-
tail (b). So if (4) is false, (3) (i. e. , the proposition that (a)
entails (b)) is true only if it is false that God is omnipotent.
So then one who asserts that (3) is true is shamelessly begging
the question.
Suppose on the other hand that (4) is true; then (2') is not.
According to (2'),
(c) It is possible that there are things God cannot control
entails
(d) God is not omnipotent.
But the assertion that (c) entails (d) is equivalent to the de-
nial of (4), since what it asserts is that the conjunction of
God is omnipotent with It is possible that there is a being God
Here I must thank Thomas Jager, Robert Bush, and Paul Mellema
for prodding me to simplify (4).
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
cannot control is not possible. Hence if (4) is true, (2') is false.
What we have, then, is a counterdilemma. Either (4) is
true or it is false; in either case one of the premises of the para-
dox is unacceptable; so the paradox fails. 30
Ill
In 1948 J. N. Findlay proposed an engagingly original piece
of natural atheology that can only be described as an ontologi-
cal argument for the nonexistence of God. He began by stat-
ing two "requirements of the religious attitude":
Religious attitudes presume superiority in their objects, and such
superiority, moreover, as reduces us, who feel the attitudes, to
comparative nothingness. .. . To feel religiously is therefore to
presume surpassing greatness in some object. .. . And hence we
are led on irresistibly to demand that our religious object should
have an unsurpassable supremacy along all avenues, that it should
tower infinitely above all other objects. .. .
But we are also led on irresistibly to a yet more stringent de-
mand. .. : we can't help feeling that the worthy object of our
worship can never be a thing that merely happens to exist. .. .
His own non-existence must be unthinkable in any circumstances. .. . God must be wholly inescapable, as we remarked previously,
whether for thought or for reality. .. .
Not only is it contrary to the demands and claims inherent in
religious attitudes that their object should exist "accidentally": it
is also contrary to these demands that it should possess its various
excellences in some merely adventitious or contingent manner. .. . And so we are led on irresistibly, by the demands inherent
in religious reverence, to hold that an adequate object of our wor-
ship must possess its various qualities in some necessary manner. 31
In essence this resolution resembles Mavrodes' (see n. 25, above).
31 "Can God's Existence Be Disproved? " Mind, LVII (1948), 176-
186. Reprinted in The Ontological Argument, ed. Plantinga (New York,
1965), pp. n 1-122, and page references are to this volume. The present
quotation is from pp. 116-118.
*73
God and Other Minds
An adequate object of religious worship must exist and pos-
sess its qualities necessarily. But the consequences of this
requirement are devastating:
Plainly (for all who share a contemporary outlook) they entail
not only that there isn't a God, but that the Divine Existence is
either senseless or impossible. .. . Those who believe in neces-
sary truths which aren't merely tautological, think that such truths
merely connect the possible instances of various characteristics
with each other: they don't expect such truths to tell them whether
there will be instances of such characteristics. This is the outcome
of the whole medieval and Kantian criticism of the Ontological
Proof. And, on a yet more modern view of the matter, necessity
in propositions merely reflects our use of words, the arbitrary con-
ventions of our language. 32
As I argued in Chapter Two, the "whole medieval and Kant-
ian criticism of the Ontological Proof" may be taken with a
grain of salt. No one has yet succeeded in showing that existen-
tial statements are all contingent; indeed, Kant himself pretty
clearly thought the existential statements of mathematics to be
necessary, if not analytic. There is nothing here, it seems to me,
to show that there could be no logically necessary beings. But
I wish to turn first to the other demand of the religious attitude
--that its object should "possess its various qualities in some
necessary manner. " Theists have sometimes made this kind of
suggestion. How is it to be explained?
At the very least, it supposes the absence of certain kinds of
change in God. According to St. Augustine, for example, "that
is not properly called eternal which undergoes any degree of
change. " 33 We might reasonably suppose that a being under-
goes changes just in case it possesses at one time a property
that at another time it lacks. Here the word "property" is so
Ibid. , p. 119.
De Trinitate, IV, ch. 18.
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
taken that a thing has the property of being (a) <j> if and only
if the proposition that it is (a) <f> is true; and a thing, x, has
the property of being (a) <j> at a given time t if and only if it
is true that at t it is (a) <£. But now it is surely clear that God
does undergo change. For the proposition God was worshiped
by St. Paul in A. D. 40 is true, unlike the proposition God was
worshiped by St. Paul in 100 B. C. ; hence in A. D. 40 God had
a property He lacked in 100 B. C. St. Augustine was by no means
prepared to deny this obvious fact; in De Trinitate, IV, chap-
ter 5, he gives a similar example to show that change can in-
deed be predicated of God relatively, as he puts it. What does
he mean, then, when he says that God is changeless? Perhaps
we can state his claim as follows. Let us say that a property
P is relational for a being x just in case the proposition that
x has P entails the existence of a (contingent) being distinct
from x. So the property of being worshiped by St. Paul would
be one of God's relational properties along with the property
of loving St. Paul and the property of knowing that St. Paul
was converted on the road to Damascus. On the other hand,
the properties of loving everyone, being omniscient, and being
everlasting are among God's nonrelational properties. And to
say that God is changeless is to say that any property God has
at one time but lacks at another is one of his relational prop-
erties.
But Augustine goes further than this. He maintains a view
that entails and presumably explains the position just stated;
this is the view that an eternal being is not merely changeless,
but unchangeable, not subject to or capable of change. It is not
merely true, but in some way necessarily true, that God does
not change with respect to his nonrelational properties. God's
nonrelational properties are, we might say, loss-proof. Augus-
tine construes or explains this in terms of the distinction be-
tween essential and accidental properties, a traditional distinc-
*75
God and Other Minds
tion that very many contemporary philosophers reject out of
hand. We might state Augustine's view by saying that all of
God's non-relational properties are essential; that God has no
property that is both accidental and nonrelational. But this
brings us to Findlay's question. What are we to make of this
distinction between essential and accidental properties? This is
a difficult and very large topic and what I shall say will be, I
am afraid, both sketchy and merely suggestive.
But perhaps we may make a beginning by saying that an
object x has a property P essentially if and only if it is false
that x might not have had P, or impossible or inconceivable
that x should have lacked P. Goebbels, for example, might have
been, had things turned out differently, a fair-minded man; but
it is inconceivable that he should have been (all along) an alli-
gator. Green might not have been my favorite color; but it is
impossible that it should have lacked the property of being a
color. The property of being odd is essential to the number
seven; the property of having been referred to by me is acci-
dental to it. And while being married to Xantippe is an acci-
dental property of Socrates, not being an eighteenth-century
Irish washerwoman, perhaps, is not.
Findlay is certainly right in claiming that many contempo-
rary philosophers reject this distinction. Some philosophers,
for example, construe the traditional doctrine as amounting to
the claim that
(1) An object x has a property P essentially if and only if
x has P and the statement x lacks P is necessarily false,
adding, of course, that an object has a property accidentally if
it has that property but does not have it essentially. On this
account the property of being an American seems to be essen-
tial to the oldest American in Paris, in that the statement The
oldest American in Paris is not an American seems necessarily
iy6
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
false. These philosophers then note a certain peculiar conse-
quence of (1)--namely that a single object may appear to have
the same property both essentially and accidentally. The tallest
conqueror of Mount Everest, for example, has the property of
having conquered Mount Everest necessarily; the most famous
resident of Redlands, Washington, does not; and yet the first is
the very same person as the second. Which of an object's prop-
erties are essential and which accidental seems to depend upon
the way in which the object is referred to; consequently these
philosophers reject the distinction as incoherent.
But clearly enough (1) is not an adequate account of the
traditional distinction. It is not impossible or inconceivable, in
the requisite sense, that the tallest conqueror of Mount Everest
shouid1 have faffed to reach the top; nor is being the husband of
Xantippe an essential property of the husband of Xantippe.
On the traditional doctrine, the necessary falsehood of a lacks
P (where "a" is standing in for any singular referring expres-
sion) does not entail that a has P essentially. Nor does the
contingency of a lacks P entail that P is not an essential prop-
erty of a; if I am thinking of the number seven, then what I
am thinking of has the property of being prime essentially de-
spite the contingency of What I am thinking of is not prime.
But perhaps a property P is an essential property of Socrates
just in case Socrates has P and the proposition Socrates lacks
P is necessarily false. Difficulties arise if we generalize to (1);
but the instantiation of (1) for Socrates may seem harmless
enough, as it will in any case where a proper name replaces
the variable "x" in (r). So suppose we adopt the following
definition:
(2) x has P necessarily if and only if x lias P and the prop-
osition x lacks P is necessarily false (where the domain
of the variable "x" is unlimited but the set of its sub-
stituends contains only proper names).
God and Other Minds
Socrates, then, has the property of being a person essentially if
and only if Socrates is a person and the proposition Socrates
lacks the property of being a person is necessarily false. But the
same sort of difficulty seems to arise again. For consider Socra-
tes' least significant property. No doubt we may suppose that it
will not be essential to him. And yet
(A) Socrates lacks Socrates' least significant property
seems to be necessarily false: it seems to entail that there is a
property Socrates both has and lacks. Or suppose I am thinking
of the property of not being a prime number. Then the prop-
erty I am thinking of is essential to Socrates, despite the appar-
ent contingency of Socrates lacks the property I am thinking of.
This difficulty is an obvious analogue of the one besetting
(1). There the difficulty arose because there were pairs of sub-
stituends for the variable "x" that denoted the same object but
had differing logical properties. Here the difficulty arises be-
cause there are similar pairs of substituends for the variable "P. "
"Snub-nosedness" and "Socrates' least important property" are
expressions denoting the same property (let us suppose); but
"Socrates lacks Socrates' least important property, " unlike "Soc-
rates lacks snub-nosedness, " expresses a necessary falsehood.
The difficulty concerning the substituends for 'V was resolved
by limiting the substituend set of "x" to proper names, thereby
excluding definite descriptions. Can we do the same thing
here? Unfortunately it is not apparent that "snub-nosedness"
is a proper name of the property snub-nosedness, nor even that
properties have proper names at all. Still, expressions like
"whiteness, " "masculinity, " "mean temperedne<js, " and the like,
differ from expressions like "Socrates' least important prop-
erty, " "the property I'm thinking of, " "the property mentioned
on page 37, " and so on, in pretty much the way that proper
names of individuals differ from definite descriptions of them.
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
And so perhaps we can resolve the difficulty by rejecting (2)
in favor of
(3) x has P necessarily if and only if x has P and the propo-
sition x lacks P is necessarily false (where the domain of
the variable "x" is unlimited but its substituend set
contains only proper names, and where the domain of
of the variable "P" is the set of properties and its sub-
stituend set contains no definite description or expres-
sions definitionally equivalent to definite descriptions).
But what about individuals that have no proper names, and
properties denoted only by definite descriptions? (3) offers us
no way of telling with respect to such an individual and such
a property, whether the individual has the property necessarily.
Here we must recognize that the domains of the variables "x"
and "P" are not really unlimited; they must contain only ob-
jects for which there are proper names, and properties denoted
by expressions other than definite descriptions. But of course
this limitation really comes to very little; for it is always open
to us to name individuals and to furnish the appropriate sort
of denoting expressions for properties.
Given the appropriate revision of (3), then, many of Soc-
rates' properties will be clearly contingent and others clearly
necessary. There are other properties--for example, being a
Greek, having been born, having a body--that will be neither
clearly contingent nor clcarly necessary properties of Socrates;
but this, I take it, is by no means fatal to the distinction. Thus
(3) is perhaps satisfactory as far as it goes. And now we can
state the traditional distinction in such a way that the restric-
tions on the substituend sets of its variables may be dropped:
(4) P is an essential property of x if and only if x has P and
there is a being y identical with x and a property P' iden-
God and Other Minds
tical with P such that y has P' necessarily (in the sense
of (3))-34
According to Augustine and much of the theistic tradition,
then, all (or almost all)33 of God's nonrelational properties--
omnipotence, omniscience, benevolence and the like--are essen-
tial to him. And conceivably Findlay is right in holding that
this or something very like it is a requirement of the attitude
of worship. But what have "modern views of necessity" to do
with it? Many contemporary philosophers reject the distinction
between essential and accidental properties (partly, perhaps,
because they fail to understand it), but others accept it. There
is no "view of necessity" accepted by all who "share a con-
temporary outlook" that precludes the existence of a being hav-
ing the properties in question essentially.
Findlay is mistaken, then, in supposing that "modern views
of necessity" make it absurd to suppose that there is a being
that possesses some of its qualities essentially. (The fact is, it
seems to me, that every being has some essential properties. )
But what about the other requirement of the religious attitude
--the requirement, namely, that its object exist in some neces-
sary manner? Is the theist really obliged, as Findlay suggests,
to hold that the proposition God exists is logically necessary?
Must he hold that God is a logically necessary being? No doubt
it is part of theism to describe God as noncontingent and neces-
Here I am indebted for a correction to Nicholas Wolterstorff.
On this characterization of Augustine's view existence would be an
essential property of God, since it is one of His nonrelational qualities.
Augustine does not clearly accept the view that the proposition God does
not exist is logically false, and perhaps it would be best not to saddle
him with it. This can easily be accomplished, either by modifying (3)
slightly or by appropriately reducing the claim that all of God's non-
relational properties are essential to Him.
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
sary; but must the necessity be logical necessity? How arc we
to understand the claim that God is a necessary being?
Suppose someone, struck by the fact that his desk might not
have existed, asks, "Why is it that this desk exists? " Perhaps
there are several sorts of reply we could give him. One answer
might be that the desk exists because a certain carpenter made
it. But suppose our questioner is still puzzled; the carpenter,
he says, also might not have existed, so why did he exist? We
could answer again by referring to some other beings or states
of affairs which were causally sufficient for the existence of the
carpenter; but of course, the same question will arise about
these beings, and about the causes of these beings, and so on
indefinitely. No matter how far back wc push this series of ques-
tions and answers, our questioner may remain dissatisfied. It
may appear to us that he is looking for a final answer, one
which puts an end to the indefinitely long series of questions
and answers where the answer to each question mentions a
being or state of affairs about which precisely the same ques-
tion again may be asked. In seeking a final answer, he is seeking
a statement which puts an end to this series of questions and
answers and allows no further question of the same sort. So
perhaps a necessary being may be characterized as (a) a being
such that some statement referring to it can properly serve as
a final answer in this sort of question and answer series, an
answer which puts an end to the series. But a final answer in
the series would refer to a being of an unusual sort; such a
being must be one about which the question "Why does it
exist? " does not arise or cannot sensibly be asked. A necessary
being, therefore, may be further characterized as (b) a being
about which one cannot sensibly ask why it exists. When the
theist, therefore, asserts that God is the necessary being, we
may construe his remark in the following way. He is pointing
God and Other Minds
out that we cannot sensibly ask, "Why is it that God exists? "
And he is holding that some assertion about God is the final
answer in the series of questions and answers we have been
considering.
Next, we should note that the question "Why does God
exist? " never does, in fact, arise. Those who do not believe
that God exists will not, of course, ask why He exists. But
neither do believers ask that question. Outside of theism, so
to speak, the question is nonsensical, and inside of theism, the
question is never asked. But it is not that the religious person
fails to ask why God exists through inadvertence or because
of lack of interest. If a believer were asked why God exists, he
might take it as a request for his reasons for believing in God;
but if it is agreed that God exists, then it is less than sensible
to ask why He does. And the explanation is not hard to find.
Essential to theism is an assertion to the effect that there is
a connection between God and all other (logically contingent)
beings, a connection in virtue of which these others are causally
dependent upon God. It is part of the Hebraic-Christian con-
ception of God that He is "Maker of heaven and earth. " But
it is also a necessary truth that God is uncreated and in no way
causally dependent upon anything else.
And so it is clcar that it is absurd to ask why God exists. To
ask that question is to presuppose that God does exist; but it
is a necessary truth that if He does, He has no cause; hence
there is no answer to a question asking for His causal condi-
tions. The question "Why does God exist? " (so construed) is
therefore an absurdity. A person who seriously asks it betrays
misapprehension of the concept of God.
Let us suppose, then, that God is a necessary being in the
sense characterized above. 36 Does not such necessity satisfy the
For a fuller (and somewhat confused) discussion of divine necessity,
Verificationism and Other Atheologica
requirements of the attitude of worship? It has seemed so to
many worshipers; most have not thought that God must be a
logically necessary being in order to be worthy of our worship.
And Findlay has given us not the slightest reason to think them
mistaken.
These atheological arguments are as unsuccessful as the argu-
ments from natural theology we considered in Part I; natural
atheology seems no better than natural theology as an answer
to the question "Are religious beliefs rationally justified? " In
Part III I shall try a different approach to this question.
see my "Necessary Being, " in Faith and Philosophy, ed. A. Plantinga
(Grand Rapids, 1963), pp. 97-108.

Part III
GOD AND OTHER MINDS

Eight
Other Mmds and Analogy
IN Parts I and II we examined two traditional answers to the
question with which this study began: Is it rational to believe
in the existence of God? And since neither natural theology nor
natural atheology seems to provide a successful answer to this
question, we have made little enough progress. But how, exactly,
does this question arise? Presumably as follows. If a man be-
lieves that the star Sirius has a planetary system containing a
planet with mountains over 40, 000 feet tall, then if his belief is
to be rational or reasonable he must have some reason or
evidence for it. Similarly, it may be said, with the existence of
God: the theist must be able to answer the question "How do
you know or why do you believe? " if his belief is to be rational;
or at any rate there must be a good answer to this question.
He needs evidence of some sort or other; he needs some reason
for believing.
Obviously this raises many questions. What is evidence?
What relation holds between a person and a proposition when
God and Other Minds
the person has evidence for the proposition? Must a rational
person have evidence or reasons for all of his beliefs? Presum-
ably not. But then what properties must a belief have for a
person to be justified in accepting it without evidence? Is a
person justified in believing a proposition only if it can be in-
ferred inductively or deductively from (roughly) incorrigible1
sensory beliefs? Or propositions that are obvious to common
sense and accepted by everyone?
These are obviously some of the most difficult and persistent
problems of epistemology. A direct assault on them would be
bold indeed, not to say foolhardy. What I propose is to exam-
ine the problem before us by exploring its connections with an
analogous problem--the so-called problem of other minds. Per-
haps this problem may be put as follows: each of us believes
that he is not alone in the universe--that there are other be-
ings who think and reason, hold beliefs, have sensations and
feelings. And while a person can observe another's behavior
and circumstances, he cannot perceive another's mental states.
"The thoughts and passions of the mind are invisible" says
Thomas Reid. 2 "Intangible, odorless, and inaudible, " we might
add; and they cannot be tasted either. Hence we cannot come
to know that another is in pain in the way in which we can
learn that he has red hair; unlike his hair, his pain cannot be
perceived. And, on the other hand, although some proposi-
tions ascribing pain to a person are incorrigible for him, no
such proposition is incorrigible for anyone else. We cannot ob-
serve the thoughts and feelings of another; so we cannot deter-
mine by observation that another is in pain. How then do we
ever know that another is in pain? What is our evidence?
But can we not sometimes see that a man is in pain? Can we
Proposition p is incorrigible for S if and only if S believes p entails p
and S believes not-p entails not-p.
Reid, Works (Edinburgh, 1858) p. 450.
Other Minds and Analogy
not sometimes see that someone is thinking, depressed, or ex-
uberant? And if anything would be "determining by obser-
vation" that another is in pain, surely seeing that he is would
be. So where is the problem? It must be conceded that in a
perfectly ordinary use of "see that" one may properly claim
to see that someone else is in pain. In the same or a similar
use, one can see that a child has measles, that a pipe will give
a sweet smoke, and that electrons of a certain sort are sporting
in the cloud chamber. One can even see (if one reads the news-
papers ) that John Buchanan of the House Un-American Activi-
ties Committee referred (no doubt mistakenly) to the Imperial
Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan as the "Inferior Lizard. " In a
similar use of the term the theist, impressed by the harmony
and beauty of the universe or the profundity of the Scriptures,
may justifiably (even if mistakenly) claim to see that God
exists.
And so of course our use of "determine by observation" will
have to be a technical use. How is it to be explained? Perhaps
we cannot explain it fully; perhaps we must give examples and
hope for the best. One can determine by observation that
Johnny's face is flushed and covered with red spots; one can-
not determine by observation that his blood contains measle
germs. One can determine by observation that today's news-
paper contains the sentence "Mr. Buchanan referred to the
Imperial Wizard as the 'Inferior Lizard'"; but if one is not
present at the hearings one cannot determine by observation
that Mr. Buchanan thus misspoke himself. Furthermore, in the
technical (but not the ordinary) use of the term sentences
of the form "S determines by observation that S' is in pain
only if S is the same person as S"' express a necessary truth;
similarly for "S determines by observation that a bodily area
contains a pain only if he feels a pain in that area. "
Now suppose we use "determinesi" for the narrower tech-
God and Other Minds
nical sense, and "determines" for the broader sense in which
one determines by observation (by seeing) that someone else
is in pain. Then a man can determine that Mr. Buchanan re-
ferred to the Wizard as a Lizard only if he determinesi the
truth of some other proposition, and knows or believes a prop-
osition connecting it with Mr. Buchanan's thus referring to the
Wizard. Furthermore, the theist can see that (i. e. , determine
that) God created the world only if in addition to determiningi
that the world is beautiful and orderly he knows some propo-
sition connecting the existence of a beautiful and orderly world
with the existence of God. In the same way I can determine
that Jones is in pain only if I know or believe some proposition
connecting what I determinei with his being in pain; and the
problem is: do I know any such proposition? If so, how? What
is my reason or evidence for supposing it true?
So there is an initial symmetry here. Some of the very bad
poetry read at Kiwanis club travelogues calls our attention to
the beauty and majesty of the mountains and concludes that
one can simply see that the world was created by God. Here
it is appropriate to ask what the connection is between God
and the mountains, and how one knows that if the latter are
beautiful and majestic, they were created by the former. But
similarly for the suggestion that one simply sees that someone
is in pain (in seeing that his behavior and circumstances are
such and such); we must ask what the connection is between
pain-behavior3 and pain, and how one knows that the former
is usually accompanied by the latter.
How do we know these things? Baron von Hiigel suggested
that we know the mind of another (on at least some occasions)
directly, in the same way we know our own minds. He appar-
Where the term "pain-behavior" is simply a label for a recognizable
pattern of behavior (and is not short for any such description as "be-
havior accompanied by pain").
19O
Other Minds and Analogy
ently believed that just as a man has "direct access" to his own
mind, so he may on some occasions have direct access to some-
one else's. It is not easy to understand the suggestion, but pre-
sumably it comes to supposing that some propositions ascribing
mental states to others are incorrigible for me--and this seems
to be just false.
Another answer I shall merely salute and dismiss is that of
the behaviorist, who claims that every mental-state-ascribing
proposition is logically equivalent to some proposition about
behavior and circumstances. There is an initial difficulty here:
how are we to take the term "about"? Is any proposition whose
subject is Jones's behavior (or which is equivalent to such a
proposition) about Jones's behavior? If so, there is absolutely
no doubt that propositions about Jones's behavior entail propo-
sitions ascribing mental states to him: consider, for example,
Jones's irritating behavior is caused by a persistent backache.
If we take "about" in this way then logical behaviorism be-
comes a truism. But if we cannot take it in this very broad
sense, how is it to be narrowed? Several possibilities present
themselves but none seems very satisfactory.
Nonetheless I suppose we really do have an idea of what the
intended sense of "about" is, even if we cannot say just what it
is. But in that sense of the term, no one has produced even one
example of a mental-state-ascribing proposition that is equiva-
lent to some behavior-cum-circumstances proposition; nor has
anyone suggested even the ghost of a reason for supposing that
there are such examples. Hence in what follows I take it for
granted that behaviorism is false.
Historically, perhaps the most important answer to the ques-
tion of other minds is the analogical position. 4 According to
The analogical argument for other minds was suggested by Descartes
(Discourse on Method, Pt. V) and Locke (Essay Concerning Human
Understanding, Bk. IV, ch. iii, par. 27). It was explicitly stated by Hume
God and Other Minds
this position one cannot determine by observation that some-
one else is in some mental state or other; neither are proposi-
tions ascribing mental states to others incorrigible for anyone.
Nevertheless, it holds, each of us has or can easily acquire evi-
dence for such beliefs. Each of us can construct a sound in-
ductive argument for the conclusion that he is not the only
being that thinks and reasons, has sensations and feelings--
an argument whose premises state certain facts about his own
mental life and about physical objects (including human
bodies), but do not entail the existence of minds or mental
states that are not his own. In this chapter and the next I
shall argue that the analogical position is as good an answer
as we have to the question "do we know and how do we know
the thoughts and feelings of another? " 5
The analogical position has come under heavy and sustained
attack during the last few years. The most powerful of these
attacks are associated with the work of Wittgenstein, as are the
most viable contemporary alternatives to the analogical posi-
tion. In what follows I shall argue that these objections and
alternatives are (so far as they are intelligible) unsound. Since
Wittgenstein's writings present j^bstantial problems of inter-
pretation, however, I shall consider the objections and alterna-
(Treatise of Human Nature, Bk. I, Pt. Ill, sec. xvi) and by J. S. Mill
(An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Philosophy [London, 1889],
pp. 243-244). More recently it has been tentatively endorsed by C. I.
Lewis (An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation [La Salle, 111. , 1946], p.
143). It has been restated and reaffirmed by A. J. Ayer (The Problem of
Knowledge [London, 1956], pp. 214-221); by C. D. Broad (Mind and
Its Place in Nature [London, 1925], pp. 335-347); by Stuart Hampshire
("Analogy of Feeling, " Mind, LXI [1952], 1-12); by H. II. Price ("Our
Evidence for Other Minds, " Philosophy, XIII [1938], 425-436); by
Bertrand Russell (Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits [New York,
1948], pp. 483-486); and by Walter Stace (The Theory of Knowledge
and Existence [Oxford, 1932], pp. 186-192).
John Wisdom, Other Minds (London, 1956), p. 192.
Other Minds and Analogy
tives as they appear in the writings of philosophers who have
tried to clarify and explain them.
I
First, an objection having to do with the learning of words
for mental processes and the acquiring of the concepts of these
processes. Norman Malcolm believes that according to the
analogical position one can learn what pain is only "from his
own case" (i. e. , by having pain), 8 but this, he thinks, is a
mistake:
If I were to learn what pain is from perceiving my own pain then
I should, necessarily, have learned that pain is something that
exists only when I feel pain. For the pain that serves as my para-
digm of pain (i. e. , my own) has the property of existing only
when I feel it. That property is essential, not accidental; it is
nonsense to suppose that the pain I feel could exist when I did
not feel it. So if I obtain my conception of pain from pain that
I experience, then it will be part of my conception of pain that I
am the only being that can experience it. For me it will be a con-
tradiction to speak of another's pain. 7
""Knowledge of Other Minds" (KOM), Journal of Philosophy (1958).
Reprinted in The Philosophy of Mind, ed. V. C. Chappell (Englewood
Cliffs, 1962), pp. 151-160. Page references will be to this volume.
7 "Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigation" (WPI), Philosophical
Review, 1954. Reprinted in Chappell, op. cit. , pp. 81-101. Page references
are to this volume. This argument is really directed against the possibility
of a private language; but Malcolm holds that the idea of a private lan-
guage is intimately tied to the idea that one can learn what pain is from
his own case (i. e. , by experiencing pain); indeed, he believes that the
latter is a "typical expression of the idea of a private language" (WPI, p.
75). He also holds that "the fundamental error of the argument from
analogy" is "the mistaken assumption that one learns from one's own case
what thinking, feeling, sensation are" (KOM, p. 156; Malcolm's italics).
In Knowledge and Certainty (Englewood Cliffs, 1963), p. 105, Malcolm
rejects this argument on the grounds that it incorrectly presupposes that
the distinction between qualitative and numerical identity holds for pains.
It is not clear to me, however, what giving up this distinction in the case
God and Other Minds
Taken as an objection to the analogical position, this argument
seems to be an ignoratio. For what the analogical position
entails is not that one could learn what pain is "from his own
case" but only that a person could (logically) know what pain
was even if he were the only sentient creature with a human
body. Hence it is not even clear that the analogical position en-
tails that a person must learn what pain is; there is no con-
tradiction in the proposition that Jones knows what pain is
but never learned what it was, either because he has known
what it was all his life, or because he acquired the concept all
right, but not by learning. 8 Strictly speaking, the analogical po-
sition need say nothing at all about the conditions under which
a person can or must learn what pain is.
One who merely sidestepped an argument as intriguing as
this one, however, would be churlish indeed. And perhaps it
could be maintained that even if the analogical position is con-
sistent with the proposition that one cannot learn what pain
is from his own case, it would be a good deal less attractive if
that proposition were true. Malcolm's argument clearly requires,
as an added premise, something like the following principle:
(Pi) If I get my conception of C by experiencing objects
and all the objects from which I get my conception
have a property P necessarily, then my conception of
C is such that the proposition Whatever is an instance
of C has P is necessarily true.
of pains comes to, nor how, exactly, giving it up affects the argument;
what follows seems to me, in any case, to be a stronger reason for mis-
trusting the argument, in that it does not depend upon giving up that
distinction.
8 "It is logically possible that someone should have been born with a
knowledge of the use of an expression or that it should have been pro-
duced in him by a drug; that his knowledge came to him by the way of
the normal process of teaching is not necessary" (Malcolm, WPI, p. 86).
Other Minds and Analogy
Is (Pi) true? To find out, we must know what it is for an
object to have a property necessarily. What Malcolm says sug-
gests
(Di) x has P. necessarily if and only if x has P and the prop-
osition x does not have P is necessarily false.
And the suggestion is that if I get my conception of pain by
experiencing pain, then each of my paradigms (i. e. , the pains
from which I get the conception) has the property of existing
only when I feel it necessarily, in the sense explained above.
Nevertheless, there are peculiarities involved here. One is the
fact that an object x may have a property P necessarily while
y which is identical with x, does not. 9 The first American to
reach the summit of Mount Everest, for example, has the prop-
erties of being an American and being a conqueror of Mount
Everest necessarily; Jim Whittaker has these properties con-
tingently. And this fact is fatal to (Di). For given (Di) it
will not be true that each of my paradigms of pain has the
property of existing only when I feel it necessarily. For suppose
that the headache I am thinking of is one of my paradigms
of pain: since The headache I am presently thinking of exists
when I do not feel it is a contingent proposition, the headache
I am presently thinking of does not have the property of exist-
ing only when I feel it necessarily. It is of course identical with
something that has the property in question necessarily; but
under (D) the headache I am presently thinking of has it
x
contingently. Hence it is false that all of my paradigms of pain
have that property necessarily.
Taking our cue from that fact, we might try to rectify matters
by embracing (D):
(D) x has P necessarily if and only if there is something
'See above, pp. 175-180.
God and Other Minds
y such that (1) x is identical with y and (2) y has P
necessarily in the sense of (D).
x
No heir to the ills of (Di), (D) has its own troubles. For if
ostensive definition is possible at all, (Pi), given (D), will be
false. Suppose Alexander the Great acquires his conception of
redness from some toys all of which were given him by his
father Philip. Then each of his paradigms of redness has the
property of being a gift from Philip. And each of them is iden-
tical with something that has that property necessarily in the
sense of (D): his red toy horse, for example, is identical with
x
the toy horse given him by Philip. Hence all of his paradigms
of red have the property of being gifts from Philip necessarily
in the sense of (D). But then, by (Pi), Alexander's concep-
tion of red must be such that All red things are gifts of Philip
is necessarily true; hence (D) will not do either.
Given (Di), (Pi) is equivalent to
(P) If every one of the objects from which I get my con-
ception of C is such that every description of it entails
that it has P, then my conception of C will be such
that the proposition Whatever is an instance of C has
P is logically necessary. 10
And given (D), (Pi) is equivalent to
(P) If, for every one of the objects from which I get my
conception of C, there is a description of it entailing
that it has P, then my conception of C is such that the
proposition Whatever is an instance of C has P is nec-
essarily true.
Where a description is any name or definite description of an object
and where a description D of an object entails that the object has a prop-
erty P just in case it is necessarily true that anything to which D applies
has P.
Other Minds and Analogy
And of course both (P) and (P) turned out unsatisfactory.
2 3
Following their lead, however, we might think (P) more prom-
ising:
(P) If every one df the objects from which I get my con-
ception of C is such that every description of it entail-
ing that it is one of my paradigms of C also entails
that it has P, then my conception of C is such that the
proposition Whatever is an instance of C has P is
necessarily true.
Perhaps (P) entails that no one can learn what pain is from
his own case; for any description of a pain entailing that it is
one of my paradigms also entails, it might be said, that it has
the property of existing only when I feel it. (P), however, is
really a wholesale assault upon ostcnsive definition generally;
it has no special bearing upon learning what pain is from one's
own case. For no matter what concept C is, any description of
a thing x entailing that x is one of my paradigms of C also
entails that I have perceived or experienced x; hence (P) en-
tails that any concept I get by experiencing objects applies
(necessarily) only to objects I have perceived or experienced. 11
But perhaps Malcolm has the following in mind. Sometimes
an object might not have had a property it in fact has, although
the proposition that it lacks that property is necessarily false.
The man standing on the corncr might not have been on the
corner, and that despite the necessary falsity of The man stand-
ing on the corner is not on the corner. Your yacht might have
been shorter than it is, again despite the necessary falsity of
Your yacht is shorter than it is. This is the distinction between
essential and accidental properties I developed in Chapter
Seven; and while it may leave some questions, there. are many
cases in which it clearly applies. So consider
111 owe this point to Robert C. Sleigh, Jr.
God and Other Minds
(D) x has P necessarily if and only if x has P and it is
false that X might not have had P.
The suggestion, of course, is that if I learned what pain is from
my own case, then each of my paradigms of pain has the
property of existing only when I feel it necessarily.
I said that in some cases there is no difficulty in determining
whether a given object has a certain property necessarily in
the sense of (D). Unfortunately, this is not one of those cases.
Wittgenstein suggests the possibility that I feel a pain in your
arm; if you feel a pain there too, and feel one of the same
duration, intensity, and so on as the one I feel, then perhaps
you and I are feeling the very same pain. Suppose, then, that
this is possible and that both of us have a pain--the very same
pain--in your left arm. Presumably that pain might have ex-
isted even if you had not felt it (provided I had); and it cer-
tainly might have existed even if I had not felt it. So is it true
that my pains necessarily exist only when I feel them? That
question apparently turns on whether it is possible for two
persons to have the very same pain. Perhaps that is possible;
it is at any rate not clearly impossible. And hence it is by
no means clear that (Pi) and (D) entail that one could not
learn what pain is from his own case.
And in any event (Pi), given (D), appears to be too strong.
For consider sneezes. Presumably one can learn what sneezes
(along with coughs and, perhaps, grunts) are by ostensive defi-
nition, by perceiving them. Yet it is false, I take it, that some
of my sneezes might have been sneezed by someone other than
myself. Any sneeze of mine has the property of being one of my
sneezes necessarily. Now suppose Alexander the Great learns
what sneezes are by perceiving his own and his father's sneezes
--that is, suppose that all of his paradigms of sneezing are
sneezed either by himself or by Philip. By (P5), Alexander's
conception of sneezing would be such that the proposition
Other Minds and Analogy
All sneezes are sneezed by Alexander or Philip is necessarily
true. If (P) is true, therefore, Alexander cannot learn what
sneezes arc by perceiving his own and his father's sneezes--
but surely he can.
This intriguing suggestion, therefore, turns out to be un-
successful as an objection to the analogical position.
II
Next, a more nebulous objection, more often encountered
in the oral tradition than in the published writings of Wittgen-
stein's followers. According to this objection, "The idea of a
private language is presupposed by every program of inferring
or constructing the 'external world' and 'other minds. '"12
And, of course, private languages are allegedly logically im-
possible. Now the issues surrounding the question of the possi-
bility of a logically private language are complex and difficult,
and the arguments by which Wittgenstein and his followers
purport to show its impossibility are not easy to follow. 13 I
shall here examine the other premise of the objection--the
claim that the analogical position entails or presupposes the
possibility of such a private language.
But first we must try to get a reasonably clear idea of what
it is that is supposedly entailed by the analogical position. How
are we to understand the claim that a given language is a
private language? "By a 'private language' is meant one that
not merely is not but cannot be understood by anyone other
than the speaker. " 14 So a language is a private language if and
Malcolm, WPI, p. 75.
Cf. Hector Castaneda, "The Private Language Argument, " in Knowl-
edge and Experience, ed. C. D. Rollins. See also the comments on Casta-
neda's paper and Castaneda's reply, all in the same volume; and see Judith
Jarvis Thomson, "Private Languages, " in American Philosophical Quar-
terly, I, 20-32.
Ibid. , p. 74.
God and Other Minds
only if someone speaks and understands it, and only one per-
son can understand it. The word "can" here, presumably, docs
not mean the same as in "I cannot read Arabic"; it signifies,
presumably, logical or conceptual necessity. We might, there-
fore, be inclined to define a private language as follows:
(a) L is a private language if and only if (1) (some of)
the terms in L are understood by only one person and
(2) the proposition More than one person understands
all of the terms in L is necessarily false.
But of course this characterization will be defective in the
same way as (above, page 195): suppose Friday's tribe is
annihilated by a natural disaster while he is visiting Robinson
Crusoe; suppose Friday alone now speaks and understands the
language of his tribe. We might define "Fritish" as "the lan-
guage Friday alone speaks"; and Fritish would then be a pri-
vate language in the sense of (a). But surely no one means to
deny that a language like Fritish is possible. It is not impossible,
in the requisite sense, that more than one person understand
the language which Friday alone understands, just as it is
not impossible that more than one person drive the automobile
that I alone drive. (It is, of course, impossible that there be an
automobile which I alone drive and which is driven by more
than one person. ) Friday alone understands Fritish; but some-
one else--indeed, any number of persons--might have under-
stood it. So I shall characterize a private language as one such
that (1) only one person understands it, and (2) it is false that
someone else might have understood it. And it is a private
language in this sense the possibility of which, according to the
claim under discussion, is entailed by the analogical position.
But why should anyone think that the analogical position
does entail the possibility of such a private language? "By a
'private' language is meant one that not merely is not but can-
2 00
Other Minds and Analogy
not be understood by anyone other than the speaker. The
reason for this is that the words of this language are supposed
to 'refer to what can only be known to the person speaking; to
his immediate private sensations. ' " 15 Now part of what is sug-
gested here, I take it, is that
(b) If some of the words of a language referred to what can
only be known to its speaker, that language would be a
private language.
I think Malcolm (and perhaps Wittgenstein too) means to
endorse (b). But the passage also suggests for consideration
the proposition
(c) A person's immediate sensations can be known only to
him.
While it is not altogether clear what is meant by the suggestion
that a man's sensations are known to him, and can be known
only to him, if a man's pains can be known only to him then
presumably he alone can know that he is in pain. And certainly
neither Malcolm nor Wittgenstein means to endorse (c). But
neither, of course, is it any part of the analogical position to
assert that a man's sensations can be known only to him; the
whole point of the position is the claim that a man can know
that someone else is in pain, for instance, via the analogical
argument. So (c) surely cannot be used in an attempt to show
that one who accepts the analogical position is committed to
the possibility of a private language, unless it can be demon-
strated that (e) follows from propositions explicitly acknowl-
edged as part of that position.
Here it might be maintained that
(d) A man's immediate sensations are private
WPI, p. 74. The passage Malcolm quotes is from the Philosophical
Investigations (New York, 1953), par. 243.
God and Other Minds
is part of the analogical position; and from (d) alone or to-
gether with some other proposition characteristic of the ana-
logical position it follows that a man's immediate sensations
can be known only to him. 16 But what does it mean to say
that sensations are private? A recurring suggestion is that al-
though it is possible for two persons to share a sensation in the
sense of having similar sensations, it is logically impossible that
two persons have numerically the same sensation. 17 You could
discover that your pain is identical with mine, is the identical
pain, just as your wife might discover that her dress is identical
with my wife's. But just as in the latter case there are two
dresses, so in the former there are two pains--yours and mine.
We might therefore define "privacy" as follows: Sensations are
private just in case it is logically impossible that two persons
have numerically the same sensation.
What Wittgenstein says in the Investigations (par. 253)
might suggest that sensations are not private, that you and
I could feel the same pain, numerically the same pain.
Whether this is or is not a possibility is not easy to tell. But
why suppose that the analogical position is committed to the
privacy of sensations? Why can't one who accepts the analogi-
cal argument simply let the chips fall where they may with
respect to that question? Why need he take a position at all?
It might be thought that if sensations were not private, the
analogical argument would be superfluous and unnecessary. If
you and I can feel the same pain, have the same pain, pre-
sumably I would not need the analogical argument to establish
18 "It is a convention that any feeling one has is an experience which is
private to oneself. And so it becomes a necessary truth that one person
cannot have, and theiefore cannot strictly know, the experiences of an-
other" (A. J. Ayer, "One's Knowledge of Other Minds, " in Philosophical
Essays [London, 1954], p. 19; ).
" See, for instance, Ayer, Foundations of Empirical Knowledge (Lon-
don, 194°), PP- 137-139-
Other Minds and Analogy
the fact that you are in pain. But of course this would be a
mistake. For from the fact that I am feeling a pain which you
also feel (and which is hence your pain) it does not follow that
I know or believe that you are in pain. I should need the ana-
logical argument, or something like it, presumably, as evidence
for the belief that the pain which I feel is also felt by you.
Whether or not pains are private, in the above sense, is quite
irrelevant to the analogical position. And hence the fact (if it
is a fact) that Pains are private entails that a man's pains are
known only to him, shows that the analogical position entails
the possibility of a private language only if Pains are private is
necessarily true and hence trivially entailed by the analogical
position--in which case every proposition would entail the
possibility of a private language.
The analogical position does, of course, entail that a man
has privileged or direct access to some of his own sensations but
not to the sensations of anyone else. So on the analogical po-
sition a man's sensations are private to him in the sense that
he alone has privileged access to them; someone might argue,
therefore, that if a man's sensations are private to him in this
sense then they are known only to him. Now what does the
analogical arguer mean to assert when he claims that a man has
privileged access to his own sensations and only to them?
Perhaps we may define this notion as follows: a person S
has privileged access to a mental state M of a person S' just in
case S believes S' has (or is in) M entails S' has (or is in) M.
It is then clear that a person does have privileged access to at
least some of his own sensations. A man cannot mistakenly
believe, for example, that he is in pain. But if so, then it is
necessarily true that any man who believes that he is in pain,
is in pain. It is equally obvious, however, that no one has
direct access to the mental states of another.
One who accepts the analogical position, therefore, may wish
God and Other Minds
to say that a man's knowledge of his own sensations is better
founded or more certain than his knowledge of someone else's;
he might be inclined to accept the principle that if Si and S
have knowledge of S's mental states, and Si but not S has
3 2
direct access to S's mental states, then Si's knowledge is better
s
founded than is S's. 18 He might say correspondingly that one
knows his own sensations in a different way from the way in
which he knows someone else's. He might therefore hold both
that his knowledge of his own mental states was more certain
than his knowledge of another's, and that lie knows his own
sensations in a different way from the way in which he knows
the mental states of another, and he might hold that these
things follow from the fact that he has direct access only to
his own mental states. But it certainly does not follow that no
one can know the mental states of another.
In characterizing the idea of a private language, Malcolm
suggests that "at bottom it is the idea that there is only a
contingent and not an essential connection between a sensa-
tion and its outward expression. " 19 Now of course it is part of
the analogical position to hold that the connection between a
sensation and its outward expression is logically contingent.
No proposition about20 a man's behavior, on that view, entails
or is entailed by any proposition ascribing a sensation to him.
Relative to any proposition about Jones's behavior, the propo-
sition Jones is in pain and its denial are both logically possible.
But how does it follow from this that a private language is
possible? Surely an argument is needed here. And in fact Mal-
colm suggests that if the connection between pain and behavior
is merely contingent, then a man's sensations can be known
Or he might say (see n. 16, above) that S strictly knows Si's sensa-
tions only if S has privileged access to them.
" WPI, p. 75
Bear in mind my earlier caveat about "about. "
Other Minds and Analogy
only to him: "For the behavior that is, for me, contingently
associated with 'the sensation of pain' may be for you, con-
tingently associated with 'the sensation of tickling'; the piece
of matter that produces in you what you call 'a metallic taste'
may produce in me what, if you could experience it, you would
call 'the taste of onions'; my 'sensation of red' may be your
'sensation of blue'; we do not know and cannot know whether
we are talking about the same things. " 21 If a man's sensations
are known only to him and one can, as the analogical arguer
avers, talk about his sensations, then a private language is pos-
sible. So if pain and behavior are contingently connected, a
private language would be possible.
But of course this argument does not come to much as an
objection to the analogical position. The latter holds both that
pain and behavior are contingently connected and that, via
the analogical argument, one person can know that another is
in pain. An argument, therefore, that employs as a premise the
proposition that if the connection between pain and behavior
is contingent, no one could know that another was in pain,
cannot be taken seriously as an objection to the analogical
position. What would be required here is some argument for
that premise. And of course such an argument would be quite
independent of the whole private language controversy; its
conclusion would entail that the analogical position is false
regardless of the outcome of the controversy.
This argument, then, like the preceding one, must be deemed
inconclusive. It seems to give us no reason at all for rejecting
the analogical position.
Ill
P. F. Strawson develops an interesting objection to what he
calls "the Cartesian analysis of a person"--an objection that
WPI, . 96
P
God and Other Minds
would, if sound, refute the analogical position. 22 The Cartesian
analysis, as depicted by Strawson, represents a person as the
union of two things--a body and mind. These two things are
of different logical types: no property significantly predicable
of one is significantly predicable of the other. What Strawson
is rejecting, then, is the view that a person is really a composite
of two substances such that to one of them mental predicates
alone are ascribable while to the other only physical or bodily
properties can be ascribed. Why does Strawson reject this
view? His reasoning begins with the claim that "it is a necessary
condition of ascribing states of consciousness, experiences, to
oneself, in the way one does, that one should also ascribe them,
or be prepared to ascribe them, to others who are not one-
self. " 23 Secondly, a necessary condition of the ability to ascribe
states of consciousness to others is the ability to identify, "re-
ferringly think about, " those things other than oneself to which
states of consciousness are to be ascribed. And thirdly, "if the
things one ascribes states of consciousness to, in ascribing them
to others, are thought of as a set of Cartesian egos to which
only private experiences can, in correct logical grammar, be
ascribed. .. then there is no question of telling that a private
experience is another's. " 24 The point here is that unless I have
a way of distinguishing one particular of a given type from
other particulars of that type, I am unable to ascribe any at-
tribute to any member of that type. But if the particulars in
question are "inaccessible" to me (in just the fashion that, on
the Cartesian and analogical view, other selves are inaccessible)
and if the attributes to be ascribed are likewise inaccessible in
that same way, I have no way of distinguishing, in thought, one
particular of that type from others of the same type. And if I
Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics (London, 1959).
Ibid. , p. 99.
Ibid. , p. 100.
Other Minds and Analogy
am unable to identify other subjects of experience, I am unable
to predicate states of consciousness of others; hence I am un-
able to predicate them of myself. This position, therefore, en-
tails that no one is able to predicate states of consciousness of
anything whatever.
The Cartesian is likely to reply that the argument is an
ignoratio. For he does not, of course, assert that only "private
experiences can, in correct logical grammar" be predicated of
selves or mental substances. After all, Descartes held that there
is a large class of selves such that to each of the members of
this class a causal relationship to a physical body can cor-
rectly be ascribed; and according to the analogical position each
of us can discover that many states of consciousness are ac-
companied by distinctive behavioral states. Further, the Car-
tesian might continue, one could identify another subject of
experience as "the subject of experience which stands to that
body in the same relation that the subject of my experiences
stands to this body. " Bodies other than my own are certainly
not inaccessible to me in the way in which another's states of
consciousness are. Strawson takes account of this objection to
his argument in the following words:
But this suggestion is useless. It requires me to have noted that
my experiences stand in a special relation to body M, when it is
just the right to speak of my experience that is in question. That
is to say, it requires me to have noted that my experiences stand
in a special relation to body M; but it requires me to have noted
this as a condition of being able to identify other subjects of
experiences, i. e. , as a condition of my having the idea of myself
as a subject of experience, i. e. , as a condition of thinking of any
experience as mine. 25
Now if this were correct, the analogical position would be
futile. But exactly why is the "right to speak of my experience"
Ibid. , p. 101.
20 j
God and Other Minds
in question for the Cartesian? To find out, we shall have to
formulate the argument against the Cartesian more precisely.
The first premise is explained in a long footnote. 20 As stated
in the text and explained in that footnote it is susceptible of
several interpretations. I shall suggest an interpretation which
seems to me likely both because Strawson's words suggest that
he would accept it and because the premise so interpreted is
fairly plausible in its own right; I shall not argue that my inter-
pretation is in fact Strawson's meaning. Since the premise is
a specification of a general principle governing predication, I
shall state it without specific reference to mental substances
and states of consciousness:
(1) A necessary condition of a person N's ascribing a predi-
cate P to an individual a is that N have a conception
of the appropriate occasions for ascribing P to individ-
uals other than a.
(2) N's being able to identify individuals other than a is a
necessary condition of N's having a conception of the
appropriate occasions for ascribing P to individuals other
than a.
The crucial word here is "identify. " Strawson states the follow-
ing general requirement for identification:
(3) "N can identify a particular only if N knows some indi-
viduating fact about that particular. " 27
We are now in a position to try to understand why Strawson
believes that the Cartesian cannot identify other subjects of
experience by means of some such locution as "the subject of
experience that stands in the same relation to that body as the
261 bid. , p. 99.
Ibid. , pp. 23, 181-183.
Other Minds and Analogy
subject of my experiences stands to this body. " One is imme-
diately struck by the thought that perhaps Strawson is here
using "necessary condition" in such a fashion that "N's doing
a is a necessary condition of N's doing b" entails that N must
do a before he can do b. At any rate on this interpretation
Strawson's argument against the Cartesian would be valid. For
premises (1) and (2) interpreted in this way entail that one
must be able to identify other subjects of experience before one
can predicate experiences of himself--that is, before one can
think of or refer to his own experiences at all. And one can
identify, referringly think about, other subjects of experience in
the way the analogical position suggests only if one is already
able to predicate experiences of himself--that is, already able
to recognize certain experiences as his own. But this is not,
presumably, Strawson's meaning. For (1) and (2) state gen-
eral conditions of predication. And under the present interpre-
tation these conditions are logically incapable of fulfillment,
not merely with respect to discourse in the Cartesian mode
about other minds, but with respect to any predication of any
property of any individual whatever. For under the interpreta-
tion in question, the above three principles come to the follow-
ing: before I can predicate any property of any individual I
must have a conception of the appropriate occasions for pred-
icating that property of other individuals (1). Before I can
have a conception of the appropriate occasions for predicating
that property of other individuals I must be able to identify
other individuals (2). And being able to identify an individual
entails knowing some individuating fact about that individual
(3). But if I know an individuating fact about an individ-
ual I am already able to predicate a property of that indi-
vidual, the property, namely, which distinguishes it from other
individuals. Hence before I am able to predicate any property
God and Other Minds
of any individual I must be able to predicate some property
of some individual; and it is accordingly logically impossible
for me to predicate any property of any individual. 28
If this is correct, we do well to look for a different interpre-
tation of Strawson's objection. And a natural suggestion is that
Strawson means, not that N's ability to identify other subjects
of experience must be temporally prior to his ability to predi-
cate experiences of them, but only that at any time at which
N is able to predicate experiences of others, he must be able
to identify them. The crucial premises then turn out as follows:
If N can predicate states of consciousness of himself at time
t, N has, at t, a conception of the appropriate occasions for
predicating states of consciousness of others.
If N has a conception of the appropriate occasions for pred-
icating states of consciousness of others, at t, N is able, at
t, to identify other subjects of experience.
The discussion so far has centered about Strawson's claim
that one who held a Cartesian position could not make a cer-
tain suggestion about the identification of other subjects of ex-
perience--the suggestion that another subject of experience
could be identified as for example, "the subject of experience
that stands in the same causal relation to that body as the sub-
ject of my experiences stands to this one. " But now the ques-
tion becomes acute: why can't the Cartesian stick with this
suggestion? I should think he could comfortably agree to (1)
and (2) while maintaining the thesis about identification
Strawson denies him. With respect to (1), for example, he
might hold the following: if N can predicate mental states of
himself at time t, then, at t, N knows (or believes, thinks, etc. )
that for any mental state M he predicates of himself, if he were
For a fuller statement of this argument, see my "Things and Persons, "
Review of Metaphysics, XIV (1961), 510.
Other Minds and Analogy
to observe a correlation between a state B of bis body and the
presence of M, then any occasion on which he observes a body
similar to his in state B is an appropriate occasion for predicat-
ing M of another subject of experience. And with respect to
(2) he might claim to be able to identify the subject of experi-
ence in question in just the way Strawson prohibits. I quoted
above (p. 207) the argument Strawson produces at this point;
but under the present interpretation of "necessary condition"
that argument turns out to be nothing more than a restatement
of principles (1) and (2).
We might be tempted to object that if the Cartesian or ana-
logical view were right no one could ever know for sure that
there were subjects of experience connected with bodies other
tYiavi his own. But that -would be to change iVit Vuu: jttL alto-
gether; Strawson has maintained not merely that on these views
no one could know for sure that there were other subjects of
experience (with that the Cartesian might possibly agree), but
that no one could so much as predicate experiences, states of
consciousness, either of others or of himself• And if I have in-
terpreted his argument aright, it does not substantiate this
claim. We seem to be left with the bare assertion that on the
Cartesian or analogical view it is impossible to see how anyone
could come by the concept of selfhood at all, or how anyone
could form the idea of a subject of experience. These objec-
tions, then, are inconclusive.
i jm
Alternatives to the
Analogical Position
IN Chapter Eight, I began the comparison of our alleged knowl-
edge of God with our alleged knowledge of other minds by
arguing that the analogical position is the best answer any of
us has to what I shall call the "epistemological question":
"How do I know that there are other beings that think and
feel, reason and believe? " By way of supporting this claim I
considered and rejected several alternatives to the analogical
position, as well as a set of Wittgensteinian objections to it. In
this chapter I shall consider a pair of contentions that are at
once objections to and alternatives to the analogical position.
I
A number of contemporary philosophers follow Wittgenstein
in believing that the epistemological question is not to be an-
swered by any tenuous analogical reasoning; its answer is to be
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
found in the fact that "inward processes stand in need of out-
ward criteria. " In "Knowledge of Other Minds, " for example,
Norman Malcolm expresses his belief that the argument from
analogy for other minds "still enjoys more credit than it de-
serves, " quotes a statement of that argument by J. S. Mill, and
then delivers the following counter:
More interesting is the following point: suppose this reasoning
could yield a conclusion of the sort "it is probable that that human
figure (pointing at some person other than oneself) has thoughts
and feelings. " Then there is a question as to whether this con-
clusion can mean anything to the philosopher who draws it, be-
cause there is a question as to whether the sentence "That hu-
man figure has thoughts and feelings" can mean anything to him.
Why should this be a question? Because the assumption from
which Mill starts is that he has no criterion for determining
whether another "walking and speaking figure" does or does not
have thoughts and feelings. If he had a criterion he could apply
it, establishing with certainty that this or that human figure does
or does not have feelings (for the only plausible criterion would
lie in behavior and circumstanccs that are open to view), and
there would be no call to resort to tenuous analogical reasoning
that yields at best a probability. If Mill has no criterion for the
existence of feelings other than his own, then in that sense he
does not understand the sentence "That human figure has feel-
ings" and therefore does not understand the sentence "It is prob-
able that that human figure has feelings. " 1
So the analogical argument is either superfluous or impossi-
ble: cither we do not need it to answer Mill's question, or if
we do need it we do not have a criterion for its conclusion and
"in that sense" cannot understand it. But is there such a sense
of "understand"? (One can, of course, invent such a sense for
Journal of Philosophy, LX (1958), 969-78. Reprinted in The Philos-
ophy of Mind, ed. Vere Chappell (Englewood Cliffs, 1962), pp. 151-160,
and page references are to this volume. The quotation is from p. 152.
God and Other Minds
it. ) To answer we must know what it is to have a criterion
for p, or for determining that p. Here Malcolm gives the fol-
lowing hints as to what this technical term means: if Mill has
a criterion he can "establish with certainty" that Smith is (or
is not) in pain. This criterion, further, will apparently be some
observable state of affairs ("the only plausible criterion would
lie in behavior and circumstances that are open to view"). And
the suggestion, apparently, is that if a man cannot establish
with certainty that Jones is in pain, then he does not under-
stand the sentence "Jones is in pain. " Why not? Because "he
has no idea what would count for or against it"? 2 But here
either "count for or against" is being used in a technical and
unexplained fashion or else the remark is false. For Mill cer-
tainly has some idea of what would count for or against Jones's
being in pain. His engaging in the sort of behavior in which
Mill engages when in pain, for example, would count for Jones's
being in pain; his behaving in some other way would count
against it. So Mill does have an idea of what would count for
Jones's being in pain. Why then must he also have a criterion
for fones is in pain in order to understand the sentence "Jones
is in pain"? And is it true that if Mill has a criterion for that
proposition, then he can establish its truth or falsity without
resorting to the analogical argument? To answer these ques-
tions we must learn more about criteria.
In "Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations" Malcolm
explains further:
What makes something into a symptom of y is that experience
teaches that it is always or usually associated with y; that so-and-so
is the criterion of y is a matter, not of experience, but of "defini-
tion". (354) The satisfaction of the criterion of y establishes the
existence of y beyond question; it repeats the kind of case in
which we were taught to say 'y'. The occurrence of a symptom
Ibid. , p. 156.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
of y may also establish the existence of y 'beyond question'--but
in a different sense. The observation of a brain process may make
it certain that a man is in pain--but not in the same way that
his pain behavior makes it certain. Even if physiology has estab-
lished that a specific event in the brain accompanies bodily pain,
still it could happen (it makes sense to suppose) that a man might
be in pain without that brain event occurring. But if the criterion
of being in pain is satisfied, then he must be in pain. 3
Consider the proposition Jones is in pain, and call it P. What
this passage clearly asserts is that it is impossible that P be
false when the criterion for P is satisfied. The impossibility in
question, furthermore, is not merely causal or empirical; it is
a matter of definition. Hence it is a necessary truth that if the
criterion for P is satisfied, then P is true; the proposition that
the criterion for P is satisfied entails P.
The very next passage, however, seems to complicate matters:
The preceding remarks point up the following question: Do the
propositions that describe the criterion of his being in pain
logically imply the proposition "He is in pain"? Wittgenstein's
answer is clearly in the negative. Pain-behavior is a criterion of
pain only in certain circumstances. If we come upon a man ex-
hibiting violent pain-behavior couldn't something show that he
is not in pain? Of course. For example, he is rehearsing for a
play; or he has been hypnotized and told, 'You will act as if you
are in pain, although you won't be in pain, ' and when he is re-
leased from the hypnotic state he has no recollection of having
been in pain; or his pain-behavior suddenly ceases and he reports
in apparent bewilderment that it was as if his body had been
possessed--for his movements had been entirely involuntary, and
during the 'seizure' he had felt no pain; or he has been narrowly
missed by a car and as soon as a sum for damages has been
Philosophical Review, LXIII (1954), 530-559. Reprinted in Chappell,
op. cit. , pp. 81-101, and page references are to this volume. The quota-
tion is from p. 87.
God and Other Minds
pressed into his hand, his pain-bchavior ceases and he laughs at
the hoax, or. .. etc. The expressions of pain are a criterion of
pain in certain "surroundings, " not in others, (cf. 584)
How can we understand this in such a way that it does not con-
flict with the clear teaching of the preceding passage? Perhaps
as follows. In the appropriate circumstances, certain kinds of
behavior are the criterion for P. Let b be some kind of be-
havior which in the relevant circumstances is the criterion for
P; and let B be the proposition that Jones is manifesting b.
Suppose further that c is a circumstance in which Jones's man-
ifesting b is the criterion for P; and let C be the proposition
that c obtains. Now Malcolm is clearly asserting that B does
not entail P; for b is the criterion for P only in certain circum-
stances. 4 Nor, therefore, does B entail that the criterion for
P is satisfied. But the conjunction of B and C with the propo-
sition that in c, b is the criterion for P does entail that the cri-
terion for P is satisfied; and hence it entails P as well. This gives
us a consistent interpretation of what Malcolm says. Although
the proposition that the criterion for P is satisfied entails P,
the proposition that Jones is engaging in the sort of behavior
which, in the appropriate circumstances, constitutes the cri-
terion for P, does not.
An interesting question here is whether the conjunction of
B with C entails P--that is, does the proposition that c obtains
conjoined with the proposition that Jones is engaging in pain-
behavior entail that Jones is in pain? Suppose that B and C
does entail P. Then apparently some proposition about5 be-
havior and circumstances entails a mental-state-ascribing prop-
osition. And of course no such propositions do entail mental-
Is the suggestion that if C is true then B entails P? Presumably not;
for if p is consistent, then it entails that q entails r only if q entails r
(i. e. , whether or not p is true).
See above, p. lgi.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
state-ascribing propositions; nor does Malcolm believe that
they do. 6 B and C, accordingly, does not entail P.
On the other hand, B and C conjoined with
D In c Jones's manifesting b is the criterion for P
does entail P. Hence D must be a contingent proposition. 7
But if it is, how is Mill supposed to know that it is true?
Mill can observe, of course, that Jones is engaging in b and that
c obtains; but before he could use his criterion, if he had one,
to establish that P is the case, he would have to establish the
fact that in c, Jones's manifesting b is indeed the criterion for
P. And how could be establish that? What would be evidence
for it? Here he would need the analogical argument, presum-
ably, or something very like it. Or perhaps something else. At
any rate it is clear, I believe, that Malcolm has not told us
enough about the nature of criteria for us to determine whether
or not his original argument against Mill is sound. For under
the present understanding of "criteria" there is no reason to
think that if Mill has a criterion for P then he can establish
that P is true without resorting to the analogical argument or
something like it. So far, therefore, we have no reason for sup-
posing that argument otiose, or that the "criteriological posi-
tion" offers a genuine alternative to the analogical position.
Some further remarks in the same article suggest a different
sense for "criterion":
" 'But, if you are certain, isn t it that you are shutting your eyes
in face of doubt? '--They are shut". (224) This striking remark
suggests that what we sometimes do is draw a boundary around
this behavior in these circumstances and say, 'Any additional cir-
cumstances that might come to light will be irrelevant to whether
this man is in pain. '. .. If your friend is struck by a car and
Cf. "Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations, " p. 89.
If p and q and r entails s, and r is necessary, then p and q entails s.
God and Other Minds
writhes with a broken leg, you do not think: Perhaps it was
prearranged in order to alarm me; possibly his leg was anesthetized
just before the 'accident' and he isn't suffering at all. Someone
could have such doubts whenever another person was ostensibly
in pain. Similarly: "I can easily imagine someone always doubting
before he opened his front door whether an abyss did not yawn
behind it; and making sure about it before he went through the
door (and he might on occasion prove to be right)--but that
does not make me doubt in the same case. " (84)®
These remarks may suggest that all or almost all of us do in
fact take pain-behavior as an expression of pain. It is simply
a fact of human nature that upon observing a human being
behaving in the relevant way (and in the relevant circum-
stances) we are certain that he is in pain. And to take pain-
behavior as a criterion of pain is simply to react in this way:
to be certain, on an occasion when a person is displaying pain
behavior, that he is in pain. To say that pain-behavior is the
criterion of pain is not to say that there is some logical or evi-
dential connection between statements describing pain-behavior
and statements ascribing pain to someone; it is just to say that
on most occasions when one human being observes another
manifesting pain-behavior (in the relevant circumstances), he
is certain that the other is in pain.
In this sense of "criterion, " of course, the man who accepts
the analogical position may very well have a criterion for pain.
Doubtless Mill had one. A person who accepts the analogical
argument need not employ it in order to convince himself that
there are other people or that others are sometimes in pain.
Aquinas and Anselm believed in God and also presented cer-
tain proofs of God's existence. Their acceptance of the latter,
however, was not a necessary condition of their faith in God;
8 "Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations, " p. 90. The passages
Malcolm quotes are from the Investigations (New York, 1953).
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
in the same way a man can be certain that one who displays
typical pain behavior is indeed in pain, while appearing to the
analogical argument as a justification, or partial justification,
for his certainty.
Thus far we have not discovered a sense for "criterion" in
which Malcolm's argument against Mill is sound. In "Wittgen-
stein's Use of 'Criterion'" Rogers Albritton explains Wittgen-
stein's use of that term as follows:
That a man behaves in a certain manner, under certain circum-
stances, cannot entail that he has a toothache. But it can entail
something else, which there is no short way of stating exactly,
so far as I can find. Roughly, then: it can entail that anyone who
is aware that the man is behaving in this manner, under these
circumstances, is justified in saying that the man has a toothache,
in the absence of any special reason to say something more
guarded (as, for example, that there is an overwhelming prob-
ability that the man has a toothache). 9
What Albritton says suggests the following:
Ci Where p and q are states of affairs, p is a criterion for q
if and only if it is necessary that anyone who knows that
p obtains and has no reason for supposing that q does
not, is justified in believing that q obtains.
So stated, this explanation has the consequence, I think, that
Jones's exhibiting typical pain behavior is not a criterion of his
being in pain. For it is not a necessary truth that anyone who
(a) knows that Jones is exhibiting typical pain behavior, and
(b) has no reason for supposing that he is not in pain, is justi-
fied in believing that Jones is in pain. Consider the man who
satisfies (a) and (b) but believes that Jones's behavior is alto-
gether irrelevant to his being in pain. He believes that Jones
'Journal of Philosophy, LVI (1958) 845-857. The quotation is from
p. 856.
God and Other Minds
is in pain, all right--not, however, because (a) is true but be-
cause it's Thursday and it is his belief that on Thursdays every-
one is in pain. Even if p is a first-rate reason for q, indeed,
entails q, a man may know that p and unjustifiably believe that
q--if, for example, he does not believe that p entails q and
accepts q just because he has found a slip of paper on which
it was written. C must therefore be revised:
t
C p is a criterion of q if and only if it is necessary that
anyone who knows that p obtains, has no reason for
supposing that q does not, and believes that q obtains
on the basis of his belief that p does, is justified in be-
lieving that q obtains.
Albritton is disinclined to believe that pain-behavior is a
criterion of pain in the sense he has explained. And it does
indeed seem that knowing that Jones is engaging in pain be-
havior (and meeting the other conditions) is not sufficient for
believing justifiably that Jones is in pain; one must also know,
or justifiably believe, that when a man exhibits pain-behavior
he is usually in pain. Be that as it may, C certainly suffers from
an opposite defect: for now the state of affairs which obtains
just in case most Dutchmen are ambidextrous and Dykstra
is a Dutchman could be my criterion for Dykstra's being ambi-
dextrous. More relevantly, Mill will now claim as his criterion
for Jones's being in pain the state of affairs which obtains just
in case the proposition There is a correlation between pain and
pain-behavior in Mill's case, and Jones is exhibiting pain-be-
havior is true. For the burden of his position is that the corre-
lation he observes between pain and pain-behavior in his own
case inductively justifies his belief that whenever a man ex-
hibits pain-behavior he is in pain; but the latter together with
the fact that Jones is exhibiting pain-behavior entails that Jones
is in pain. On this version of "criterion" one who accepts the
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
analogical position may indeed have a criterion for that human
figure's having feelings; part of the position just is that pain-
behavior is (or can be) a criterion, in the current sense, for
someone's being in pain. And so we still have not found a sense
of the term "criterion" which will be of use in Malcolm's argu-
ment against the analogical position.
Sydney Shoemaker suggests the following as an explanation
of "the sense of 'criterion' which has become current through
the influence of Wittgenstein's later work":
A test of whether something is one of the criteria for the truth
of judgments of a certain kind is whether it is conceivable that
he might discover empirically that it is not, or has ceased to be,
evidence in favor of the truth of such judgments. If it is evi-
dence, and it is not conceivable that it could be discovered not
to be (or no longer to be) evidence, then it is one of the criteria.
If so and so's being the case is a criterion for the truth of a
judgment of identity, the assertion that it is evidence in favor
of the truth of the judgment is necessarily (logically) rather than
contingently (empirically) true. We know that it is evidence, not
by having observed correlations and discovered empirical general-
ization, but by understanding the concept of a <£. .. . The
search for the criteria for the truth of a judgment is the search
for necessarily true propositions asserting that the existence of
certain phenomena or states of affairs is evidence of the truth
of that judgment. 10
Although Shoemaker is talking in part about the criteria for
the identity of certain kinds of objects, he obviously means his
remarks to apply to criteria generally. His suggestion seems to
be something like the following: suppose we know that eight
Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity (Ithaca, 1963), pp. 3-4. (Shoemaker
explicitly disclaims any intention of dealing directly "with the doubts and
difficulties that have been raised concerning this notion in recent philo-
sophical discussion. " Nonetheless his suggestion is interesting and worth
considering. )
God and Other Minds
out of ten nine-year-old Chevrolets have defective wiring; then
A George's car is a nine-year-old Chevrolet
is inductive evidence for
B George's car has defective wiring.
That A is evidence for B, however, is a contingent truth; it is
conceivable that we should discover its falsity. We might do
this, for example, by discovering
C George's car has just been rewired by a competent me-
chanic (and almost no such cars have defective wiring)
or possibly
D Nine out of ten nine-year-old Chevrolets have impec-
cable wiring.
More generally, where p is inductive evidence for q, the proposi-
tion that p is evidence for q is only contingently true; on the
other hand, p is a criterion for q if and only if the proposition
that p is evidence for q is logically necessary.
Shoemaker says nothing further here about the conditions
under which one proposition is evidence for another (and in
the present context that omission is surely no grounds for com-
plaint). One naturally supposes that p is evidence for q just in
case q is more probable than not on p--that is, just in case q
would be more probable than not with respect to what we knew
if p were all we knew relevant to q. (And, of course, p would
be evidence against q if p were evidence for q's denial. ) If this
is Shoemaker's intention, however, then his explanation of the
distinction between criteria and symptoms seems to me to em-
body a confusion. Let me explain why. In the first place, A by
itself is not inductive evidence for B. For A alone does not dis-
confirm (is not evidence against)
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
E All nine-year-old Chevrolets have magnificent wiring.
But then A does not disconfirm the conjunction of A with E, 11
which entails
F George's car has splendid wiring.
Hence A does not disconfirm F. 12 But if so, A does not confirm
B, since B entails the denial of F. 13 Of course A conjoined with
G Eight out of ten nine-year-old Chevrolets have defec-
tive wiring
is evidence for B; but A alone is not. The conjunction of A
with G is inductive evidence for B; but how could we possibly
discover that it is not evidence for B? We could, indeed, dis-
cover C (George's car has just been rewired). To do so, how-
ever, would not be to discover that A and G is not evidence for
B; it would be to discover the truth of a proposition whose
conjunction with A and G is evidence for the falsity of B. In-
deed, there is no way of discovering that A and G does not
confirm B; for the proposition that it does is itself necessarily
true.
Taking Shoemaker's suggestion this way, then, I think we
get the result that no proposition is ever merely inductive evi-
dence for any other proposition; and the equally unlikely result
that such a proposition as A and G is a criterion for the truth
of B. And, of course, under this understanding of "criterion"
By the principle that if p is not evidence against q, then it is not
evidence against its conjunction with q.
By the principle that if p does not disconfirm q, then p does not dis-
confirm any proposition entailed by q. (This follows from the principle
that if p is evidence for q, then p is evidence for any logical consequence
of q. )
By the principle that if p does not disconfiim q and r entails the
denial of q, then p is not evidence for r. (This also follows from the
principle mentioned in the previous footnote. )
God and Other Minds
Mill would indeed have a criterion for Jones is in pain; his cri-
terion would be the conjunction of the premises of the analogi-
cal argument whose conclusion was that proposition.
Now Shoemaker clearly believes that a proposition p may be
evidence at one time but not at another for a proposition q.
So no doubt he is not using the locution "evidence for" in what
I said was the natural way to use it. How then does he mean
to use it? The following is a possibility: in assessing the eviden-
tial relevance of one proposition to another what we consider
is the probability of the first on the second together with our
background information, or that part of it relevant to the case
in question. Where e is our background information, then, p
is evidence for q just in case (1) q is more probable than not
on the conjunction of p with e, and (2) the probability of q
on the conjunction of p with e is greater than its probability on
e alone. Given then this explanation of "evidence for, " A above
would indeed be evidence for B; for presumably G would be
part of our relevant background information. Furthermore, we
could discover that A was not evidence for B by making a dis-
covery effecting the right sort of change in our background in-
formation. We might conceivably discover D, for example; if
D became a part of our background information then presum-
ably B would no longer be more probable than not on the con-
junction of the latter with A. Given this conception of evi-
dence, how can we state Shoemaker's distinction between
criteria and inductive evidence? The essence of the distinction,
of course, is that p is criterial evidence for q only if it is neces-
sarily true that p is evidence for q; but merely inductive evi-
dence if the latter is only contingently true. So perhaps we can
put this as follows:
C Where e is our relevant background information, p is
a criterion for q if and only if there is no proposition
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
r consistent with p and with q1* such that when e' is
formed from e by conjoining r with e (and deleting any
conjunct of e inconsistent with r, 15 q is not more prob-
able than not on the conjunction of p with e'.
On C, however, it appears that no behavioral proposition is
(or states) a criterion for Jones's being in pain. For any such
proposition would say, of Jones, that he is displaying behavior
of a certain specified sort S. But now consider
H Jones is almost never in pain when he displays behavior
of sort S.
This will be consistent with the proposition that Jones is in
pain as well as the proposition that Jones is displaying behavior
of sort S. And our background information is of such a sort that
when we add H to it, its conjunction with Jones is displaying
behavior of sort S will not be evidence for Jones is in pain.
Hence on C the former will not be a criterion for the latter;
hence C is unsuccessful.
There remains but one more possibility I wish to examine.
Consider what we may call the myriokranic syllogism, where
(1) the major premise is a proposition of the form most (al-
most all, the vast majority of, etc. ) A's are B; (2) the minor
asserts of some particular x that is an A; (3) the conclusion
states of that same x that it is a B, and (4) the minor premise
does not entail the conclusion. Suppose we say further that the
minor premise of a myriokranic syllogism is evidence for its
conclusion in just those cases where our background informa-
tion contains the major. We may say still further, then, that
where (and only where) the major premise is necessarily true,
This qualification serves to eliminate some trivial counterexamples.
This must be stated with greater care to be fully accurate; but the
gain would not be worth the price in complication.
God and Other Minds
the minor is necessarily evidence for the conclusion. Now per-
haps Shoemaker's suggestion may be put as follows:
C Where p is a criterion for q and p and q each predicate
a property of the same individual, there is a myriokranic
syllogism whose minor premise is p, whose conclusion
is q, and whose major premise is necessarily true.
Of course this would not constitute a perfectly general explana-
tion of the nature of criteria; for no doubt it is false that wher-
ever p is a criterion for q, p and q predicate a property of the
same individual. Nonetheless, it may hold for the cases rele-
vant to the present discussion; for it might be argued that Jones
is displaying pain-behavior is a criterion (in the sense just ex-
plained) for Jones is in pain in that
M On most occasions when a person displays pain-behavior
he is in pain
is necessarily true.
I think Shoemaker believes that M is necessarily true; and
Albritton tentatively attributes the view that it is to Wittgen-
stein. 16 Is it? It certainly does not appear to be. It has the look
of a fact of common experience, as Albritton remarks. Of
course other propositions which at first blush do not seem to be
necessary have been shown to be so; Some properties have no
associated sets does not look necessary at first glance either.
But at any rate, we need an argument, and a substantial one,
for the claim that M is necessarily true.
Shoemaker appears to suggest such an argument. 17 He ap-
parently means to argue that (1) if M is contingent, its denial
is conceivable. And (2) if its denial is conceivable, one could
Albritton, op. cit. , p. 856.
Op. cit. , pp. 188-190. I think Shoemaker is arguing for the necessity
of M in this passage; but that he is doing so is not altogether clear.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
"imagine what it would be like" for the usual correlation be-
tween pain-behavior and pain to fail in one's own case. But, he
argues, in fact no one can imagine this. Curiously enough,
however, Shoemaker employs as a premise the proposition that
one can imagine what it would be like for a certain state of
affairs to obtain only if one could establish or prove that it
obtained:
The claim that one can imagine what it would be like for the
state of affairs S (the failure of the usual correlations between
pain-behavior and pain) to become, in one's own case, the rule
rather than the exception is, I think, equivalent to the claim
that one could establish that this had occurred in one's own case;
one could express this claim by saying that there is something
one can imagine occurring that would show one that this had
happened in one's own case. 18
Now premise (2) above is true (and relevant to the argu-
ment) only if "one can imagine what it would be like if p" is
equivalent to something like "one can see that p is contingent. "
But if so, Shoemaker is espousing the peculiar principle that if
one can see that p is contingent, then one can or could estab-
lish or discover that p is true. And this seems obviously false.
That I am alive or am conscious is contingent and so is its
denial; yet it is scarcely possible for me to establish the latter.
That there are beings capable of making discoveries is also con-
tingent; but surely its denial cannot be discovered or established.
Once more, then, we have not been able to find a sense of
"criterion" under which Malcolm's argument against Mill is
plausible.
Like Malcolm and Shoemaker, P. F. Strawson accepts the
view that there are behavioral criteria for mental states. And
if he has no very clear explanation of the criteriological rela-
uIbid. , pp. 189-190.
God and Other Minds
tionship, what he seeks to establish is not merely that it does
in fact connect behavior and mental states, but that its con-
necting them is a necessary condition of our being able to pred-
icate mental states either of ourselves or of others; he offers a
"transcendental deduction" of the criteriological relation. I
quote the argument in full:
Clearly there is no sense in talking of identifiable individuals
of a special type, a type namely, such that they possess both
M-predicates and P-predicates, unless there is in principle some
way of telling, with regard to any individual of that type, and
any P-predicate, whether that individual possesses that P-predicate.
And in the case of at least some P-predicates, the ways of telling
must constitute in some sense logically adequate kinds of criteria
for the ascription of P-predicates, For suppose in no case did
these ways of telling constitute logically adequate kinds of criteria.
Then we should have to think of the relation between the ways
of telling and what the P-predicate ascribes, or a part of what it
ascribes, always in the following way: we should have to think
of the ways of telling as signs of the presence, in the individual
concerned, of this different thing, viz. , the state of consciousness.
But then we could only know that the way of telling was a sign
of the presence of the different thing ascribed by the P-predicate,
by the observation of correlations between the two. But this ob-
servation we could each make only in one case, viz. , our own. And
now we are back in the position of the defender of Cartesianism
who thought our way with it was too short. For what, now, does
'our own case' mean? There is no sense in the idea of ascribing
states of consciousness to oneself, or at all, unless the ascriber
already knows how to ascribe at least some states of consciousness
to others. So he cannot argue in general 'from his own case' to
conclusions about how to do this; for unless he already knows
how to do this, he has no conception of his own case, or any
case, i. e. , any subject of experiences. 19
18Individuals (London, 1959), pp. 105-106.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
Let me try to state this argument a bit more precisely. In
order to simplify matters I shall specify the argument with re-
spect to a certain kind of mental state, pain, and the "ways of
telling" appropriate to that state which I shall call P-behavior.
Strawson's argument may then be outlined as follows:
(1) If P-behavior is not a logically adequate criterion for the
ascription of pain, P-behavior is a sign of pain.
(2) If a person N knows at time t that P-behavior is a sign
of pain, then at some prior time t-1 N observed a cor-
relation between P-behavior and pain in his own case.
(3) If at t-1 N noted a correlation between pain and P-be-
havior in his own case, then N was able to predicate pain
of himself at t-i.
(4) If at t-1 N was able to predicate pain of himself, then
at t-1 N knew how to predicate pain of others.
(5) If at t-i N knew how to predicate pain of others, then
at f-i N knew that P-behavor is a sign of pain.
Step (6) would be a repetition of (2) with "t-1" substituted
for "t" and "t-2" for "t-1. " Steps (7), (8), and (9) would
parallel (3), (4), and (5); step (10) would again parallel (2)
with the substitution of "t-2" for "t" and "t-3" for "t-1"; and
so on. The conclusion Strawson draws, of course, is that if
P-behavior were not a logically adequate criterion for the as-
cription of pain, no one could ascribe pain to anyone else;
and hence no one could ascribe pain to himself either.
There is an ambiguity in the phrase "knows how to predicate
pain of others" as it occurs here. Step (4) of this argument is
clearly intended to be identical with the central premise of
Strawson's argument against the Cartesian20--the premise that
"it is a necessary condition of ascribing states of consciousness,
experiences, to oneself, in the way one does, that one should
See above, p. 205.
God and Other Minds
also ascribe tbem, or be prepared to ascribe them, to others who
are not oneself. " 21 (I shall call that premise "the predication
principle. ") Accordingly (4) ought to be taken as
(4a) If at t-i N was able to predicate pain of himself, then
at t-i N had a conception of the appropriate occasions
for predicating pain of others,
and (5) ought to be rewritten as
(5a) If at t-i N had a conception of the occasions appro-
priate for ascribing pain to others, then at t-i N knew
that P-behavior is a sign of pain.
But it is not at all clear that (5a) ought to be accepted. Sup-
pose that in accordance with step (2) N could know that P-be-
havior is a sign of pain only if he had observed a correlation
between P-behavior and pain. At time t-2, before he has ob-
served any such correlation, N might make the following dec-
laration: If I observe a connection between my pain and P-be-
havior on my part at t-i, then any occasion after f-i on which
I observe P-behavior which is not mine will be an appropriate
occasion for predicating pain of someone else. If he were to
make such a declaration, he would "have a conception of the
circumstances appropriate for predicating pain of someone
else, " although he would not then know that P-behavior is a
sign of pain, for he would not have made the requisite observa-
tion. Hence it seems that step (5) cannot be accepted.
Now for a couple of objections to my refutation. First, we
should note that Strawson distinguishes a weaker and a stronger
version of the predication principle. 22 He claims that his argu-
ments require only the weaker version, which is the one I have
been ascribing to him and under which in fact the arguments
Strawson, op. cit. , p. 99.
Ibid.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
are not sound. The stronger version of that principle asserts
that a necessary condition of one's being able to predicate men-
tal states of himself is that one in fact predicate mental states
of others (as opposed to merely having a conception of the ap-
propriate occasions for so predicating them). And someone
might say that Strawson's argument can be rescued by employ-
ing the stronger version of the predication principle. Here we
must again remember the two possible interpretations of "nec-
essary condition": the stronger principle may be asserting that
before N can ascribe pain to himself he must have ascribed it
to someone else. So taken, the principle has little to recom-
mend it, for it is supposed to be a specification of a general
principle about predication; but that general principle would
then be the absurd assertion that before I can predicate any
property of any one thing I must have predicated that property
of something else. The other sense of "necessary condition" is
not easy to apply to the predication principle in its stronger
formulation, but presumably it would come to something like
this: I cannot have predicated pain of myself before I have
predicated it of others--that is, any time at which I predicate
a mental state of myself is a time before which or at which I
predicate that state of someone else. And the general principle
of which this is a specification would be: any time at which N
predicates a property P of individual a is a time at which or
before which N predicates that property of some other indi-
vidual. This in turn entails that the first occasion on which
anyone predicates a property of anything is one on which he
predicates that property of at least two things. I take it that the
principle so stated is utterly gratuitous. But a little reflection will
satisfy anyone who is interested that the declaration I ascribed
to N at t-2 can be reformulated so as to be consistent even
with that peculiar version of the predication principle.
So Strawson does not succeed in showing, it seems to me,
God and Other Minds
that if we are able to predicate mental states of ourselves, there
must be criteria for the predication of these states of others.
There seems to be no explanation of the criteriological position
which enables us to see that it furnishes either a valid objection
or a genuine alternative to the analogical position.
II
Wittgenstein remarks: "My attitude towards him is an atti-
tude towards a soul. I am not of the opinion that he has a
soul. " 23 Shoemaker explains and develops this aphorism:
It is, I should like to say, part of our "form of life" that we ac-
cept what other persons say at face value, without normally
raising or even considering the question whether they understand
the meanings of the expressions they utter, or whether their ap-
parent testimony is really testimony. Normally there is no infer-
ence, and certainly not an inductive inference, from "He uttered
the sounds 'I went for a walk yesterday' " to "He said that he
went for a walk yesterday. " We regard a person who is talking,
not as making sounds, from which, knowing the circumstances
under which such sounds have been uttered in the past, we can
make certain inductive inferences, but as saying something. .. .
It would be misleading to describe this as a belief on our part,
the belief that people who use the words we use generally mean
by them what we mean by them. It is rather a matter of attitude,
of the way in which we respond to a person who is talking. 24
I shall use. .. the term "human being" in a technical sense,
to mean "something that looks like, and has the physical char-
acteristics (anatomical structure, chemical composition and so
forth) of a person. " What might be regarded as essential at-
tributes of persons, e. g. , being able to remember some of their
past actions, being capable of learning the use of language, and
so forth, I shall regard as only contingent properties of human
Op. cit. , p. 178.
Op. cit. , p. 249.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
beings. My distinction between persons and human beings is
similar to Locke's distinction between a person and a man. 25
In Section 6 I introduced a technical use of the term "human
being" and insisted on a conceptual distinction between human
beings, things that look like and have the physical characteristics
of persons, and persons. The "attitude" referred to above can be
further described by saying, this distinction notwithstanding, that
we regard human beings as persons without having evidence that
they are persons. Involved in being a person is having a memory,
and this involves having the ability to make, without evidence,
true statements about one's own past. It is part of our attitude
that we do not normally demand that particular human beings
have this ability, though there could be human beings who do
not have it. 26
These passages express an objection to the analogical posi-
tion--an objection that I shall inelegantly call "the attitudinal
objection. " But how, exactly, is it opposed to the analogical
position? At what points does it differ from it? To see this we
must characterize the analogical position more fully. Let us say
that a man's total evidence is a set of propositions meeting the
following conditions: (1) he knows every member of it, and
(2) every member of it is either necessarily true or merely about
physical objects or merely about his own mental state or a logi-
cal consequence of such propositions. According to the analogi-
cal position, there is a large class K of propositions that are
about other persons and their mental states and are more prob-
able than not on my total evidence. I believe many of these
propositions, furthermore, and my justification for doing so is
just the fact that they are more probable than not on my total
evidence. And finally, these propositions can be shown to be
probable on my total evidence by inductive or analogical argu-
-I6id, P. 237.
Ibid. , p. 250.
God and Other Minds
ments. Now among the members of K we should find, for ex-
ample, the following:
(a) I am not the only person.
(b) On most occasions when a person displays pain-behav-
ior, he is in pain.
(c) Jones is a person.
(d) On most occasions when a human being (in what Shoe-
maker calls his "technical sense") displays pain-behavior,
some person is in pain.
(e) All human beings (in the technical sense) are persons.
(f) On most occasions when a human being (in the tech-
nical sense) emits sounds that, in some language, con-
stitute a sentence expressing a memory or perceptual
judgment, that memory or perceptual judgment is true.
(g) On most occasions when a person emits sounds that, in
some language or other, constitute a sentence expressing
a memory or perceptual judgment, that memory or per-
ceptual judgment is true.
(h) Jones is in pain.
So much for my brief statement of the analogical position.
Now the attitudinal objection (as I understand Shoemaker's
development of it) would begin by claiming that the members
of K fall into three groups. Some of them (for example (b)
and (g)) are necessarily true. 27 A second group (group II) in-
Shoemaker argues for the necessity of (b) on pages 168-178 (and
elsewhere); on pages 229-236 he argues for the necessity of (g). It is
doubtful, I think, that sentences (b) and (g) ordinarily express necessary
propositions; I am inclined to believe that what Shoemaker takes as a
technical sense of "human being" is in fact the usual sense both of "per-
son" and "human being. " But even if this is so, we can take it that the
term "person" is used technically in (b) and (g), in such a fashion that
they do express necessary propositions. Then sentences (b), (d), (f) and
(g) would express the propositions that Shoemaker takes them to, but
it would be (b) and (g) rather than (d) and (f) that involve technical
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
eludes (e) and (e). These are not believed at all; our stance
with respect to them is a matter of attitude. I do not believe (or
know, assume, take for granted) that Jones is a person; instead
I regard him as a person; my attitude toward him is an attitude
toward a person. The analogical position errs doubly, then: it
supposes that the propositions in the second group are believed
and it supposes them more probable than not with respect to
my total evidence. The rejection of the analogical position goes
even deeper than this, however; so far one who accepted it could
concede the above claims and continue to hold his former views
with respect to the remaining members of K, including, for
example, (h). As the third tenet of the attitudinal objection,
then, we add the claim that the remaining members of K (in-
cluding (h)) constitute a group (group III) that are more
probable than not on the conjunction of my total evidence
with the members of group II; they are not, however, more
probable than not on my total evidence alone.
According to the attitudinal objection, then, no (contingent)
member of K is more probable than not on my total evidence
alone; and some of them (i. e. , the members of group II) are
not even believed. Many questions arise here. What, for exam-
ple, is meant by saying that my stance with respect to the mem-
bers of group II is a matter of attitude? Can I regard Jones as
a person without believing (or taking it for granted, or knowing)
that he is a person? Fundamentally, however, the questions
that arise here are two: What reason is there for supposing that
I do not believe the members of group II? And what is the
reason for supposing (contrary to the analogical position) that
none of the (contingent) members of K are more probable
than not on my total evidence? I shall deal with each of these
questions in turn.
uses. Which of these uses is technical and which ordinary is not, in the
present context, of much moment.
God and Other Minds
Shoemaker nowhere explicitly argues that we do not or can-
not believe such propositions as that Jones is a person. But he
does say the following:
If this attitude were one of belief, we could inquire into the
grounds of the belief. But this is just what we do not do. It is
part of the expression of this attitude that the question of what
justifies us in regarding what others say as testimony does not
arise. 28
What Shoemaker says here and elsewhere suggests the follow-
ing argument. First of all, we do know many of the proposi-
tions in group III; on many occasions we know the truth of
such propositions as Jones is in pain. But our evidence for any
proposition in group III always includes members of group II;
that is, any set of propositions constituting evidence, for us, for
some proposition in group III, includes one or more members
of group II. Furthermore, we have no evidence for any of the
members of group II, and hence if we believed them, our belief
would be unfounded. But if any evidence we have for the mem-
bers of group III included unfounded beliefs, we would not
know these propositions either; hence we do not believe the
members of group II. But then it is pretty hard to say what our
position with respect to these propositions is, and it seems as
appropriate as anything else to say that it is a matter of attitude
(toward, presumably* the subjects of the propositions in ques-
tion).
A crucial premise of this argument is that we have no evi-
dence for the members of group II and that to believe a mem-
ber of this group for which one has no evidence is to hold an
unfounded belief. More specifically: (1) the members of group
II are not more probable than not on my total evidence (as
defined above); and (2) if someone believes a member of group
Op. cit. , p. 250.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
II that is not more probable than not on his total evidence, his
belief is unfounded. What does it mean to say that a belief is
unfounded? Here the word is so taken that the following sen-
tences express necessary propositions:
(1) If S's belief that p is unfounded, S does not know p.
(2) If every set of propositions constituting evidence for q
for S contains an unfounded belief, then S does not
know q.
The following, then, seems to be the idea behind this argu-
ment. If you believe a member of group II which is not more
probable than not on your total evidence, you do not know
that proposition or any other proposition for which it is an
essential part of your evidence. On the other hand, if you adopt
the appropriate attitude toward this member of group II (or
toward its subject) but refrain from believing it, then, though
you cannot know it, you can know its evidential consequences.
So if you have the appropriate attitudes you can know the
members of group III, despite their being evidentially based on
members of group II whose truth you do not know.
Now there is certainly something peculiar about this sugges-
tion. Why does the fact that I believe a proposition render me
cpistemologically less favored, with respect to those propositions
for which it is an essential part of my evidence, than I would
be if I did not believe it? Would it not be just as plausible to
hold that my having the appropriate attitudes justifies me in
believing the members of group II themselves as well as their
evidential consequences? And of course it is very hard to see
how the fact that I have the attitudes in question enables me
to know propositions which are contingent, corrigible, and re-
quire evidence, but for which my best evidence includes propo-
sitions I do not know to be true.
The crux of the position, considered as an objection to the
God and Other Minds
analogical position, however, is the claim that no member of
group II is more probable than not on my total evidence; Shoe-
maker's argument for it has a Wittgensteinian ring:
Let us consider whether it would be possible for me to question
whether there is anyone at all (other than myself) who speaks
the language I speak, and then to discover empirically, by ob-
serving correlations between the uttering of sounds and the past
histories of those who utter them, that those around me do speak
the language I speak and that certain of their utterances are
memory claims and can generally be relied upon. In carrying on
such an investigation, I would of course have to rely on my own
memory. But one's memory can be mistaken. It is essential to
the very notion of memory, as knowledge of an objective past,
that there be a distinction between remembering something and
merely seeming to remember something. And for there to be such
a distinction there must be such a thing as checking up on one's
memory and finding that one does, or does not, remember what
one seems to remember. As Wittgenstein has pointed out, there
are and must be circumstances in which we would accept other
sorts of evidence concerning the past as more authoritative than
our own memories. An important way of checking up on one's
own memory is by reference to the testimony of other persons.
But this sort of check would not be available to me if I could
not even regard the utterances of other human beings as testi-
mony (e. g. , as memory claims) until I had completed my in-
vestigation and established the required set of correlations. And
the possibility of my checking up on my memories in any other
way presupposes the possibility of checking them in this way. 29
Shoemaker's argument here, I think, is for the conclusion that
no person S could produce an argument meeting the following
two conditions: (1) its conclusion is that there is someone other
than S who uses the language he uses, and (2) neither the
premises nor S's evidence for the premises nor the fact that S
"Ibid. , p. 252.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
knows the premises presupposes or entails that there are per-
sons other than S. If successful, of course, Shoemaker's objec-
tion will show that no analogical argument for other minds can
be acceptable. Now the argument appears to be a reductio:
suppose that
(a) S has produced an argument A of the sort under con-
sideration.
If so, then
(b) S has come to know the truth of the premises of A.
From (a) and (b) (together with some unmentioned premise
specifying the possible ways of coming to know the truth of
a proposition) it follows that
(c) S must have relied upon his memory in coming to know
the truth of the premises of A.
From (a), presumably, it is to follow that
(d) S cannot check up on the alleged memories in question
by appealing to the testimony of others.
But
(e) S can check up on his memory in some other way, only
if he can check up on them by appealing to the testi-
mony of others.
Hence
(f) S cannot check up on his alleged memories at all.
Shoemaker points out that "it is essential to the very notion of
memory that there be a distinction between remembering some-
thing and merely seeming to remember something. " I think he
means to assert here that S seems (at some time or other)
to remember that p does not entail S remembers that p; and
God and Other Minds
also that a person has the concept of memory, knows what
memory is, only if he does not believe that his seeming to re-
member that p entails that he does remember that p (or better,
believes the former does not entail the latter). Hence we have
as another premise
(g) If S has the concept of memory, S knows that S seems
to remember p does not entail S remembers p.
But, Shoemaker adds, there can be a distinction between seem-
ing to remember and remembering only if there is "such a
thing as checking up on one's memory and finding that one
does, or does not, remember what one seems to remember. " I
take it here that he means to suggest, not merely that there is
such a distinction (and hence such a thing as checking up on
one's memories), but also that a person can be aware of this
distinction only if there is some way in which he can check up
on his memories. So we get another premise:
(h) If S knows that S seems to remember that p does not
entail S remembers that p then S can check up on his
memories.
But then it follows from (f) and (h) that
(i) S does not make a distinction between his remember-
ing that p and his seeming to remember that p.
And hence, of course, S does not have the concept of memory.
I am not sure how the argument is meant to proceed from
this point. Perhaps the suggestion is that (i) and (c) are incon-
sistent; this would properly complete the reduetio and for all
I know it may be true. The difficulty with the argument, it
seems to me, comes earlier. Its premises entail that
(j) If S produces an argument which (1) is for the con-
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
elusion that there is someone other than S who speaks
the same language that S does, and (2) has premises
such that none of them nor S's evidence for them nor
the fact that S knows them presuppose that there are
other persons, then S cannot make a distinction be-
tween remembering that p and merely seeming to re-
member that p.
Proposition (j) asserts, therefore, that under the mentioned
conditions S could not know that S seems to remember that p
does not entail S remembers that p. And this seems to me to be
false. For surely it could happen that at a given time t S seems
to remember both that p, and that at U he seemed to remem-
ber that not-p. But then S could engage in the following rea-
soning: if I seem to remember that p entails I remember that
p, then I remember that p and that at ti I seemed to remem-
ber that not-p. By another application of the same principle
it follows that at ti I remembered that not-p. But then both
p and not-p would be the case; hence it is false that I seem to
remember that p entails I remember that p. And then S would
surely have a distinction, know the difference, between remem-
bering and merely seeming to remember. Step (j) therefore is
false; hence the premises of the argument are not all true.
Where, exactly, does the difficulty arise? Step (h) asserts that
if a man has the concept of memory, then he can check up
on (at least some of) his memories. Now I am not clear as to
whether Shoemaker would construe a person's discovering that
he has had at least one false memory belief as a case of check-
ing up on his memory. If he would, however, then it is clear
that premise (3) is false and the analogical arguer might per-
fectly well be able to check up on some of his memories. On
the other hand, if he would not regard this as a case of such
checking up, then it becomes clear that premise (h) is false
and being able to check up on one's memories is not a neces-
God and Other Minds
sary condition of knowing that there is a difference between
seeming to remember something and really remembering it.
Premise (g) of Shoemaker's argument asserts that a person
S does not have the concept of memory unless he recognizes
that there is a difference between seeming to remember some-
thing and remembering it; unless, that is, he knows that S seems
to remember that p does not entail S remembers that p. Now
perhaps the argument can be restated by replacing (g) with
a slightly stronger premise:
(m) S has the concept of memory only if he can discover
that some of his memory beliefs are false without ap-
pealing to other memory beliefs.
But why can the analogical arguer not check his memory, by,
for example, consulting his notebook? Perhaps he keeps a jour-
nal in which he records the results of his self-observation. The
answer, of course, will be that if he did, he would be obliged
to rely on his memory for such facts as that when he made the
entry in question he used "1" as the numeral corresponding to
the number one; he must also rely upon his memory for such
facts as that he is the person who made the entry in question.
What he appeals to in checking his memory belief presupposes
that some other memory belief is true; he therefore has no
independent check on his memory beliefs; he is treating what
he seems to remember as the "highest court of appeal":
Imagine that you were supposed to paint a particular color "C",
which was the color that appeared when chemical substances X
and Y were combined. Suppose that the color struck you as
brighter on one day than on another; would you not sometimes
say: "I must be wrong, the color is certainly the same as yes-
terday"? This shows that we do not always resort to what memory
tells us as the verdict of the highest court of appeal. 30
Wittgenstein, op. cit. , par. 56.
Alternatives to the Analogical Position
Commenting on this passage Malcolm says:
There is, indeed, such a thing as checking one memory against
another, e. g. , I check my recollection of the time of departure of
a train by calling up a memory image of how a page of the
time-table looked--but "this process has got to produce a memory
which is actually correct. If the mental image of the time-table
could not itself be tested for correctness, how could it confirm
the correctness of the first memory? " (265)31
This passage suggests that (m) must give way to something like
(n) S has the concept of memory only if S can discover
that some of his memory beliefs are false without ap-
pealing to other memory beliefs or propositions he
could know to be true only if he knew that some of his
memory beliefs were true,
or (in view of Shoemaker's claim that any other way of check-
ing one's memory beliefs presupposes checking them by ap-
pealing to the testimony of others)
(0) S has the concept of memory only if S can discover
that some of his memory beliefs are false by appealing
to the testimony of others.
But these premises appear to be too strong. Before Friday
showed up, Robinson Crusoe could not appeal to the testi-
mony of others in order to check his memory beliefs; yet surely
it would be foolish to infer that he could not learn anything
he did not already know, or no longer knew what he had once
learned, or no longer possessed the concept of memory. Crusoe
did have the testimony of others prior to shipwreck; but once
he was shipwrecked he had only his own memory to rely on,
even for such facts as that the testimony of others with respect
WPI, p. 77. The passage Malcolm quotes is from the Investigations.
God and Other Minds
to a given matter was, for example, p. Shoemaker presumably
takes it, therefore, that there is some significant difference be-
tween the situation of the analogical arguer and Crusoe's situa-
tion. Yet it is very hard to see what that difference would be.
Is the difference that while it is merely physically impossible
that Crusoe appeal to the testimony of others, it is logically
impossible that the analogical arguer do so? No. For of course
it is not logically impossible for the analogical arguer to appeal
to the testimony of others. What is impossible is that he both
do that and produce a worth-while analogical argument. And
it is similarly impossible that Crusoe both be out of contact
with others and accept the testimony of others. So what exactly
is the relevant difference? Steps (n) and (o) must be so
amended that they function in Shoemaker's argument but do
not entail that Crusoe lacks the concept of memory; and it is
certainly not easy to see how to do this. But pending such
amendment, I think we must conclude that Shoemaker's argu-
ment, and with it the attitudinal objection, is inconclusive.
Once more, then, we have found neither a valid objection nor
a viable alternative to the analogical position.
Ten
God and Analogy
IN the last two chapters I defended the analogical position
against several objections and argued that it was more success-
ful than any current alternative to it. 1 We should note, further-
more, that the analogical argument for other minds strongly
resembles the teleological argument for the existence of God.
They answer similar questions; both are inductive or ana-
logical arguments; each is perhaps the most successful answer
to the question it addresses. In this chapter I shall argue that
the analogical position finally falls prey to the very objection
that, in Chapter Four, I urged against the teleological argu-
ment.
I
Perhaps we may begin by considering A. J. Ayer's statement
of the analogical position: "On the basis of my own experience
'Of course I did not consider every alternative that has been proposed:
see below, p. 269.
God and Other Minds
I form a general hypothesis to the effect that certain physical
phenomena are accompanied by certain feelings. When I ob-
serve that some other person is in the appropriate physical state,
I am thereby enabled to infer that he is having these feelings;
feelings which are similar to those that in similar circumstances
I have myself. " 2 Noting that this formulation seems open to
the "one case alone" objection, Ayer suggests that
the objection that one is generalizing from a single instance can
perhaps be countered by maintaining that it is not a matter of
extending to all other persons a conclusion which has been found
to hold for only one, but rather of proceeding from the fact that
certain properties have been found to be conjoined in various cir-
cumstances. .. . So the question that I put is not: Am I justified
in assuming that what I have found to be true only of myself
is also true of others? but: Having found that in various circum-
stances the possession of certain properties is united with the
possession of a certain feeling, does this union continue to obtain
when the circumstances are still further varied? The basis of the
argument is broadened by absorbing the difference of persons into
the difference of the situations in which the psycho-physical con-
nections are supposed to hold. 3
This version of the analogical argument may bear fuller state-
ment. Initially it is pointed out that while a person can observe
another's behavior and circumstances, he cannot perceive an-
other's mental states. Hence we cannot come to know that
another is in pain, for example, by perceiving his pain. And,
on the other hand, although some propositions ascribing pain
to a person are incorrigible for him, no proposition ascribing
pain to him is incorrigible for anyone else. We might put these
things technically by saying that no one can determine by
observation that another is in pain. 4
a The Problem of Knowledge (Edinburgh, 1956), p. 249.
Ibid. , pp. 250-251.
'See Chapter Eight, p. 188.
God and Analogy
According to the analogical position, I nevertheless have or
can easily acquire evidence for such propositions as that some
other person is in pain and that some person is feeling pain in
a bodily area in which I feel nothing. Let us say that S's total
evidence is a set of propositions such that p is a member of
it if and only if (1) p is either necessarily true or solely about5
S's mental states or solely about physical objects, or a conse-
quence of such propositions, and (2) S knows p to be true.
According to the analogical position, my total evidence yields
an argument for each of the above conclusions. For
(1) Every case of pain-behavior such that I have determined
by observation whether or not it was accompanied by
pain in the body displaying it, was accompanied by pain
in that body. 6
Applying the so-called straight rule of induction, I conclude
that
(2) Probably every case of pain-behavior is accompanied by
pain in the body displaying it.
But then on a certain occasion I observe that
(3) B over there (a body other than my own) is displaying
pain-behavior.
From (2) it follows that B is pained; since I do not feel a pain
there, I conclude that
Where a necessary (but 'not sufficient) condition of a proposition's
being solely about my own mind or physical objects is that it not entail
the existence of mental states that are not mine.
Where, of course, I determine by observation that pain-behavior on
the part of a given body is accompanied by pain in that body only if I
feel pain in it; and where the term "pain-behavior" is simply a label for
a recognizable pattern of behavior (and hence from the fact that a man
displays pain-behavior it does not follow that he is in pain). For a com-
ment on the form of (1) see Chapter Four, note 7.
God and Other Minds
(4) Some other sentient creature has a pain.
And so I am not the only sentient creature.
But here an objection arises. Consider how I establish (4):
I observe that B is displaying pain-behavior. But no matter
how intensely I concentrate, no matter how carefully I can-
vass my feelings, my attempt to feel a pain in B is futile. I feel
no pain there. Doesn't this state of affairs provide me with a
disconfirming instance of (2)? Should I not reject the sugges-
tion that B contains a pain in favor of the conclusion that
(2) is false? Consider the following analogy. Justice Douglas is
walking through Racehorse Canyon, idly inspecting his sur-
roundings. It occurs to him suddenly that every maple in the
Canyon of which he has determined by observation whether
it has leaves, has indeed had leaves. (Peculiar things occur to
Justice Douglas. ) So, lie concludes, probably all maples in
Racehorse Canyon have leaves. Walking a bit farther, he en-
counters another maple. Carefully inspecting this one, he fails
to see any sign of leaves. He concludes that the maple has in-
visible leaves.
This procedure on Justice Douglas' part is surely perverse
and absurd. What he should have concluded is not that there
are leaves that cannot be seen, but that some of the maples in
Racehorse Canyon lack leaves. And, by analogy, should I not
take my failure to observe pain in B to provide me with a coun-
terinstance to the generalization that every case of pain-behavior
is accompanied by pain in the body displaying it?
One who accepts the analogical position, of course, will be
quick to reject this suggestion. And perhaps his answer could
proceed along the following lines. There is a difference, in gen-
eral, between failing to observe the presence of A's and observ-
ing the absence of A's (observing that no A's are present). 7
71 owe this way of putting the distinction to Robert C. Sleigh, Jr.
God and Analogy
A man may fail to see the mountain goats on a distant crag
without thereby seeing that no mountain goats are there. But
just as there are circumstances in which killing someone con-
stitutes murdering him, so there are circumstances in which
failing to perceive a thing constitutes observing its absence.
Suppose, for example, that a person with good eyesight is look-
ing at a maple ten feet away to see if it has leaves; the light is
ample, his view of the tree is unobstructed, etc. If he sees no
leaves, then in failing to see leaves he sees that the tree has no
leaves. We might call any set of conditions in which failing
to observe leaves on a tree constitutes observing that it has no
leaves, an optimal set of conditions for observing the presence
or absence of leaves. And though it may be difficult, perhaps, to
specify the members of such an optimal set, there is no doubt
that we are sometimes in circumstances of just that sort. Now
if a man justifiably believes that he is in an optimal set of con-
ditions for observing whether or not a tree has leaves, and fails
to observe that it does, then he can justifiably believe that he
is observing the absence of leaves there; perhaps, indeed, he is
rationally obliged, in these circumstances, to take it that there
are no leaves on the tree.
On the other hand, of course, if he knew that he was not in
a position to observe whether leaves were present or absent,
then his failure to observe leaves would scarcely oblige him
to believe that he has a counterinstance to the generalization
that all maples have leaves. More generally, under what condi-
tions is a man obliged to take his observing an A and failing to
observe that it is8 B as providing him with a counterinstance
to all A's are B? Consider the following three conditions:
Since "B" is presumably a variable whose substituends are singular
referring expressions, the verb here, strictly speaking, should be "has. " For
stylistic reasons I shall continue to use "is" except where genuine am-
biguity results.
God and Other Minds
(5) There are no possible circumstances in which failing to
observe that an A is B constitutes observing that it is
not B.
(6) No one can ever be in a position to observe that an A
is not B.
(7) It is not possible to observe that an A is not B.
These three conditions hold with respect to observing
whether or not a given bodily area is pained. There are no cir-
cumstances in which failing to feel pain in a body other than
my own, for example, constitutes observing that that body is
free from pain; I cannot observe the absence of pain in a body
other than mine. But of course the same really holds for my
own body as well; as Wittgenstein says, it is logically possible
that someone else feel a pain in my body; 9 I can never tell by
observation that my body is free from pain (although of course
I can tell that I do not feel a pain there). And surely a man
who knows that one cannot tell by observation that a given
bodily area contains no pain is not obliged to conclude that
he has a counterinstance to (2). Hence we may assert
(8) A person S is obliged to take his observing that some-
thing is A and failing to observe that it is B as providing
him with a counterinstance to All A's are B only if (a)
he does not know that it is impossible to observe that
an A is not B, and (b) he does not know that there are
no circumstances in which failing to observe that an
A is B constitutes observing that it is not B, and (c)
he does not know that he cannot be in a position to
observe that an A is not B.
Since, of course, I might very well know any or all of these
things, I am not obliged, in discovering that (4) is true, to take
"Philosophical Investigations, par. 302.
God and Analogy
it that I have a counterinstance to (2); and hence this objec-
tion to the analogical position fails.
The fact that one cannot observe the absence of pain de-
livers the analogical position from the above objection; that
fact, nevertheless, is the rock upon which it founders. To see
this we must characterize more fully the sort of argument
which, on the analogical position, is available to each of us.
Let us say that a simple inductive argument for S is an argu-
ment of the following form:
Every A such that S has determined by observation whether
or not A is B is such that S has determined by observation
that A is B. 10 Therefore, probably every A is a B.
And let us say that a direct inductive argument for S is an
ordered pair of arguments of which the first member is a simple
inductive argument a for S, and the second a valid deductive
argument one premise of which is the conclusion of a, the
other premises being drawn from S's total evidence.
Tire contention of the analogical position, then, is that for
any person S (or at least for most persons) there is a direct
inductive argument for S, for such conclusions as that at a
given time t someone other than S is in pain. But this is not
all that the analogical position holds. For it is of course pos-
sible that there be for a person S a direct argument for p
although p is improbable on S's total evidence. What the ana-
logical position must hold here is that for any person S there
are direct arguments for the propositions in question and no
comparable evidence against them; they must be more probable
than not on his total evidence.
This account would be complicated but not essentially modified if it
were so generalized as to take account of the sort of argument where, of
his sample of A's, S determines by observation that m/n of them are B
and concludes that probably m/n A's are B.
God and Other Minds
Finally, according to the analogical position, the bulk of my
commonsense beliefs11 about minds and mental states must be
more probable than not on my total evidence. It is not suffi-
cient that my total evidence confirm the proposition that there
are other sentient beings; it must also confirm, in one way or
another, the whole range of commonsense beliefs about the
behavioral accompaniments or aspects of anger, joy, depression,
and pain, as well as beliefs about the connections between body
and mind generally. It need be no part of the analogical posi-
tion to maintain that for each of these propositions there is,
for me, a direct argument. For some of them, perhaps, my only
evidence is the fact that they are probable with respect to other
propositions for which I do have direct arguments. But each
(or most) of us must have a basic set K of such propositions for
each member of which he has a direct argument; and perhaps
the remainder of his relevant commonsense beliefs can be
shown to be confirmed by the conjunction of the members of
K. Furthermore, then, not only must each member of K be
more probable than not on my total evidence; their conjunc-
tion must be. This, of course, is a much stronger claim; it is
possible that pi. .. p are individually more probable than
n
not on q while their conjunction is not. 12 And among the mem-
bers of K we should certainly find such propositions as the fol-
lowing:
(a) I am not the only being that feels pain.
(b) There are some pains that I do not feel.
The term "belief" is here so used that "Jones believes p" is not in-
consistent with (and indeed is entailed by) "Jones knows p. "
Let q be a fair die is about to be thrown; let pi through p be, re-
s
spectively, face one will not come up, face two will not come up, face
three will not come up, face four will not come up, and face five will not
come up. Each of p through p is then more probable than not on q;
L 5
but their conjunction is not.
God and Analogy
(c) Sometimes certain areas of my body are free from pain.
(d) There are some pains that are not in my body.
(e) There are some cases of pain that are not accompanied
by pain-behavior on the part of my body.
(f) I am the only person who feels pain in my body.
(g) Sometimes someone feels pain when I do not.
Propositions (a)-(g), of course, are stated for me; but there is
for any person an analogue, in an obvious sense, of each of
those propositions. Now, perhaps, we can summarily restate the
analogical position as follows:
(9) For any (or almost any) person S there is a set of prop-
ositions K such that the appropriate analogues of (a)-
(g) are members of K; and S's total evidence directly
supports each member of K (i. e. , for any member m
of K there is a direct argument for S supporting m but
no direct argument for S against m); and the conjunc-
tion of the members of K is more probable than not on
S's total evidence.
So stated, this position is dubious at best. The conjunction of
(a)-(g) is not more probable than not on the sort of evidence
to which the analogical position directs our attention; nor (with
one exception) does the analogical position give us any reason
for supposing that (a)-(g) are individually more probable than
not on that evidence.
II
Suppose we begin with propositions (a) and (b). Recall that
my argument for (a) involves a simple inductive argument
from
(1) Every case of pain-behavior such that I have determined
by observation whether or not it was accompanied by
God and Other Minds
pain in the body displaying it, was accompanied by pain
in that body
to
(2) Probably every case of pain-behavior is accompanied by
pain in the body displaying it.
But
(3) B over there (a body other than mine) is displaying
pain-behavior,
hence
(10) Probably B contains a pain.
And since I feel no pain in B, I conclude that
(b) I do not feel every pain.
Of course if B contains a pain, then some sentient creature or
other is feeling a pain in B; hence
(a) I am not the only being that feels pain.
Such is my evidence, on the analogical position, for (a) and
(b). There is a peculiarity about the inference of (2) from (1),
however, that ought not to pass unmentioned. As we have
noted, I determine by observation that a given body or bodily
area contains a pain just in case I feel a pain there. Further,
I cannot determine by observation that a bodily area does not
contain a pain--not even if the area in question is part of my
own body. The best I can do along these lines is to determine
that I do not feel a pain there; but of course it does not follow
that no one does. So, for any bodily area, I determine by ob-
servation whether or not that area is pained only if what I de-
termine is that it is pained. And consequently no counter-
instance to (2) (the argument's conclusion) can possibly turn
God and Analogy
up in my sample. There are other arguments of this same sort
and most of them deserve to be regarded with the gravest sus-
picion. Consider, for example, the inductive argument for
epistemological idealism:
(11) Every physical object of which it has been determined
whether or not it has ever been conceived (i. e. , per-
ceived or thought of) has been conceived.
Therefore,
(12) Probably every physical object is conceived; so there
are no unconceived physical objects.
Now it might be said that an alleged inductive argument of
this sort clearly proves nothing at all. For if there were any
counterinstances to the conclusion, it would be logically im-
possible for one of them ever to turn up in the sample; and
hence we know, in any instance of this sort, that there is no
reason to suppose that our sample is a random or fair one. Sup-
pose we are drawing colored marbles from an inexhaustible urn
and know that Descartes' evil genius is so guiding our hands
that we draw only red ones; ought we then to take the fact
that all the marbles we have so far drawn have been red as evi-
dence for the view that all the marbles in the urn are red? If it
is impossible for a counterinstance to the conclusion of a sim-
ple inductive argument to turn up in its sample (where the
conclusion is not itself necessarily true), then the argument is
unacceptable. Perhaps we do well, therefore, to accept some
such principle as the following:
(A) A simple inductive argument is acceptable only if it is
logically possible that its sample class contain a counter-
instance to its conclusion.
Now (A) appears to be inadequate13 on the grounds that it
As I was reminded by Lawrence Powers.
God and Other Minds
fails to eliminate certain arguments that such a principle ought
to eliminate. Consider, for example, the following argument for
the conclusion that I am not the only human person. Let us
say that x is crowman just in case x is either a crow or a human
body and that a thing is minded if it is the (human) body of
a human person. Then
(13) Every crowman such that I have determined by obser-
vation whether or not it was either black or minded,
was either black or minded.
So probably
(14) Every crowman is either black or minded.
But
(15) B over there (a human body other than my own) is
a crowman and is not black.
Hence B is probably minded; hence there is at least one other
human person.
This argument will not meet with instant approval. And yet
its premise will be true for any of us. For any crow in my sam-
ple will have the sample property (i. e. , the property of being
black or minded); my own body will be in my sample and will
have the sample property; and of no human body will I be able
to determine that it lacks the sample property. Furthermore, the
inference of (14) from (13) does not violate (A); clearly it is
possible (though it will not happen) that my sample class con-
tain a counter-instance (a white crow, for example) to (14).
An interesting peculiarity of this argument is that it will not
serve to establish that Negroes are minded or are human
persons; the analogue of (15) will not be true for a Negro.
Emboldened by this unexpected turn of events a Southern
white segregationist (call him Jim Clarke) might go on to ar-
God and Analogy
gue that for each of us whites, there is an argument of the fol-
lowing kind for the conclusion that no Negroes have minds:
Where x is a swaneg, if x is either a Negro or a swan,
(16) Every swaneg such that I have determined by observa-
tion whether or not it was either white or nonminded
was either white or nonminded.
So probably
(17) Every swaneg is white or nonminded.
But
(18) S over there (a Negro) is a swaneg and S is not white.
So probably
(19) S is nonminded.
Jim Clarke's argument clearly has a true premise. Further-
more, it does not run afoul of (A). But Jim Clarke probably
fails to anticipate the reply that we might call "the Black
Muslim retort"; any Negro can argue as follows: Where x is a
croite, just in case x is either a crow or a white human body,
(20) Every croite such that I have determined by observa-
tion whether or not it was either black or nonminded,
was black or nonminded.
So probably
(21) Every croite is either black or nonminded.
But
(22) Jim Clarke over there is a croite and Jim Clarke is not
black.
So probably
(23) Jim Clarke is nonminded.
God and Other Minds
None of these arguments violates (A); and this is best con-
strued as a deficiency of (A). Perhaps, therefore, we can re-
state (A). Let us suppose for the moment that we know what
it is for a property to have a disjunct or conjunct: the property
being black or minded, for example, has as one disjunct the
property being black. And let us say that a property P is a
part of a property P' just m case P is the same property as P'
or P is a disjunct, conjunct, antecedent, or consequent of P'
or of a part of P'. Then
(A') Where a, y3, is a simple inductive argument for S, j8 is
of the form All A's have B, and where C is any part of
B a, (3 is acceptable for S only if the propositions S
has examined an A and determined by observation that
it lacks C and S has examined an A and determined by
observation that it has C are both logically possible.
I am by no means certain that (A') rules out all of the sorts of
arguments it is designed to rule out. With sufficient patience
and ingenuity we could perhaps construct an argument that
does not violate (A') but is nonetheless preposterous in pretty
much the same way as the above arguments. But at any rate
(A') seems to be true. And if it is, the argument from (1) to
(2) must be rejected, so that wc are left without a direct argu-
ment for (a) or (b).
The following (merely suggestive) argument indicates that
any direct argument for (a) will run afoul of (A'). To get a
direct argument for (a) we must first, presumably, get a direct
argument for (b) (there are some pains I do not feel). Pre-
sumably (b) will follow from some proposition of the form
(24) Every case of is accompanied by pain meeting con-
dition ip
together with a premise asserting that I have observed a case
God and Analogy
of <j> but feel no pain meeting condition </*. The proposition
(call it (24')) of the form exhibited by (24) will not, of course,
be necessarily true; it will require inductive support. But any
simple inductive argument for (24') will run afoul of (A'),
since its premise will be of the form
(25) Every case of <f> such that I have determined by observa-
tion whether or not it was accompanied by pain meet-
ing condition \p was so accompanied.
Of course, (24') need not be the conclusion of a simple induc-
tive argument; perhaps it follows from propositions of the forms
(26) Every case of <f> is a case of (3
and
(27) Every case of /? is accompanied by pain meeting condi-
tion ip.
But then obviously the same problem will arise with the propo-
sition of the form depicted in (27) (which is of course the same
form as depicted in (13)). It looks as if any direct argument
from my total evidence for (a) will involve a simple inductive
argument for a proposition like (24'); but in that case we will
find that no such direct argument for (a) is palatable if we ac-
cept (A'). The fact that one cannot observe the absence of
pain appeared earlier to deliver the analogical position from
disaster; here it returns to wreak destruction upon it.
But perhaps we should ask at this juncture whether the argu-
ment I gave above for (A') is conclusive. (It does seem a bit
harsh to insist that my observing that some cases of pain-be-
havior are accompanied by pain gives me no reason at all for
supposing that all such cases are so accompanied. ) I think the
argument is indeed conclusive; but on the other side it might
be urged that we never have good reason to suppose that the
God and Other Minds
sample of an inductive argument is a fair sample. This last is
a large and complex question. Fortunately we need not enter it
at present. For we cannot succor the analogical position by
rejecting (A'); if we reject (A') (and adopt no similar princi-
ple) we then open the gates to direct argument from my total
evidence against (a) and (b):
(28) Every pain which is such that I have determined by
observation whether or not it was felt by me, was felt
by me.
So probably
(29) Every pain is felt by me,
which is the denial of (b), and of an essential premise in our
argument for (a). This, no doubt, is a preposterous argument.
And yet its peculiarity consists just in the fact that it violates
(A'); if we reject (A') we must accept this argument as of
equal weight with the argument for (b). But then so far as
direct arguments are concerned, the denials of (a) and (b)
are as probable on my total evidence as (a) and (b) them-
selves, in which case my total evidence does not directly sup-
port the latter. Whether or not (A') is to be accepted, there-
fore, my total evidence does not support (a) and (b).
Ill
Next, let us consider
(c) Sometimes certain areas of my body are free from pain.
Each of us takes a proposition like (c) to be evidently and ob-
viously true. What sort of evidence, according to the analogical
position, do I have for (c)? I cannot, of course, observe the ab-
sence of pain in my body any more than I can observe its ab-
God and Analogy
sence in some other body; it is logically possible that when I
feel no pain in my arm, someone else does.
However, it does not follow from this (contrary to what one
might be tempted to suppose) that I can never, on the analogi-
cal position, get evidence for the proposition that a certain
area of my body is at a certain time free from pain. For evi-
dence of the following sort is available to me:
(30) Every pain which is such that I have determined by
observation whether or not it was accompanied by pain-
behavior on the part of the body in which it was lo-
cated, has been so accompanied.
So probably
(31) Every pain is accompanied by pain-behavior on the part
of the body in which it is located.
(And of course this inference does not violate (A'). ) But
(32) At present my body is not displaying pain-behavior.
Hence probably
(33) No area of my body is presently pained.
From which, of course, (c) follows. Accordingly my total evi-
dence provides me with a direct argument for (c). We might
be tempted to think that it also provides me with a direct argu-
ment against (c). Consider those ordered pairs (a, t) whose
first members are areas of my body and whose second members
are times:
(34) Every ordered pair (a, t) which is such that I have
determined by observation whether or not a was pained
at t, has been such that a was pained at t.
So probably
God and Other Minds
(35) Every ordered pair (a, t) is such that a is pained at t.
But then
(36) Probably every area of my body always contains a pain.
But the inference of (35) from (34) runs afoul of (A'), along
with, apparently, any other direct argument from my total evi-
dence against (c). If we accept (A'), therefore, we get a direct
argument for (c) but none against it; hence on (A') the ana-
logical position with respect to (c) appears to be vindicated.
We might note parenthetically that if (A') is to be rejected,
my total evidence provides me with direct arguments for propo-
sitions even more preposterous than (36); if we let "a" range
over human bodies generally, the analogue of (34) will remain
true and we get the conclusion that probably every area of
every human body is always pained. If we let "a" range over
areas of physical objects generally the analogue of (34) still
remains true and we get the outrageous result that probably
every area of every physical object is always pained. Leibniz
and Whitehead apparently overlooked this fertile source of evi-
dence for certain of their conclusions.
IV
The propositions
(d) There are some pains that are not in my body
and
(e) There are some cases of pain that are not accompanied
by pain-behavior on the part of my body
may be considered together. What presents itself. as the direct
argument for (d) is the following:
(1) Every case of pain-behavior such that I have deter-
mined by observation whether or not it was accom-
God and Analogy
panicd by pain in the body displaying it, was accom-
panied by pain in that body.
Hence
(2) Probably every case of pain-behavior is accompanied by
pain in the body displaying it.
But
(3) B over there (a body other than mine) is displaying
pain-behavior,
hence
(10) Probably B has a pain.
Hence
(d) There are some pains that are not in my body.
The argument for (e) shares steps (1), (2), (3), and (10)
with the above argument. If, in addition,
(37) My body is not now displaying pain-behavior
is part of my total evidence, (e) follows.
The inference from (1) to (2), again, is ruled out by (A').
And, as in the case of (a) and (b), if we accept (A') we ap-
pear to have no direct argument at all for either (d) or (e).
On the other hand, my total evidence appears to provide me
with direct arguments against both (d) and (e):
(38) Every pain which is such that I have determined by
observation whether or not it was in my body, was in
my body.
Hence probably,
(39) All pains are in my body.
This argument does not violate (A'). But is it an acceptable
God and Other Minds
inductive argument? It might be objected that it is causally
impossible for a person to feel pain anywhere but in his own
body, and that, where it is impossible to observe an A which
is B (although possibly some A's are B), it is illegitimate to
conclude that no A's are B from a premise reporting that no
observed A's are B. If a man knows that it is impossible to ob-
serve an A which is B, then indeed he cannot reasonably con-
clude that no A's are B from the fact that every A which is
such that he has determined by observation whether or not
it is B, has turned out not to be B. But things are quite differ-
ent if he does not know this; ignorant of the fact that one can-
not see mountain goats on a glacier at 800 yards, a tenderfoot
might sensibly conclude, after futilely inspecting Kulshun Gla-
cier from that distance several weeks running, that no mountain
goats frequent it. And, of course, as an analogical arguer I do
not initially know that one can feel pain only in his own body;
it is just this sort of belief that the analogical argument is sup-
posed to ground and justify. This argument, therefore, is ap-
parently successful.
A similar direct argument holds against (e). Every case of
pain which is such that I have determined by observation
whether or not it was accompanied by pain-behavior on the part
of my body was so accompanied; probably, therefore, every case
of pain is accompanied by pain-behavior on the part of my
body, in which case (e) is false.
If we accept (A'), therefore, we get direct arguments against
(d) and (e) but no direct arguments for them. If we reject
(A'), of course, we get direct arguments both for and against
them; hence in neither case does my total evidence directly sup-
port either (d) or (e).
V
This brings us to
(f) I am the only person who feels pain in my body
God and Analogy
and
(g) Sometimes someone feels pain when I do not.
Does my total evidence provide me with a direct argument for
(f)? Apparently not.
(40) Every pain in my body which is such that I have de-
termined by observation whether or not it is felt by me,
has been felt by me
presents itself as the relevant premise; but of course the argu-
ment from (40) to (f) flatly conflicts with (A'). Nor, on the
other hand, does my total evidence seem to provide me with
a direct argument against (f). To get such an argument we
should need a direct argument for
(41) Sometimes my body contains a pain I do not feel.
And in order to do that we should need to employ some such
premise as
(34) Every ordered pair (a, t) such that I have determined
by observation whether a was pained at t is such that
a was pained at t.
But as we have already seen any simple argument with (34)
as its premise will violate (A').
Now suppose (as seems to be the case) that my total evi-
dence yields no direct argument for (f) but does yield a direct
argument for p and for q, where p and q are logically inde-
pendent of each other, of (f), and of my total evidence; and
where the conjunction of p with q entails (f). (In such a case,
let us say that my total evidence provides an indirect argument
for (f). ) Would it then follow that my total evidence supports
(f)? No. It is of course true that if p is more probable than not
on q, and p entails r, then r is more probable than not on q.
But from the fact that p is more probable than not on q, and
God and Other Minds
r is more probable than not on q, it does not follow that p and
r is more probable than not on q. And of course where p, q,
and r are logically independent and q supports p and q sup-
ports r, q supports the conjunction of p with r to a lesser degree
than it supports either p or r. So even if my total evidence
yielded an indirect argument for (f), it would not follow that
my total evidence supports (f). But the fact is that we seem to
be unable to find even an indirect argument from my total
evidence. That evidence, as we have seen, yields a direct argu-
ment for
(42) Whenever my body is pained, it displays pain-behavior
and for
(43) Whenever my body displays pain-behavior, I feel pain.
But (42) and (43) do not entail that I feel every pain in my
body or that I alone feel pain in my body; they entail only that
whenever anyone feels pain there, I do. We seem, therefore,
to be able to find neither a direct nor an indirect argument for
(f) if we accept (A'); if we reject (A'), of course, we will find
direct arguments both for and against (f).
(g) Sometimes someone feels pain when I do not
resembles (f) in that there seems to be no direct argument
from my total evidence either for or against it. It differs from
(f) in that there seems to be an indirect argument against it.
My total evidence directly supports
(44) Every case of pain is accompanied by pain-behavior on
the part of my body.
It also yields an argument for
(45) Whenever my body displays pain-behavior, I feel pain.
But (44) and (45) entail
God and Analogy
(46) Whenever any sentient being feels pain, I feel pain,
which is the denial of (g).
The upshot of the above is clear. If we reject (A'), we find
that a person's total evidence provides direct arguments both
for and against each of those commonsense beliefs which, on
the analogical position, it is alleged to support. But if we accept
(A') (as I believe we should) we still find that a man's total
evidence does not support the conjunction of those common-
sense beliefs. It does not even support the conjunction of the
members of K. Indeed, it does not so much as support the
members of K individually; (c) alone appears more probable
then not on my total evidence while (d), (e), and perhaps (f)
appear to be improbable on it. What the analogical arguer
should conclude is that every pain occurs in his own body and
is accompanied by pain-behavior on the part of his body (and
so, perhaps, he could perform a splendid humanitarian service
by destroying that wretched body). 14
The objection to which the analogical position falls victim is
clearly an analogue of the objection urged in Chapter Four
against the teleological argument for the existence of God. For
according to each of these, a certain set of propositions--(a)-
(g) in the present case, and (a)-(f) in the case of the teleo-
logical argument (see above, p. 109)--is supported by evidence
But what about the following version of the analogical argument:
Every human body of which I have determined by observation
whether or not it has a human mind connected with it (in a certain
complicated way) has had a mind connected with it (in that way).
Therefore probably every human body has a human mind connected
with it in that way.
This formulation is explicitly open to the charge that its sample class con-
sists in just one member--my own body. Hence the argument is a hasty
generalization. Furthermore, a little reflection reveals that it suffers from
the very same defect as the version considered above.
J
God and Other Minds
of a certain kind. The objection, in each case, is that the evi-
dence to which our attention is called supports only some of
these propositions; but then, of course, the conjunction of these
propositions is not, in either case, more probable than not on
that evidence.
VI
We began this study by asking whether belief in the exist-
ence of God is rational. The natural theologian's answer, we
found, is of dubious worth at best. The teleological argument is
perhaps his most powerful weapon; and yet it suffers from a
crucial and crippling deficiency. But if the answer of the natural
theologian does not carry conviction, that of the natural athe-
ologian is even less satisfactory. I then proposed to explore an
analogous question in the philosophy of mind: the question
how I know, what my reasons are for believing, that I am not
the only creature that thinks and feels, reasons and believes.
Here I argued that while the analogical position is as good an
answer as we have to this question, it nonetheless shares the
crippling defect of the teleological argument. And my final
query is this: exactly what bearing do these conclusions have on
the question with which we began--the question whether it is
rational to accept theistic belief?
The answer is not easy, and what I have to say is merely ten-
tative. I think it must be conceded that the theist has no very
good answer to the request that he explain his reasons for
believing in the existence of God; at any rate he has no answer
that need convince the skeptic. But must he have or must there
be an answer to this question if his belief in God is reasonable,
rationally justifiable: must there be, for any proposition p that
I rationally believe (and that is, let us say, contingent and cor-
rigible), a good answer to the "epistemological question":
"How do you know that p; what are your reasons for supposing
God and Analogy
that p is true? " Presumably not. If I am right, the analogical
position is the best answer I have to the relevant epistemologi-
cal question; but even if it is unsatisfactory my belief in (a)-
(g) is by no means irrational. Of course there may be other
answers; it may be, for example, that some version of what I
called the "attitudinal position" (above, p. 233) can be made
out with respect to propositions (a)-(g). But clearly the theist
could hold the same sort of view with respect to the central
tenets of theism; they too could be said to be matters of atti-
tude rather than belief. 15 Again, it is sometimes said that prop-
ositions (a)-(g) constitute, for each of us, parts of a well-
confirmed scientific hypothesis. 16 But this is really a case of
obscuram per obscuras: the relationship between a scientific
theory and the grounds for accepting it is still a black and
boundless mystery. Does each of us have grounds for accepting
the proposition that he is not the only being that thinks and
reasons, senses and feels, as a scientific theory? The question
can hardly be considered until we have a clearer understanding
of the nature of scientific theories and how they are confirmed;
its answer is pretty much anyone's guess. Our understanding of
scientific theory is too meager to make it more than a shot in
the dark. Still, if it is on target with respect to propositions
(a)-(g) of this chapter there seems no reason why it should
be wide of the mark for (a)-(f) of Chapter Four.
But let us suppose, as seems to me to be true, that there are
no viable alternatives to the analogical position. Then we must
conclude, I believe, that a man may rationally hold a contin-
gent, corrigible belief even if there is no answer to the relevant
Cf. Norman Malcolm, "Is It a Religious Belief That God Exists? " in
Faith and the Philosophers, ed. John Hick (New York, 1964), pp. 103-
110.
Cf. Paul Ziff, "The Simplicity of Other Minds, " Journal of Philoso-
phy, LXII (Oct. 1965), 575-585. See also an abstract of my reply to
Ziff's paper (ibid. , pp. 585-587),
God and Other Minds
epistemological question. Of course it follows only that some
such beliefs may be held rationally under the indicated condi-
tions; it does not follow that a man can rationally hold just any
such belief without a, reason or evidence. And, it might be held,
although rational belief in other minds does not require an
answer to the epistemological question, rational belief in God
does. In this connection it is important and relevant that the
body of evidence with respect to which we considered (a)-
(f) of Chapter Four (the "teleological hypothesis") is differ-
ent from the relevant evidence in the case of the analogical
argument (above, p. 247). I referred to this latter as a man's
"total evidence. " To avoid confusion, let us call it the "ana-
logical evidence"; and let us refer to the former body of evi-
dence as the "teleological evidence. " Now the fact is these
bodies of evidence do not coincide. For in scrutinizing the
teleological argument we take it for granted that we know a
great many facts about minds--for example, that there are
several of them--that are not to be found in the analogical
evidence. The teleological evidence obviously contains the
analogical evidence and a great deal more. And hence what has
been shown is that (a)-(f) of Chapter Four is as probable,
relative to one body of evidence, as (a)-(g) of the present
chapter is to another; and this goes no way at all, it might be
said, toward showing that the two are on a par.
That the two bodies of evidence differ in the way suggested
must, of course, be conceded. Nonetheless it is true, I think,
that if (a)-(f) of Chapter Four is as probable on the first
evidence as (a)-(g) of the present chapter on the second, then
there is nothing to choose from between them so far as evidence
or reasons go; the teleological evidence is the evidence appro-
priate to the teleological argument. I shall not argue that here,
however; instead, let me point out, first, that the conjunction of
God and Analogy
(a)-(f) of Chapter Four is about as probable on the analogical
evidence as it is on the teleological. Recall that
(b) The universe was designed by exactly one person
of (a)-(f) was not confirmed by the relevant evidence in that
we knew of many cases where things exhibiting the degree of
unity characterizing the universe had been the work of several
persons. 17 But of course if my evidence is limited to the ana-
logical evidence this objection falls by the wayside; my analogi-
cal evidence contains no such cases. On the other side, (a),
which was supported by the teleological evidence, is not ap-
parently confirmed by the analogical evidence; the latter seems
to yield no direct argument for it that does not violate (A').
So (a)-(f) of Chapter Four is about as probable on the ana-
logical evidence as it is on the teleological. But then it follows
that (a)-(f) of Chapter Four is as probable on the analogical
evidence as is (a)-(g) of the present chapter. For if (a)-(f)
is as probable on the teleological evidence as (a)-(g) is on the
analogical evidence, and (a)-(f) is as probable on the analogi-
cal evidence as on the teleological evidence, then (a)-(f) is as
probable on the analogical evidence as (a)-(g).
Of course there may be other reasons for supposing that al-
though rational belief in other minds does not require an an-
swer to the epistemological question, rational belief in the
existence of God does. But it is certainly hard to see what these
reasons might be. Hence my tentative conclusion: if my belief
in other minds is rational, so is my belief in God. But obviously
the former is rational; so, therefore, is the latter.
See above, p. 109.

Index
Aiken, H. , 116, 117, 123 Broad, C. D. , 38 ff. , 48
Albritton, R. , 219 ff. , 226 Brown, T. P. , 8, 22 ff.
Alston, W. P. , ix, 47 ff. , 58 ff.
Analogical argument for other Cartwright, R. , ix, 39
minds, 191 ff. Castaneda, H. -N. , ix, 199
compared with teleological argu- Chimera, the, 51, 53, 79
ment, 245 ff. , 267 ff. Church, A. , 165, 166
final failure of, 251, 253 ff. , Cosmological argument, 3 ff.
259 ff. , 267 ff. Cox, D. , 161
objections to, 193 ff. Creary, L. G. , 144
attitudinal objection, 233 ff. Criterion, 214 ff.
private language objection,
199 ff. De Vos, P. , 72
Anselm, St. , 26 ff. , 33, 36-37, 43,
47 ff. , 58 ff. , 64 s. Entailment, 55 ff.
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 4 ff. Essential (vs. accidental) properties,
Augustine, St. , 174 ff. , 180 175 ff-, 195, 196
Ayer, A. J. , 38, 48, 164 ff. Evil, 107 ff.
justified, 122
Behaviorism, 191 moral, 131-132
Belknap, N. , 57-58 physical, 131, 132, 149 ff. , 153 ff.
Black, M. , ix Existence
Bradley, F. H. , 115 distinct modes of, 48, 51 If.
Braithwaite, R. B. , 161 is it a predicate? , 27 ff.
Index
Existential propositions, 39 ff. , Mueller, 1. , ix
can they be tautological? , 44 ff. Myriokranic syllogism, 225
Findlay, J. N. , 173, 180, 183 Nakhnikian, G. , ix
Flew, A. , 13 ff. , 150-151, 157 ff-, Natural atheology, 115 ff.
Natural theology, 3 ff.
Frankena, W. , ix Necessary being, 6 ff. , 180 ff.
Freedom and determinism, 133 ff. being necessary a se, 8 ff.
being necessary ab aliter, 8 ff.
Gaunilo, 73 Nidditch, P. , 165-166
Geach, P. T. , 7, 19, 22 ff. Nontemporal properties, 17 ff.
Gettier, Edmond L. , Ill, ix
God Observation, 188 ff.
arguments against the existence Omnipotence, 168 ff.
of, 115 ff. Ontological argument, 26 ff.
arguments for the existence of, Other minds
3 ff- analogical argument for, 191 ff.
changelessness of, 174 ff. problem of, 188 ff.
and evil, 107 ff.
the greatest possible being, 26 ff. Pike, N. , 123, 124, 152
as necessary being, 6 ff. , 180 ff. Plantinga, C. A. , ix
as omnipotent, 168 ff. Possible nonhuman spirits, 150,
Harper, George G. , Jr. , ix Possible person, 140 ff.
Hartshorne, C. , 82 Powers, L. , 255
Hempel, C. , 163 Privacy, 201 ff.
Hume, D. , 96 ff. , 115 Private language, 199 ff.
Privileged access, 203
Inductive evidence, 221 ff.
Reid, T„ 188
Jellema, W. H. , ix
Satan, 149, 150
Kant, I. , 27, 29 ff. , 44, 95, 106 and his cohorts, 149
Schopenhauer, A. , 37
Landesman, Charles, Jr. , ix Shaffer, J. , 44 ff.
Lehrer, K. , 72 Shoemaker, S. , 221 ff. , 232 ff.
Sleigh, R. C. , Jr. , ix, 18, 197, 248
McCloskey, H. J. , 115, 117, 123, Smiley, T. , 57
Stob, H. , ix
Maclntyre, A. C. , 160 Strawson, P. F. , 205 ff. , 227 ff-
Mackie, J. L. , 116 ff. , 136 ff. , 168
McTaggart, J. , 115 Teleological argument, 95 ff.
Malcolm, N. , 82 ff. , 193 ff. , 199 ff. , Theistic proofs
212 ff. , 243 nature of, 3
Mavrodes, G. , 171 cosmological argument, 3 ff.
Mayo, B. , 171 moral argument, 111
Memory, 238 ff. ontological argument, 26 ff.
Mill, J. S. , 115, 213 ff. , 227 teleological argument, 9; ff.
Index
Van Buren, P. , 162, 163 Wisdom, J. , 38, 48, 152
Verifiability Criterion of Meaning, Wittgenstein, L. , 192, 199, 201,
162 ff. 215, 219, 221, 226, 233, 238,
Verificationism, 157 ff. 244
von Huge], Baron, 190, 197 Wolterstorff, N. , ix, 180