LIFE OF DEMETRIUS -- Normalized XTTS Master Text chapter the first
The man who first compared the arts to our senses seems to me to have especially alluded to the power which they both exhibit of dealing with objects of completely contrary qualities. In this respect they coincide; but they differ in respect of the use and purpose of the object of which they take cognisance. Our senses are influenced indifferently by things white or black, sweet or bitter, soft or hard; for the proper function of each sense is merely to receive all these impressions and to convey them to the mind. But the arts, which have been invented in order to cultivate the qualities proper to their own nature and to eschew those which are foreign to it, view some with especial favour as partaking of their own essence, and avoid others as mere untoward accidents. Thus the art of medicine deals with diseases, and the art of music deals with discord merely with a view to produce their respective opposites; while self control, justice, and wisdom, which are the most perfect of all arts, because they decide not only what is honourable, righteous, and useful but likewise what is hurtful, shameful, and unjust, do not praise innocency which prides itself upon inexperience of evil, but think it to be folly and ignorance of what all who intend to live as becomes them ought to know. The man who first compared the arts to our senses seems to me to have especially alluded to the power which they both exhibit of dealing with objects of completely contrary qualities. In this respect they coincide; but they differ in respect of the use and purpose of the object of which they take cognisance. Our senses are influenced indifferently by things white or black, sweet or bitter, soft or hard; for the proper function of each sense is merely to receive all these impressions and to convey them to the mind. But the arts, which have been invented in order to cultivate the qualities proper to their own nature and to eschew those which are foreign to it, view some with especial favour as partaking of their own essence, and avoid others as mere untoward accidents. Thus the art of medicine deals with diseases, and the art of music deals with discord merely with a view to produce their respective opposites; while self control, justice, and wisdom, which are the most perfect of all arts, because they decide not only what is honourable, righteous, and useful but likewise what is hurtful, shameful, and unjust, do not praise innocency which prides itself upon inexperience of evil, but think it to be folly and ignorance of what all who intend to live as becomes them ought to know.
The ancient Spartans at their feasts used to compel their helots to drink a large quantity of wine, and then brought them into the banqueting hall in order to show the young Spartans what drunkenness was like. I think that to instruct one class of men by the ruin of another is neither humane nor politic; yet I conceive that it may be useful to insert among my Parallel Lives some examples of men who have been careless of their own reputation, and who have used their great place and power only to make themselves notorious for evil. The description of such men's lives is not indeed an agreeable task or a pleasant mode of employing my leisure; still, as Ismenias the Theban, when instructing his scholars how to play the flute, used to say, "Thus you should play, " and again, "Thus you should not play, " while Antigenides even thought that the young would take more pleasure in listening to good flute players if they had first heard bad ones, so I think that we shall be more inclined both to admire and to imitate the lives of good men if we are well acquainted with those of bad ones. This book, then, will contain the lives of Demetrius, surnamed the City taker, and of Antonius the Triumvir, men who bear signal witness to the truth of Plato's remark that great men have great vices as well as great virtues. Both alike loved passionately, drank deep, and fought bravely; both were free handed, extravagant, and arrogant. Fortune served them both alike, not only in their lives, for each of them had great successes and great disasters, each won great empire and lost it again, each unexpectedly fell and rose again; but also in their deaths, as the one was captured by his enemies, and the same fate all but befell the other. The ancient Spartans at their feasts used to compel their helots to drink a large quantity of wine, and then brought them into the banqueting hall in order to show the young Spartans what drunkenness was like. I think that to instruct one class of men by the ruin of another is neither humane nor politic; yet I conceive that it may be useful to insert among my Parallel Lives some examples of men who have been careless of their own reputation, and who have used their great place and power only to make themselves notorious for evil. The description of such men's lives is not indeed an agreeable task or a pleasant mode of employing my leisure; still, as Ismenias the Theban, when instructing his scholars how to play the flute, used to say, "Thus you should play, " and again, "Thus you should not play, " while Antigenides even thought that the young would take more pleasure in listening to good flute players if they had first heard bad ones, so I think that we shall be more inclined both to admire and to imitate the lives of good men if we are well acquainted with those of bad ones. This book, then, will contain the lives of Demetrius, surnamed the City taker, and of Antonius the Triumvir, men who bear signal witness to the truth of Plato's remark that great men have great vices as well as great virtues. Both alike loved passionately, drank deep, and fought bravely; both were free handed, extravagant, and arrogant. Fortune served them both alike, not only in their lives, for each of them had great successes and great disasters, each won great empire and lost it again, each unexpectedly fell and rose again; but also in their deaths, as the one was captured by his enemies, and the same fate all but befell the other.
Antigonus had two sons by Stratonike, the daughter of Korragus, one of whom he named Demetrius after his brother, and the other Philip after his father. This is the account given by most historians, though some say that Demetrius was not the son but the nephew of Antigonus; but that, as his father died while he was still an infant and his mother at once married Antigonus, he was commonly regarded as his son.
His brother Philip, who was a few years younger than himself, died soon; but Demetrius grew up to be a tall man, though not so tall as his father. His face and figure were of extraordinary beauty, which baffled all the attempts of painters and sculptors to do them justice. His expression was at once sweet, commanding, and terrible; and his countenance showed all the eagerness and fire of youth combined with the calm dignity of a hero and a king. In like manner his disposition was one which was equally capable of inspiring terror or love. He was the pleasantest of companions, more given to wine drinking and the enjoyment of luxurious idleness than any other king of his age; and yet he displayed remarkable energy and persistence in action, so that he emulated the fame of the god Dionysus, being like him a famous warrior, and, when the war was over, most capable of thoroughly enjoying the arts of peace. His brother Philip, who was a few years younger than himself, died soon; but Demetrius grew up to be a tall man, though not so tall as his father. His face and figure were of extraordinary beauty, which baffled all the attempts of painters and sculptors to do them justice. His expression was at once sweet, commanding, and terrible; and his countenance showed all the eagerness and fire of youth combined with the calm dignity of a hero and a king. In like manner his disposition was one which was equally capable of inspiring terror or love. He was the pleasantest of companions, more given to wine drinking and the enjoyment of luxurious idleness than any other king of his age; and yet he displayed remarkable energy and persistence in action, so that he emulated the fame of the god Dionysus, being like him a famous warrior, and, when the war was over, most capable of thoroughly enjoying the arts of peace.
chapter the third
He was remarkably fond of his father; and the love and respect which he paid to his father and mother seem to have been prompted by true affection, not by a wish to stand well with those in power. Once, when Antigonus was receiving an embassy from some foreign state, Demetrius, who had been out hunting, came up to his father, kissed him, and sat down beside him just as he was, with his javelins still in his hand.
When the ambassadors had transacted their business and were about to leave his presence, Antigonus said to them in a loud voice, "And, gentlemen, you may carry home this news about me and my son, that these are the terms on which we live, " thinking that so great a proof of his trust in his son's loyalty would add considerable strength to his throne. So much mistrust and suspicion is bred by absolute power, and so hard a thing is it for a king to have a companion, that the eldest and greatest of the successors of Alexander publicly boasted that he was not afraid to have his own son sitting by his side with a spear in his hand.
Indeed, this was the only royal family which through many generations remained unpolluted by this species of crime; for of all the successors of Antigonus only one, Philip, assassinated his son. All the records of other dynasties are full of murders of sons, mothers, and wives; for the murder of brothers had grown to be considered, like an axiom in mathematics, as a necessary precaution to be taken by all kings on ascending to the throne. Indeed, this was the only royal family which through many generations remained unpolluted by this species of crime; for of all the successors of Antigonus only one, Philip, assassinated his son. All the records of other dynasties are full of murders of sons, mothers, and wives; for the murder of brothers had grown to be considered, like an axiom in mathematics, as a necessary precaution to be taken by all kings on ascending to the throne.
chapter the fourth
The following anecdote seems to prove that Demetrius when young was of a kind and loving nature. Mithridates, the son of Ariobarzanes, was his friend and companion, and was a good subject of Antigonus, of thorough and unsuspected loyalty, but at length incurred the suspicion of Antigonus in consequence of a dream.
Antigonus dreamed that he walked over a large and fair plain, sowing it with gold dust; and that shortly afterwards, returning that way again, he found nothing but stubble left. While grieving over this he heard some men say that Mithridates had gone away to Pontus on the Euxine, after having gathered the golden harvest. Antigonus was much disturbed at this vision, and, after having compelled his son to swear that he would keep silence about it, told him of the vision, and added that he had made up his mind to make away with the man.
Demetrius was greatly grieved at hearing this, and, when the young man, as he was wont to do, again joined him and spent the day with him, Demetrius dared not tell him by word of mouth what danger he was in because of the oath; but he drew him aside into a quiet place, and there, as soon as they were alone together, he wrote on the ground with the butt end of his spear, in sight of the other, the words "Fly, Mithridates! " Mithridates understood his meaning and ran away that very night to Cappadocia.
Not long afterwards he showed Antigonus what was the real meaning of his dream; for he made himself master of an extensive territory and became the founder of the dynasty of the kings of Pontus, which was overthrown by the Romans in about the eighth generation after him. By this example we may perceive the noble and loyal nature of Demetrius. Not long afterwards he showed Antigonus what was the real meaning of his dream; for he made himself master of an extensive territory and became the founder of the dynasty of the kings of Pontus, which was overthrown by the Romans in about the eighth generation after him. By this example we may perceive the noble and loyal nature of Demetrius.
chapter the fifth
As the elements, because of their mutual attraction and repulsion, are, according to Empedocles, always at variance with one another, and especially with those with which they happen to be in contact, so, while all the successors of Alexander were always at war, circumstances from time to time caused hostilities between two or more of them to take an especially active form.
At this time Antigonus was at war with Ptolemy; and, hearing that Ptolemy had left the island of Cyprus, had landed in Syria, and was ravaging that country, he himself remained in Phrygia but sent his son Demetrius to oppose him.
Demetrius was now two and twenty years of age, and was for the first time entrusted with the sole management of an important campaign. As might be expected of so young and untried a commander, when pitted against a man trained to war under Alexander and who had since his death waged many wars with success, Demetrius was defeated near the city of Gaza with a loss of fifteen thousand killed and eight thousand prisoners.
He also lost his own tent, his property, and all his personal attendants. These, however, were restored to him, with all his captured friends, by Ptolemy, who sent him a kindly worded message to the effect that they ought not to fight as mortal foes but only for honour and empire.
Demetrius, after receiving this message and his property, prayed to the gods that he might not long remain in Ptolemy's debt, but that he might soon recompense him in like manner. He did not behave like a youth who has received a check at the outset of his first campaign, but repaired his failure like an old and wary commander, enrolling fresh soldiers, providing new supplies of arms, keeping a firm hold over the cities near him, and carefully drilling his new levies. Demetrius, after receiving this message and his property, prayed to the gods that he might not long remain in Ptolemy's debt, but that he might soon recompense him in like manner. He did not behave like a youth who has received a check at the outset of his first campaign, but repaired his failure like an old and wary commander, enrolling fresh soldiers, providing new supplies of arms, keeping a firm hold over the cities near him, and carefully drilling his new levies.
chapter the sixth
Antigonus, when he heard of the defeat, remarked that Ptolemy had conquered beardless boys, but that he would have to fight his next battle with grown men. He yielded, however, to his son's entreaty to be allowed to repair his fault by himself, and, as he did not wish to damp his spirits, left him in sole command.
Soon after this, Killes, Ptolemy's lieutenant, arrived in Syria with a large force, meaning to chase Demetrius, whom he supposed to be disheartened by his defeat, quite out of Syria. But Demetrius, by a sudden attack, surprised his army and struck it with panic. He captured the enemy's camp and their general, and took eight thousand prisoners and a great quantity of booty.
He was overjoyed at this, not because he meant to keep what he had won, but to give it back, and did not so much value the glory and wealth which he had gained as the opportunity now offered him for repaying the courtesy of Ptolemy. He did not presume to do this on his own responsibility, but wrote first to his father. On receiving permission from him to deal as he pleased with the fruits of his victory, he gave costly presents to Killes and his friends, and sent them back to Ptolemy.
This battle forced Ptolemy to retire from Syria and brought Antigonus from Kelainae rejoicing at the victory and eager to see his son. This battle forced Ptolemy to retire from Syria and brought Antigonus from Kelainae rejoicing at the victory and eager to see his son.
chapter the seventh
After this, Demetrius was sent to subdue the Nabathean Arabs, in performing which service he incurred great danger by journeying through waterless deserts; but his intrepid courage overawed the barbarians, and he returned loaded with plunder, having captured seven hundred camels.
Seleucus had once lost his capital city Babylon, which Antigonus took from him; but he had since recovered it by his own arms, and at this time was marching with an army to attempt the conquest of the nations bordering upon India and the provinces near Mount Caucasus.
Demetrius, hoping that he might find Mesopotamia in a defenceless condition, suddenly crossed the Euphrates, took Babylon by surprise, and made himself master of one of its two citadels, driving out the garrison placed there by Seleucus. He placed seven thousand of his own troops in the citadel, ordered his soldiers to enrich themselves by the plunder of the surrounding country, and then returned to the sea coast, leaving Seleucus more firmly established on his throne than before; for by plundering the country he seemed to admit that he had no claim to it.
As Ptolemy was now besieging Halicarnassus, he quickly marched thither and succeeded in saving the city. As Ptolemy was now besieging Halicarnassus, he quickly marched thither and succeeded in saving the city.
chapter the eighth
As the glory which he won by this action was very great, he and his father Antigonus conceived a strong desire to liberate the whole of Greece from the tyranny of Ptolemy and Cassander. None of the successors of Alexander ever waged a more just or honourable war than this; for Demetrius and Antigonus, to gain themselves honour by freeing the Greeks, spent upon them the treasure which they had won in their victories over the barbarians.
They determined first of all to attack Athens, and when one of the friends of Antigonus advised him, if he captured that city, to keep it in his own hands because it was the key of Greece, Antigonus replied that the best key to a country was the goodwill of its people, and that Athens was the watchtower of the world, from whence the glory of his deeds should shine like a beacon light to all mankind.
Demetrius now set sail for Athens with five thousand talents of silver and a fleet of two hundred and fifty vessels. At this time Demetrius of Phalerum governed the city as Cassander's lieutenant, and a garrison was placed in Munychia.
By good fortune and good management the fleet arrived on the twenty fifth day of the month Thargelion, without anyone being aware of its coming. When the ships were seen, they were thought to form part of Ptolemy's fleet, and preparations were made to give them a friendly reception.
At last the officers in command discovered their mistake; and a scene of great confusion ensued as they hastily made preparations to resist the enemy, who were already in the act of disembarking; for Demetrius, finding the mouths of the harbours open, sailed straight in, and could be seen distinctly by all standing on the deck of the ship and making signs to the Athenians to be quiet and keep silence.
When this was done, he bade a herald proclaim that his father Antigonus had sent him thither in an auspicious hour to liberate the Athenians, drive out their Macedonian garrison, and restore to them their own laws and ancient constitution. When this was done, he bade a herald proclaim that his father Antigonus had sent him thither in an auspicious hour to liberate the Athenians, drive out their Macedonian garrison, and restore to them their own laws and ancient constitution.
chapter the ninth
Upon hearing this proclamation, the greater part of the people laid down their shields at their feet, clapped their hands, and shouted to Demetrius to come ashore, calling him their saviour and benefactor. Demetrius of Phalerum, however, thought it necessary to admit so powerful a man to the city, even though he might have no intention of performing any of his promises; so he sent ambassadors to make their submission.
Demetrius received them graciously and sent back with them Aristodemus of Miletus, one of his father's friends. As the Phalerean, in consequence of this sudden turn of fortune, was more afraid of his own countrymen than of the enemy, Demetrius, who admired his courage and public spirit, took care to have him conveyed in safety to Thebes, to which town he himself wished to go.
Demetrius now declared that, although he was very eager to view the city, he would not do so until he had completely set it free and expelled its garrison. He therefore surrounded Munychia with a ditch and rampart, cutting it off from the rest of the city, and then sailed to attack Megara, which was held by a garrison of Cassander's troops.
As he heard that Kratesipolis, the wife of Alexander the son of Polysperchon, a celebrated beauty, was at Patrae and was not unwilling to grant him an interview, he left his army encamped in the territory of Megara and proceeded thither with only a few lightly equipped followers.
When he was near the place, he pitched his own tent apart from his men, that the lady might not be seen when she came to visit him. Some of the enemy discovered this and made a sudden attack upon him. He only escaped by putting on a mean cloak and running away alone, so that his licentiousness very nearly exposed him to ignominious capture.
When Megara was taken the soldiers were about to plunder the city, but the Athenians with great difficulty prevailed upon Demetrius to spare it. He drove out the Macedonian garrison and made the city independent.
While he was doing this he remembered Stilpon the philosopher, who was reputed to have chosen for himself a life of retirement and study. Demetrius sent for him and inquired whether anything had been stolen from him. "Nothing, " replied Stilpon. "I saw no one taking away any knowledge. " As, however, nearly all the slaves were stolen, after Demetrius had talked graciously to Stilpon and at length dismissed him with the words, "My Stilpon, I leave you a free city, " "Quite true, " replied Stilpon, "for you have not left us a single slave. "
chapter the tenth
Demetrius now returned to Munychia, encamped before it, dislodged the garrison, and demolished the fort. And now, at the invitation of the Athenians, he proceeded into the city, where he assembled the people and re-established the ancient constitution. He also promised that his father Antigonus would send them one hundred and fifty thousand bushels of wheat and timber enough to build a fleet of one hundred ships of war.
Thus did the Athenians recover their democratic constitution fifteen years after it had been dissolved; for during the period between the Lamian war and the battle of Crannon their government had nominally been an oligarchy, but practically had been a despotism on account of the great power of Demetrius of Phalerum.
The benefits which Demetrius conferred upon the Athenians rendered him indeed great and glorious; but they rendered his fame invidious by the extravagant honours which they conferred upon him. They were the first of all men who bestowed upon Antigonus and Demetrius the title of kings, a name which they greatly disliked because of its association, and which moreover belonged at that time in an especial manner to the descendants of Philip and Alexander, being the only one of their ensigns of royalty which had not been adopted by other princes.
The Athenians too were the only people who styled Antigonus and Demetrius their saviour gods, and they even abolished the ancient office of the archon from whom the year received its name, and elected in his place every year a priest to minister at the altar of the saviour gods. They also decreed that their images should be woven into the sacred peplus of Athena with those of the gods. They consecrated the spot where Demetrius first set his foot on the ground when he alighted from his chariot, and built an altar upon it which was called the altar of the Descending Demetrius.
They added two to the number of their tribes and called them Demetrias and Antigonis; and consequently they raised the number of the senators from five hundred to six hundred, because each tribe supplied it with fifty members. They added two to the number of their tribes and called them Demetrias and Antigonis; and consequently they raised the number of the senators from five hundred to six hundred, because each tribe supplied it with fifty members.
chapter the eleventh
This extravagant adulation made Demetrius unpopular with the wiser citizens, who felt ashamed that the Athenians should act thus towards a mortal man; yet even this flattery could not sate or soften Demetrius, who would accept from the Athenians no less extravagant tokens of devotion than the Athenians were willing to give.
He lived in the city in a manner altogether unworthy of its dignity. He used the Parthenon as his lodging; and there, in the name of Athena, whose dwelling it was, he led a life of riotous licence, receiving courtesans there and filling the sacred precincts with revelry and drunkenness. The Athenians endured this, partly through fear, and partly through the hope of gaining further benefits, for they were bewitched by their prosperity and ready to forgive any outrage in exchange for material advantage.
Moreover Demetrius frequently demanded money, and they complied eagerly, piling tax upon tax, until they almost exhausted themselves in their eagerness to please him. On one occasion they raised two hundred and fifty talents for him in a few days. Their flatteries indeed went to such an extreme that they used to salute him in public decrees as "the most beautiful of all men, " and to swear by him in place of their accustomed oaths.
A certain Demochares, a man of courage and good sense, ridiculed these absurdities and was banished for doing so; but even during his exile he continued to scoff at the abject servility of his countrymen, saying that the only thing Athens wanted to make it perfect was a bath of brine, so that it might be pickled and preserved from rotting. A certain Demochares, a man of courage and good sense, ridiculed these absurdities and was banished for doing so; but even during his exile he continued to scoff at the abject servility of his countrymen, saying that the only thing Athens wanted to make it perfect was a bath of brine, so that it might be pickled and preserved from rotting.
chapter the twelfth
Meanwhile Cassander grew uneasy at the rising power of Antigonus and Demetrius. He determined to strengthen his position in Greece, and therefore marched into Attica, hoping to seize Athens before Demetrius could return.
Demetrius, however, hurried back with great celerity. He surprised Cassander near the city, pursued him up to the very gates, and almost captured him. Cassander fled in haste to the Peloponnesus, leaving Attica in the hands of Demetrius, who proceeded to set free the cities there and place garrisons favourable to his father.
After this the Greeks met at the Isthmus of Corinth and formed themselves into a league, choosing Antigonus and Demetrius as commanders in chief. Only the Lacedaemonians held aloof, for they alone refused to renounce their ancient maxim of never obeying a foreign master.
The assembly voted to wage war for the freedom of Greece, and Demetrius was appointed to lead the campaign. His first act was to march into Aetolia; but, as the Aetolian people took refuge in their mountains and avoided a pitched battle, he wasted the country with fire and sword and returned without effecting anything of importance. The assembly voted to wage war for the freedom of Greece, and Demetrius was appointed to lead the campaign. His first act was to march into Aetolia; but, as the Aetolian people took refuge in their mountains and avoided a pitched battle, he wasted the country with fire and sword and returned without effecting anything of importance.
chapter the thirteenth
Not long afterwards Demetrius received intelligence that Ptolemy and his fleet were again threatening Athens. He instantly embarked with his own ships and sailed to the Cyclades, meaning to block Ptolemy's passage.
But a violent storm scattered his ships, and he landed with only a few vessels on the island of Andros. Although so weakened, he nevertheless attacked the Macedonian garrison in the city, routed them, and captured the island. His fleet, however, had suffered such losses that he could not continue the pursuit of Ptolemy, who passed unmolested and reached the coast of Greece.
During this time Demetrius received unwelcome news from Athens. The Athenians, in their desire to please him, had passed laws giving him absolute freedom to choose any wives he pleased, and had even decreed that their wives might be visited by him without jealousy. This shameless proposal caused great scandal, and Demetrius himself was displeased by a decree which made him hateful to decent men and ridiculous to the wise.
He therefore wrote to the Athenians, rebuking them sharply for making such decrees, and bade them remember that even their flattery ought to have some limits. He therefore wrote to the Athenians, rebuking them sharply for making such decrees, and bade them remember that even their flattery ought to have some limits.
chapter the fourteenth
Demetrius, after this, returned to Athens in high displeasure, and his conduct there showed how far prosperity had corrupted him. He forbade any Athenian to entertain strangers unless he obtained permission first from Demetrius; and when he himself did give entertainments he invited not the better citizens but the most worthless and profligate.
He also married several women at once, and treated even the wives of free men as though he had the right to command them. His licentiousness, however, was equalled by his magnificence; for he gave splendid banquets and festivals, provided costly exhibitions, and sent rich offerings to the temples.
Notwithstanding this mixture of excess and magnificence, his arrogance offended even his flatterers. Once, when the people were assembled, he sent to order them to wait, because he was asleep; upon which Artemidorus, one of the citizens, said, "It would not be wonderful if he were asleep, for he seems to be the only man whom Fortune has not yet awakened. " Though these sayings circulated privately, no one dared oppose him openly, for his power was too great and his anger too terrible. Though these sayings circulated privately, no one dared oppose him openly, for his power was too great and his anger too terrible.
chapter the fifteenth
After remaining for some time in Greece, Demetrius moved northward, hearing that Lysimachus had seized several cities in Asia Minor. He crossed the Hellespont with a powerful fleet and army, and compelled many of the Greek cities there to join him.
Meanwhile Seleucus, who had now grown very powerful in the East, began to view with suspicion the ambition of Antigonus and Demetrius. Ambassadors passed to and fro, but no peace could be agreed upon, for both parties aimed at nothing less than universal empire.
The crisis came when the four greatest princes of the age -- Cassander, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and Ptolemy -- formed a great confederacy against Antigonus. They marched huge armies into Asia and converged upon him from all sides.
Demetrius now joined his father with a mighty force, having brought from Greece a fleet of one hundred and fifty ships and a large body of soldiers. Father and son embraced with tears, for they foresaw the danger of the coming conflict, yet were resolved to meet it with courage and united purpose. Demetrius now joined his father with a mighty force, having brought from Greece a fleet of one hundred and fifty ships and a large body of soldiers. Father and son embraced with tears, for they foresaw the danger of the coming conflict, yet were resolved to meet it with courage and united purpose.
chapter the sixteenth
When the allied princes drew near, Antigonus marched to meet them and encamped beside the city of Ipsus in Phrygia. Demetrius, whose courage was as fiery as his father's was steady, commanded the cavalry on the left wing.
The battle began at dawn and was long and obstinately contested. Demetrius, leading a furious charge, routed the troops opposed to him and pursued them a considerable distance; but this impetuosity ruined the plans of Antigonus. For the elephants of Seleucus advanced in a long and unbroken line and barred Demetrius from returning to his position, thus cutting him off from his infantry.
Meanwhile Antigonus, left unsupported, received a mortal wound and fell. When Demetrius at last forced his way back, he found the battle lost and his father dead. He wept bitterly and fled with the remnant of the cavalry to Ephesus.
Thus perished Antigonus, a man of great spirit and energy, who had shown as much capacity both in prosperity and adversity as any of the successors of Alexander. Thus perished Antigonus, a man of great spirit and energy, who had shown as much capacity both in prosperity and adversity as any of the successors of Alexander.
chapter the seventeenth
After the disaster of Ipsus, Demetrius found himself stripped of all his former power. From commanding mighty armies and ruling vast territories, he was now a fugitive with only a small force. Yet his courage rose with his misfortunes.
He sailed to Greece, where the Athenians, who had been the first to flatter him in prosperity, now refused to receive him in adversity, sending to tell him that the city was closed against him.
This ingratitude touched him deeply, but he did not avenge it. He merely sent to request the removal of his household furniture, which had been left in Athens; and even this was refused until the philosopher Demochares persuaded the people to return it.
Demetrius then sailed to the Peloponnesus, where he took some cities and garrisoned them; afterwards, passing into Thrace, he asked Seleucus for permission to settle in his dominions. But Lysimachus treacherously plotted to seize him, and he escaped only with difficulty.
At length Seleucus invited him to Cilicia and gave him the city of Tarsus; but soon afterwards he repented of this generosity and ordered Demetrius to leave. Angered by this fickleness, Demetrius seized the whole province of Cilicia and prepared for war. At length Seleucus invited him to Cilicia and gave him the city of Tarsus; but soon afterwards he repented of this generosity and ordered Demetrius to leave. Angered by this fickleness, Demetrius seized the whole province of Cilicia and prepared for war.
chapter the eighteenth
Demetrius, with his usual impetuosity, now conceived the bold design of marching into the interior of Asia and rousing the peoples there to revolt against Seleucus.
He collected a considerable army, partly by force, partly by promises of future reward; and, as his soldiers were in want of pay, he plundered the neighbouring tribes and even attempted to seize the treasures stored in the temple of Aphrodite at Paphos.
His hopes were always extravagant; he seemed to believe that fortune, which had once raised him so high, would again restore him to empire. But the countries which he invaded were barren, his forces were reduced by famine and disease, and many deserted.
At last, after a long and miserable march, he crossed the Taurus mountains and descended into Syria, where the army of Seleucus was advancing to meet him.
A great sickness now fell upon his troops; the men died by hundreds, and Demetrius, surrounded on all sides, resolved to surrender himself voluntarily to Seleucus rather than see the remainder of his forces perish. A great sickness now fell upon his troops; the men died by hundreds, and Demetrius, surrounded on all sides, resolved to surrender himself voluntarily to Seleucus rather than see the remainder of his forces perish.
chapter the nineteenth
When Demetrius appeared before Seleucus, the king was moved with compassion. He remembered their former friendship and the great name of Antigonus, and he treated Demetrius with honour, giving him royal tents, attendants, and a revenue sufficient for his maintenance.
But as time passed, Demetrius could not endure the idleness of captivity. His mind, accustomed to vast schemes and restless activity, consumed itself with vain hopes and projects. He drank deeply and gave himself up to pleasure, striving to forget his misfortunes.
Seleucus allowed his friends to visit him and relaxed many restraints; yet he feared that Demetrius might escape or conspire with disaffected Greeks and Macedonians. He therefore kept a careful watch, though he did not wish to treat him harshly.
In this condition Demetrius lingered for three years, sometimes cheerful and full of hope, sometimes plunged in melancholy, until at last his excesses brought on illness. In this condition Demetrius lingered for three years, sometimes cheerful and full of hope, sometimes plunged in melancholy, until at last his excesses brought on illness.
chapter the twentieth
Demetrius died in captivity at the age of fifty four years. His death moved Seleucus to grief, who had intended to release him eventually when the troubles of his kingdom were settled.
His ashes were placed in a golden urn and sent to his son Antigonus, who received them with tears and built a noble monument to his memory.
Such was the end of Demetrius, a man of great contrasts: bold, magnificent, and courteous, yet also licentious, extravagant, and overbearing. Few men ever experienced greater extremes of fortune.
Raised to empire while still a youth, he afterwards wandered as a fugitive; he was adored by cities and afterwards shut out by them; he commanded fleets and armies and then begged a refuge from those he had once befriended.
Yet in all these changes he bore himself with a certain splendour of spirit which, though often misguided, made him one of the most striking and memorable figures of his age. Yet in all these changes he bore himself with a certain splendour of spirit which, though often misguided, made him one of the most striking and memorable figures of his age.
chapter the twenty-first
Demetrius went to war with the Rhodians because they were the allies of Ptolemy, and he brought up to their walls his largest city taker, a great machine with a square base, each side of which measured eight and forty cubits at the bottom. It was sixty and six cubits in height, and its upper part was much narrower than the base. Within, it was divided into many separate storeys and chambers, with windows on each storey opening towards the enemy, through which missiles of every kind could be shot, as it was full of soldiers armed with every manner of weapon.
It never shook nor trembled, but rolled steadily onward, upright and firm, with a regular and equable motion which filled all spectators with terror and delight. Two steel corslets were brought from Cyprus for Demetrius to use in this war, each of which weighed forty minae. The maker, Zoilus, wishing to show their strength and power of resisting a blow, bade Demetrius shoot a dart from a catapult at one of them at the distance of twenty paces. Where it struck, the iron remained unbroken, and showed only a trifling scratch, such as might be made by a stylus or iron pen for writing on wax. This corslet Demetrius wore himself.
He gave the other to Alkimus of Epirus, the bravest and most warlike man in all his army, who wore a suit of armour weighing two talents, while that of all the rest weighed only one talent. This man fell during the siege of Rhodes, in a battle fought near the theatre. He gave the other to Alkimus of Epirus, the bravest and most warlike man in all his army, who wore a suit of armour weighing two talents, while that of all the rest weighed only one talent. This man fell during the siege of Rhodes, in a battle fought near the theatre.
chapter the twenty-second
The Rhodians defended themselves with great spirit, and Demetrius was unable to accomplish anything against them; yet he still continued the siege out of anger, because they had captured a ship in which his wife Phila had sent him letters, clothes, and bedding, and had sent it at once to Ptolemy exactly as it was. In this conduct they were far from imitating the courtesy of the Athenians, who, when Philip was at war with them, captured a messenger and read all the letters which he carried except one written by Olympias, which they did not open, but forwarded to him with the seal unbroken.
However, although Demetrius was much nettled by the conduct of the Rhodians, he did not stoop to retaliation, although he soon had an opportunity of doing so. Protogenes of Kaunus happened at that time to be painting a picture of Ialysus for the Rhodians, and Demetrius found the picture nearly finished in one of the suburbs of the city. The Rhodians sent a herald begging him to spare the work and not destroy it, to which he answered that he would rather burn his father's statues than such a precious work of art.
Apelles tells us that when he first saw this picture the sight so astonished him that it took away his breath, and that at last he said, "Indeed this is a wonderful piece of work, and must have cost great labour. " Yet, said he, it lacked that grace which gives so divine a charm to the works of Apelles himself.
This picture shared the common lot of Greek works of art; it was taken to Rome, where it was afterwards destroyed by fire.
As the Rhodians gallantly held their own in the war, Demetrius became weary of the siege and gladly accepted the offer of the Athenians to act as mediators. They made peace on condition that the Rhodians should be the allies of Antigonus and of Demetrius, except against Ptolemy. As the Rhodians gallantly held their own in the war, Demetrius became weary of the siege and gladly accepted the offer of the Athenians to act as mediators. They made peace on condition that the Rhodians should be the allies of Antigonus and of Demetrius, except against Ptolemy.
chapter the twenty-third
The Athenians now invited Demetrius to come to their aid, as Cassander was besieging Athens. Demetrius arrived with three hundred and thirty ships and a large land force. He not only drove Cassander out of Attica, but pursued him as far as Thermopylae, where he defeated him in a battle and gained possession of the city of Heraclea, which voluntarily surrendered to him. A body of six thousand Macedonians also deserted Cassander and joined him.
On his return he freed the Greeks south of Thermopylae from Macedonian domination, formed an alliance with the Boeotians, and took Kenchreae. He destroyed the forts at Phyle and at Panactum in Attica, which had been garrisoned by Cassander's troops, and restored them to the Athenians.
They, although they seemed to have exhausted every possible form of adulation during his former visit, yet contrived to flatter him anew by fresh honours. They assigned the interior of the Parthenon to him for his lodging; and there he dwelt with the title of "the guest of Athena, " though he was a most ill behaved guest to be quartered in the house of a virgin goddess.
Yet once, when Antigonus heard that his brother Philip was staying in a house where there were three young women, he said nothing to Philip, but in his presence sent for the quartermaster and said to him, "Will you be so good as to find some less crowded quarters for my son? "
chapter the twenty-fourth
Demetrius, however, without paying the least respect to Athena, although he was wont to call her his elder sister, filled the Acropolis with such a succession of outrages committed upon well born youths and women of high position that the place appeared comparatively decent when he contented himself with holding an orgy in the company of the celebrated courtesans Chrysis, Lamia, Demo, and Antikyra.
For the sake of the city I will say no more about his other debaucheries; but I cannot refrain from mentioning the virtue and chastity shown by Democles. He was very young, and his beauty attracted general notice; indeed his nickname betrayed him, for he was always spoken of as Democles the Handsome.
He turned a deaf ear to every advance, present, or threat; and at length ceased to frequent the gymnasium and the palaestra, using only a private bath. Demetrius watched his opportunity and surprised him there alone.
The boy, when he saw that he was caught where no one could help him, rather than suffer outrage, took off the lid of the copper, leaped into the boiling water, and destroyed himself. He deserved a better fate, but the spirit which prompted the act was worthy of his country and of his beauty.
Very different was the conduct of Cleaenetus, the son of Cleomedon, who, when his father was condemned to pay a fine of fifty talents, obtained a remission of it from Demetrius and showed a letter from Demetrius to the Athenian people signifying his pleasure in the matter; by which conduct Cleaenetus not only disgraced himself but threw the whole city into confusion.
Cleaeneton's fine was remitted, but the people decreed that no citizen should ever again bring them a letter from Demetrius.
However, as Demetrius was greatly incensed at this and did not conceal his displeasure, the Athenians in terror not only reversed the decree but put to death some of those who had advocated it and banished others.
They even decreed that "the entire people of Athens should regard anything which King Demetrius might be pleased to command as both righteous in respect of the gods and legal as regards men. " When one of the better class of citizens remarked that Stratocles must be mad to propose such a decree, Demochares of Leukonoe answered, "He would be mad not to be mad, " for Stratocles made a great fortune by flattering Demetrius. For this saying Demochares was forced into exile.
Such was the conduct of the Athenians when they were relieved of their Macedonian garrison and were supposed to have become a free people. Such was the conduct of the Athenians when they were relieved of their Macedonian garrison and were supposed to have become a free people.
chapter the twenty-fifth
Demetrius next proceeded to Peloponnesus, where he met with no resistance; for the enemy fled before him and surrendered their cities. He made himself master of the district known as Acte and of the whole of Arcadia except Mantinea; while he set free Argos, Sikyon, and Corinth by bribing their garrisons with one hundred talents to evacuate them.
At Argos he presided at the games at the festival of Hera, which took place during his stay. On this occasion he convened a solemn assembly of all the Greeks and publicly married Deidameia, a daughter of Aeacides, king of the Molossi, and sister of Pyrrhus.
He remarked to the people of Sikyon that they were living away from their proper city, and prevailed upon them to remove to the spot which they now inhabit. He changed the name as well as the site of the city, and, instead of Sikyon, named it Demetrias.
At a largely attended meeting held at the Isthmus, Demetrius was proclaimed chief of Greece as Philip and Alexander had been in former days; though Demetrius reckoned himself not a little superior to either of them, being elated by his good fortune and by the immense force at his disposal.
Alexander never deprived a king of his title, nor did he ever call himself king of kings, though he raised many to the rank and dignities of kings; but Demetrius scoffed at any man being called king except himself and his father, and at his feasts was much amused to hear toasts drunk to "Demetrius the King, " "Seleucus the Commander of the Elephants, " "Ptolemy the Admiral, " "Lysimachus the Treasurer, " and "Agathocles of Sicily the Lord of the Isles. " The other princes laughed at these sallies of Demetrius, and only Lysimachus was angered that Demetrius should think him a eunuch; for it was the general custom to appoint eunuchs to the office of treasurer. Indeed, Lysimachus hated him more bitterly than all the rest; and, sneering at his passion for Lamia, declared that he had never before seen a whore act in a tragedy.
To this Demetrius retorted that his whore was a more respectable woman than Lysimachus's Penelope. To this Demetrius retorted that his whore was a more respectable woman than Lysimachus's Penelope.
chapter the twenty-sixth
Demetrius now set out for Athens, and sent a letter to the Athenians informing them that he desired to be initiated, and that he wished to go through the whole course, including both the lesser and the greater mysteries.
This was not lawful, and had never before taken place; for the minor initiation used to be held in the month Anthesterion, and the great mysteries in the month Boedromion. When the letter was read, no one ventured to offer any opposition except Pythodorus the torchbearer; but he effected nothing.
At the instance of Stratocles, the Athenians decreed that the month Munychion should be renamed Anthesterion, and that in it should be held the mysteries of Demeter at Agrae. After this, the same month Munychion was renamed Boedromion, and Demetrius was admitted to the second degree and enjoyed the privileges of an epoptes.
In allusion to this, Philippides ridiculed Stratocles in his verse as the man
"Who crowds into one month the entire year. "
And in allusion to Demetrius lodging in the Parthenon, he wrote:
"Who treats Acropolis as if it were an inn, And makes the Virgin's shrine a house of sin. "
chapter the twenty-seventh
But of all the outrages and unlawful acts committed by Demetrius at this period, none enraged the Athenians so much as his demand that they should speedily levy a sum of two hundred and fifty talents. When this sum had been raised by the harshest and most pitiless exactions, Demetrius publicly presented it to Lamia and her companions for their toilet tables.
It was not the loss of the money, but the disgrace of the whole affair and the scorn which it brought upon them, that stung the Athenians to the quick. Some writers, however, say that it was the Thessalians, not the Athenians, who were thus treated.
Besides this, Lamia extorted money from many citizens under the pretext of providing a supper for the king. This supper became so notorious on account of its extravagant cost that Lynkeus of Samos wrote a history of it. For this reason one of the comic poets cleverly called Lamia a city taker.
Demetrius himself was called Mythus, or Fable, by Demochares of Soli, because he too had his Lamia. Demetrius himself was called Mythus, or Fable, by Demochares of Soli, because he too had his Lamia.
Indeed the passion of Demetrius for Lamia caused not only his wives but his friends to dislike and envy her. Some of these friends, when on an embassy to Lysimachus, were shown by him on his arms and thighs the scars made by a lion's claws, as he told them how King Alexander had once shut him in a cage with the beast. They jestingly answered that their master also often showed on his neck the marks of a savage beast called Lamia.
It was a matter of wonder that Demetrius, who objected to Phila because she was past her youth, should yet be captivated by Lamia, who was now far advanced in years. It was a matter of wonder that Demetrius, who objected to Phila because she was past her youth, should yet be captivated by Lamia, who was now far advanced in years.
Once, when Lamia was playing on the flute at a banquet, Demetrius asked another courtesan, Demo surnamed Mania, what she thought of her. "I think her an old woman, my king, " answered she.
Again, when sweetmeats were set on the table, Demetrius said to Demo, "Do you see what fine things Lamia sends me? " "My mother, " answered Demo, "will send you many more, if only you will sleep with her. "
A witty saying of Lamia's about the judgment of Bocchoris is recorded.
A certain Egyptian became enamoured of the courtesan Thonis, but she demanded too high a price. Afterwards he dreamed that he had enjoyed her and so lost his desire for her. Thonis sued him for payment, and Bocchoris, having heard both sides, ordered the man to place the sum claimed in a glass vessel and wave it before her so that she might clutch at the shadow, since his dream was but the shadow of the reality.
Lamia said that this judgment was unjust, because the woman's desire for the gold was not satisfied by the shadow, whereas the young man's passion had been satisfied by the dream. Lamia said that this judgment was unjust, because the woman's desire for the gold was not satisfied by the shadow, whereas the young man's passion had been satisfied by the dream.
chapter the twenty-eighth
But now the fortunes and deeds of Demetrius compel us to pass from comedy to tragedy; for all the other kings conspired against Antigonus and united their forces.
Demetrius therefore sailed away from Greece and joined his father, who, for a man of his years, displayed marvellous vigour and was greatly encouraged by his son's arrival. Yet it appears that Antigonus, had he only controlled his excessive love of power and made some small concessions, might have preserved his supremacy to the end of his life and bequeathed to his son the position of chief of all the successors of Alexander.
Being, however, naturally haughty and disdainful, and even harsher in speech than in deed, he alienated many young and powerful princes. Even now he boasted that he would scatter the great confederacy menacing him as easily as a man drives a flock of birds from a field.
He took the field with more than seventy thousand infantry, ten thousand cavalry, and seventy and five elephants; while his enemies had sixty and four thousand infantry, five hundred more cavalry than he, four hundred elephants, and one hundred and twenty war chariots.
As they drew near, his confidence diminished, though his resolve did not. His former custom had been to show a lofty spirit in danger, speaking loudly, jesting in the presence of the enemy, thus displaying contempt for them and confidence in himself. Now, however, he was silent and thoughtful.
He publicly presented Demetrius to the army as his successor. What astonished all most of all was that he now held council with Demetrius alone within the tent; for never before had he shared his secret thoughts with his son, but had always planned and executed his designs solely on his own authority.
It is said that when Demetrius, as a very young man, once asked at what hour they would march, Antigonus angrily answered, "Do you fear that you alone will not hear the sound of the trumpet? "
chapter the twenty-ninth
On this occasion they were also disheartened by sinister omens.
Demetrius dreamed that Alexander appeared before him in shining armour and asked what their watchword would be for the battle. When Demetrius replied, "Zeus and victory, " Alexander said, "I will go now and tell this to the enemy, for I am going over to them. " Antigonus, too, as he stepped from his tent to view his line, stumbled and fell headlong upon his face. When he rose he lifted his hands to heaven and prayed that the gods would grant him either victory or a swift and painless death before his army was routed. Antigonus, too, as he stepped from his tent to view his line, stumbled and fell headlong upon his face. When he rose he lifted his hands to heaven and prayed that the gods would grant him either victory or a swift and painless death before his army was routed.
When the battle began, Demetrius with the flower of the cavalry charged Antiochus, the son of Seleucus, and routed him brilliantly. But by pursuing him too far, he ruined the battle; for the elephants of Seleucus advanced in a long and unbroken line and prevented his return to his infantry.
The phalanx, left without cavalry support, was exposed; and Seleucus, keeping his own cavalry hovering near, terrified the phalanx and encouraged the men to change sides. A great mass of Antigonus's infantry did so, and the rest fled.
Enemies now closed around Antigonus; and one of his attendants said, "My king, it is you for whom they are making. " "Why, " answered he, "what other mark could they have but me? Demetrius will soon be here to the rescue. " He looked round, hoping in vain to see his son. A storm of darts fell upon him and struck him down. All his attendants fled except one, Thorax of Larissa, who remained faithfully by the corpse. He looked round, hoping in vain to see his son. A storm of darts fell upon him and struck him down. All his attendants fled except one, Thorax of Larissa, who remained faithfully by the corpse.
chapter the thirtieth
After this battle, the victorious kings divided between them the empire of Antigonus and of Demetrius, each annexing the region nearest his own dominions, like men cutting portions from a vast slaughtered beast.
Demetrius fled with five thousand infantry and four thousand cavalry, and marched with all speed toward Ephesus. All believed that, in his need of money, he would plunder the rich temple there; and he himself, fearing such an act from his soldiers, took ship and hastened to Greece, for his chief hopes still lay in Athens.
He had left there a part of his fleet, some treasure, and his wife Deidameia; and he thought no refuge more certain in adversity than that city, where he fancied the loyalty of the people secure.
But while he passed the Cyclades he met an embassy from Athens forbidding him to approach, for they had decreed that none of the kings should be admitted within their walls.
The ambassadors added that his wife, Deidameia, had been escorted with honour to Megara. The ambassadors added that his wife, Deidameia, had been escorted with honour to Megara.
Hitherto Demetrius had borne all misfortunes with calmness, never letting an unworthy word escape him; but at this message he was transported with anger. He was deeply grieved at this unexpected betrayal and at finding that the seeming devotion of the Athenians had been mere pretence.
The bestowal of excessive honours by the multitude is a poor test of loyalty; for honours freely offered are noble, but those extorted by fear are worthless. Men fawn alike upon those whom they fear and those whom they love.
Hence the wise judge the statues, decrees, and public distinctions bestowed upon them by reflecting upon what they themselves have done for their admirers, for by this they discern whether the praises are genuine or forced; for cities often heap honours upon men whom they abhor but dare not oppose. Hence the wise judge the statues, decrees, and public distinctions bestowed upon them by reflecting upon what they themselves have done for their admirers, for by this they discern whether the praises are genuine or forced; for cities often heap honours upon men whom they abhor but dare not oppose.
chapter the thirty-first
Demetrius, although he considered himself to have been shamefully treated by the Athenians, was powerless to resent their conduct. He sent an embassy to Athens, gently complaining of what they had done and requesting that they would restore his ships, one of which was a vessel of thirteen banks of oars.
Having received these vessels, he coasted along as far as the Isthmus, where he found that all his garrisons had been driven out of the cities and that the whole country had gone over to his enemies.
He now left Pyrrhus to act as his lieutenant in Greece, and himself sailed to the Chersonese. Here he enriched his troops at the expense of Lysimachus by plundering the country, and thus soon found means to collect a considerable army.
The other kings paid little heed to Lysimachus, thinking him no better a man than Demetrius and more to be feared only because he was more powerful. The other kings paid little heed to Lysimachus, thinking him no better a man than Demetrius and more to be feared only because he was more powerful.
Not long after this, Seleucus sent an embassy to Demetrius to propose a marriage between Demetrius's daughter Stratonike, born of his wife Phila, and Seleucus himself. Seleucus already had one son, Antiochus, by his wife Apama, a Persian lady, but he thought that his empire was large enough to support more than one heir, and he desired to form an alliance with Demetrius because Lysimachus had recently taken to wife one of Ptolemy's daughters for himself and another for his son Agathocles.
To Demetrius this proposal was a most unexpected piece of good fortune. He placed his daughter on board ship and sailed with his entire fleet to Syria. On the way he was forced to land often for supplies, especially on the coast of Cilicia, which province, after the battle wherein Antigonus fell, had been bestowed upon Pleistarchus, the brother of Cassander.
Pleistarchus took offense at Demetrius's intrusion into his territory and hurried to Macedonia to complain to Cassander that Seleucus was betraying the common cause by bargaining with their most dangerous foe. Pleistarchus took offense at Demetrius's intrusion into his territory and hurried to Macedonia to complain to Cassander that Seleucus was betraying the common cause by bargaining with their most dangerous foe.
chapter the thirty-second
Demetrius, discovering the intentions of Pleistarchus, immediately proceeded to Quinda, where he found a treasure of twelve hundred talents still remaining. Having seized this, he quickly reembarked and put to sea.
He was now joined by his wife Phila, and soon met Seleucus at Rhossas. There the two princes conversed together in noble fashion, without any suspicion or fear.
Seleucus first entertained Demetrius in his tent in the midst of his camp, and afterwards Demetrius gave him a banquet aboard his great thirteen-banked ship. They conversed freely for many days, meeting without guards or weapons, until at length Seleucus received Stratonike and escorted her with great pomp to Antiocheia. Seleucus first entertained Demetrius in his tent in the midst of his camp, and afterwards Demetrius gave him a banquet aboard his great thirteen-banked ship. They conversed freely for many days, meeting without guards or weapons, until at length Seleucus received Stratonike and escorted her with great pomp to Antiocheia.
Demetrius now made himself master of Cilicia, and sent his wife Phila to her brother Cassander to answer the complaints brought by Pleistarchus.
During this period Deidameia sailed from Greece and rejoined Demetrius, but soon after her arrival she fell ill and died.
By the good offices of Seleucus, Demetrius was now reconciled with Ptolemy and arranged to take Ptolemy's daughter Ptolemais as his wife.
So far, Seleucus behaved generously; but when he demanded that Demetrius sell him Cilicia for a sum of money, and then angrily insisted that Tyre and Sidon also be surrendered, his conduct appeared petty and ungenerous--unworthy of one who had made himself master of all the lands between the Red Sea and the Mediterranean.
Plato's maxim here is proved: that he who desires to be truly rich must lessen his desires rather than enlarge his possessions; for the man who knows no bounds to his covetousness will never be free from want. Plato's maxim here is proved: that he who desires to be truly rich must lessen his desires rather than enlarge his possessions; for the man who knows no bounds to his covetousness will never be free from want.
chapter the thirty-third
Demetrius on this occasion showed no lack of spirit. He declared that even if he had lost ten thousand fields like Ipsus, he would never consent to purchase Seleucus for his son-in-law.
He strengthened the garrisons of the cities; and hearing that Lachares, taking advantage of the factions in Athens, had made himself despot of that city, he thought that, if he only showed himself, he might easily regain it. He strengthened the garrisons of the cities; and hearing that Lachares, taking advantage of the factions in Athens, had made himself despot of that city, he thought that, if he only showed himself, he might easily regain it.
He crossed the sea safely with a great fleet; but when off the coast of Attica he encountered a violent storm, in which most of his ships and a great number of his men were lost.
He himself escaped unhurt and immediately began to make war on the Athenians. As he could not accomplish anything of importance, he sent his lieutenants to collect another fleet, while he himself went to Peloponnesus.
Here he laid siege to Messene, and during an assault nearly lost his life, for he was struck full in the face by a dart from a catapult, which pierced through his jaw into his mouth.
He recovered from his wound, received the submission of several insurgent cities, and returned to Attica, where he made himself master of Eleusis and Rhamnus and ravaged the surrounding country. He recovered from his wound, received the submission of several insurgent cities, and returned to Attica, where he made himself master of Eleusis and Rhamnus and ravaged the surrounding country.
He captured a ship laden with wheat bound for Athens, and hanged the captain and the pilot. This frightened the merchants so greatly that they avoided Athens altogether, and a terrible famine followed.
A medimnus of salt was sold for forty drachmas, and a modius of corn for three hundred drachmas. A medimnus of salt was sold for forty drachmas, and a modius of corn for three hundred drachmas.
The Athenians gained a momentary respite when a fleet of one hundred and fifty ships, sent by Ptolemy, appeared near Aegina. But soon Demetrius gathered a fleet of three hundred ships from Peloponnesus and Cyprus, before which Ptolemy's vessels withdrew.
Lachares now escaped, leaving the city to its fate. Lachares now escaped, leaving the city to its fate.
chapter the thirty-fourth
The Athenians, although they had decreed that anyone who proposed to make peace with Demetrius should be put to death, now immediately opened their nearest gates and sent an embassy to him, driven not by hope but by starvation.
It was said that, among other painful scenes, a father and son were sitting in the same room without hope of survival when a dead mouse fell from the roof; and they sprang up and fought for it.
We are told that during this time the philosopher Epicurus kept his disciples alive by measuring out to them each day a fixed allowance of beans. We are told that during this time the philosopher Epicurus kept his disciples alive by measuring out to them each day a fixed allowance of beans.
Such was the state of the city when Demetrius entered.
He ordered the Athenians to assemble in the theatre, occupied the stage with armed men, surrounded the actors' place with his bodyguard, and appeared like a tragic actor entering from the back.
The Athenians were terrified; but the first words of his address relieved their fears. He spoke mildly, gently complained of their conduct, and announced his forgiveness.
He distributed one hundred thousand medimni of wheat and appointed the most popular citizens to the magistracies. He distributed one hundred thousand medimni of wheat and appointed the most popular citizens to the magistracies.
Dromocleides the orator, seeing how eager the people were to outdo all former praises, proposed that the ports of Peiraeus and Munychia should be handed over to King Demetrius. When this passed, Demetrius placed a garrison in the Museum, intending thereby to restrain the people should they become restless and divert his attention from his other enterprises. Dromocleides the orator, seeing how eager the people were to outdo all former praises, proposed that the ports of Peiraeus and Munychia should be handed over to King Demetrius. When this passed, Demetrius placed a garrison in the Museum, intending thereby to restrain the people should they become restless and divert his attention from his other enterprises.
chapter the thirty-fifth
Being now master of Athens, Demetrius immediately began to attack Lacedaemon.
He met the Spartan king Archidamus near Mantinea, defeated him, and invaded Laconia, driving his beaten army before him.
He fought a second battle before the walls of Sparta itself, killed two hundred Spartans, and took five hundred prisoners; and he very nearly took the city, which had never before been captured. He fought a second battle before the walls of Sparta itself, killed two hundred Spartans, and took five hundred prisoners; and he very nearly took the city, which had never before been captured.
Fortune, however, continually produced in the life of Demetrius more sudden and violent changes than in that of any other prince. He rose repeatedly from the depths of poverty to the heights of power, and again as swiftly fell.
When his fortunes were lowest, he would repeat the verse of Aeschylus:
"Thou raisest up, and thou dost bring me down. "
So now, when all seemed to prosper--his empire expanding and his achievements multiplying--news suddenly arrived that Lysimachus had taken all the cities in Asia that belonged to him, and that Ptolemy had made himself master of Cyprus except Salamis, which he was besieging, where the mother and children of Demetrius were.
Yet, like the woman in the poet Archilochus, who offered water in one hand while concealing fire in the other, the fortune of Demetrius, after dragging him down from the conquest of Sparta, at once presented him with fresh hopes of a great and daring enterprise. Yet, like the woman in the poet Archilochus, who offered water in one hand while concealing fire in the other, the fortune of Demetrius, after dragging him down from the conquest of Sparta, at once presented him with fresh hopes of a great and daring enterprise.
chapter the thirty-sixth
After the death of Kassander, his eldest son Philip ascended the throne, but not long afterwards he died. Then the two younger sons contended for the crown. One of them, Antipater, murdered his mother Thessalonike; upon this the other invited Pyrrhus from Epirus, and Demetrius from Peloponnesus, to support his claim. After the death of Kassander, his eldest son Philip ascended the throne, but not long afterwards he died. Then the two younger sons contended for the crown. One of them, Antipater, murdered his mother Thessalonike; upon this the other invited Pyrrhus from Epirus, and Demetrius from Peloponnesus, to support his claim.
Pyrrhus was the first to arrive, and demanded so large a portion of the kingdom of Macedonia as the price of his assistance that Alexander, the young prince, soon began to fear him. When Demetrius arrived with his army, Alexander feared him still more, because of his great renown. Pyrrhus was the first to arrive, and demanded so large a portion of the kingdom of Macedonia as the price of his assistance that Alexander, the young prince, soon began to fear him. When Demetrius arrived with his army, Alexander feared him still more, because of his great renown.
He met Demetrius near Dium, welcomed him as a guest, and then hinted that he had no further need of his services. Mutual suspicion arose. Demetrius, when invited to a banquet, was warned that Alexander meant to assassinate him during the drinking. Demetrius calmly ordered his officers to keep the troops under arms, and brought into the dining hall so many of his own attendants that Alexander dared attempt nothing. He met Demetrius near Dium, welcomed him as a guest, and then hinted that he had no further need of his services. Mutual suspicion arose. Demetrius, when invited to a banquet, was warned that Alexander meant to assassinate him during the drinking. Demetrius calmly ordered his officers to keep the troops under arms, and brought into the dining hall so many of his own attendants that Alexander dared attempt nothing.
On the next day Demetrius prepared to depart, begging Alexander's pardon for leaving so suddenly. Alexander rejoiced, believing he left voluntarily. He escorted Demetrius as far as the borders of Thessaly. Near Larissa, each invited the other to a banquet, each intending murder. On the next day Demetrius prepared to depart, begging Alexander's pardon for leaving so suddenly. Alexander rejoiced, believing he left voluntarily. He escorted Demetrius as far as the borders of Thessaly. Near Larissa, each invited the other to a banquet, each intending murder.
This resolved Alexander's fate. He attended the banquet of Demetrius. When Demetrius rose suddenly, Alexander rose also and followed him. As he passed through the doorway, Demetrius said quietly to the guards, "Kill the man who follows me, " and walked on. Alexander was cut down, as were the friends who rushed to assist him. One of them, dying, remarked that Demetrius had anticipated them by one day. This resolved Alexander's fate. He attended the banquet of Demetrius. When Demetrius rose suddenly, Alexander rose also and followed him. As he passed through the doorway, Demetrius said quietly to the guards, "Kill the man who follows me, " and walked on. Alexander was cut down, as were the friends who rushed to assist him. One of them, dying, remarked that Demetrius had anticipated them by one day.
chapter the thirty-seven
That night was one of tumult and terror. At dawn the Macedonians, expecting an attack from Demetrius, saw none. When he announced his wish to explain his actions, they met him with goodwill. Seeing Antipater hated for matricide, and unable to find a better sovereign, they saluted Demetrius as King of the Macedonians and conducted him into Macedonia. That night was one of tumult and terror. At dawn the Macedonians, expecting an attack from Demetrius, saw none. When he announced his wish to explain his actions, they met him with goodwill. Seeing Antipater hated for matricide, and unable to find a better sovereign, they saluted Demetrius as King of the Macedonians and conducted him into Macedonia.
The new reign pleased the rest of the Macedonians, who still remembered the harsh deeds of Kassander after the death of Alexander the son of Philip. Whatever affection remained for the moderation of old Antipater now benefited Demetrius, for his wife Phila was the daughter of Antipater, and his son by her, now nearly grown, accompanied him and stood as rightful heir to the kingdom. The new reign pleased the rest of the Macedonians, who still remembered the harsh deeds of Kassander after the death of Alexander the son of Philip. Whatever affection remained for the moderation of old Antipater now benefited Demetrius, for his wife Phila was the daughter of Antipater, and his son by her, now nearly grown, accompanied him and stood as rightful heir to the kingdom.
chapter the thirty-eight
Soon Demetrius heard joyful news. His mother and children had been released by Ptolemy and honourably treated. He also heard that his daughter Stratonike, given in marriage to Seleukus, now lived with Antiochus the son of Seleukus, under the title "queen of the native tribes of the interior. "
Antiochus had fallen violently in love with Stratonike, though she had already borne a child to his father. Unable to overcome his passion, he resolved to die. Under pretence of illness, he refused nourishment and wasted away. Antiochus had fallen violently in love with Stratonike, though she had already borne a child to his father. Unable to overcome his passion, he resolved to die. Under pretence of illness, he refused nourishment and wasted away.
Erasistratus the physician perceived that he was in love, but not with whom. He watched Antiochus whenever visitors entered. His condition never changed unless Stratonike entered. Then all the symptoms described by Sappho appeared: stammering voice, fiery blush, dimmed eyesight, sweating, wild pulse, and then pallor as passion overwhelmed him. Erasistratus the physician perceived that he was in love, but not with whom. He watched Antiochus whenever visitors entered. His condition never changed unless Stratonike entered. Then all the symptoms described by Sappho appeared: stammering voice, fiery blush, dimmed eyesight, sweating, wild pulse, and then pallor as passion overwhelmed him.
Erasistratus reasoned that no other woman but Stratonike could produce such despair. Yet he dared not name her at once. At last he ventured to tell Seleukus that the prince was dying of hopeless passion -- and that it was for Erasistratus's own wife. Erasistratus reasoned that no other woman but Stratonike could produce such despair. Yet he dared not name her at once. At last he ventured to tell Seleukus that the prince was dying of hopeless passion -- and that it was for Erasistratus's own wife.
Seleukus urged him to surrender his wife and marry her to the prince. "No, " answered Erasistratus. "You yourself would not do this if Antiochus were in love with Stratonike. "
"It is what I would most desire, " replied Seleukus with tears, "for I would gladly give up even my crown to save my son. "
Thus encouraged, Erasistratus revealed the truth. Seleukus summoned an assembly and declared that he would give Stratonike in marriage to Antiochus, and with her the sovereignty of the nations of the interior. He asked his friends to persuade her to accept this as honourable and lawful, since it was the king's will. Thus, in this extraordinary manner, Antiochus was married to Stratonike. Thus encouraged, Erasistratus revealed the truth. Seleukus summoned an assembly and declared that he would give Stratonike in marriage to Antiochus, and with her the sovereignty of the nations of the interior. He asked his friends to persuade her to accept this as honourable and lawful, since it was the king's will. Thus, in this extraordinary manner, Antiochus was married to Stratonike.
chapter the thirty-nine
After gaining Macedonia, Demetrius subdued Thessaly also. Master of nearly the whole Peloponnesus, with Megara and Athens besides, he marched against Boeotia. After gaining Macedonia, Demetrius subdued Thessaly also. Master of nearly the whole Peloponnesus, with Megara and Athens besides, he marched against Boeotia.
At first the Boeotians agreed to alliance. Later, when Kleonymus of Sparta came to Thebes with an army, and Pisis of Thespi stirred them to recover liberty, they revolted. Demetrius at once brought up his great siege engines. At first the Boeotians agreed to alliance. Later, when Kleonymus of Sparta came to Thebes with an army, and Pisis of Thespi stirred them to recover liberty, they revolted. Demetrius at once brought up his great siege engines.
Kleonymus fled secretly in terror, and the Boeotians surrendered. Though Demetrius garrisoned their cities, levied heavy money, and left Hieronymus the historian as governor, he seemed mild, especially in his treatment of Pisis, whom he dismissed unharmed and even made polemarch of Thespi. Kleonymus fled secretly in terror, and the Boeotians surrendered. Though Demetrius garrisoned their cities, levied heavy money, and left Hieronymus the historian as governor, he seemed mild, especially in his treatment of Pisis, whom he dismissed unharmed and even made polemarch of Thespi.
Soon after, Lysimachus was taken prisoner by Dromichaetes. Demetrius marched rapidly hoping to seize Thrace undefended. But the Boeotians revolted again when he was gone, and news reached him that Lysimachus had already been released. Enraged, he returned and, finding the Boeotians defeated in battle by his son Antigonus, he again besieged Thebes. Soon after, Lysimachus was taken prisoner by Dromichaetes. Demetrius marched rapidly hoping to seize Thrace undefended. But the Boeotians revolted again when he was gone, and news reached him that Lysimachus had already been released. Enraged, he returned and, finding the Boeotians defeated in battle by his son Antigonus, he again besieged Thebes.
chapter the forty
Meanwhile Pyrrhus overran Thessaly and advanced to Thermopylae. Demetrius left Antigonus to continue the siege and marched to confront Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus retreated, and Demetrius returned to press the siege of Thebes. Meanwhile Pyrrhus overran Thessaly and advanced to Thermopylae. Demetrius left Antigonus to continue the siege and marched to confront Pyrrhus. Pyrrhus retreated, and Demetrius returned to press the siege of Thebes.
He brought up his huge machine, the "city-taker, " which moved only with great difficulty, requiring two months to advance scarcely two furlongs. The Boeotians fought bravely. Demetrius forced unnecessary battles out of arrogance; after one such fight Antigonus grieved at the losses said:
"My father, why do we allow so many men to perish without need? "
Demetrius answered sharply:
"Why are you troubled? Do you pay the dead? "
Yet to show he was not careless only of others' blood, he fought among the foremost and was struck by a dart from a catapult that pierced his neck. Though suffering greatly, he continued until he took Thebes a second time. Yet to show he was not careless only of others' blood, he fought among the foremost and was struck by a dart from a catapult that pierced his neck. Though suffering greatly, he continued until he took Thebes a second time.
When he entered, the terror of the citizens was extreme. Yet he put to death only thirteen and banished a few. Thus Thebes was taken twice within less than ten years since its rebuilding. When he entered, the terror of the citizens was extreme. Yet he put to death only thirteen and banished a few. Thus Thebes was taken twice within less than ten years since its rebuilding.
When the Pythian games were due, Demetrius made a startling innovation. Since the passes to Delphi were held by the Aetolians, he celebrated the Pythian games in Athens, declaring that Apollo, patron of the Athenians, should receive special honour there. When the Pythian games were due, Demetrius made a startling innovation. Since the passes to Delphi were held by the Aetolians, he celebrated the Pythian games in Athens, declaring that Apollo, patron of the Athenians, should receive special honour there.
chapter the forty-one
Demetrius returned to Macedonia. Disdaining a life of repose, and finding his subjects more manageable during campaigns than at home, he marched against the Aetolians. After ravaging their land, he left Pantauchus there with part of the army and went to confront Pyrrhus. Demetrius returned to Macedonia. Disdaining a life of repose, and finding his subjects more manageable during campaigns than at home, he marched against the Aetolians. After ravaging their land, he left Pantauchus there with part of the army and went to confront Pyrrhus.
The two missed each other: Demetrius entered Epirus and ravaged the land, while Pyrrhus met Pantauchus and fought him. Pyrrhus wounded Pantauchus in single combat, routed his forces, and took five thousand prisoners. The two missed each other: Demetrius entered Epirus and ravaged the land, while Pyrrhus met Pantauchus and fought him. Pyrrhus wounded Pantauchus in single combat, routed his forces, and took five thousand prisoners.
This harmed Demetrius more than any defeat; for Pyrrhus was admired far more for valour than hated for injuries. The Macedonians began to say openly that he alone revived the image of Alexander's courage, while Demetrius imitated only the theatrical pomp. This harmed Demetrius more than any defeat; for Pyrrhus was admired far more for valour than hated for injuries. The Macedonians began to say openly that he alone revived the image of Alexander's courage, while Demetrius imitated only the theatrical pomp.
Demetrius indeed took extravagant airs, wearing magnificent purple robes and hats with a double crown, and shoes of purple felt embroidered with gold. A vast cloak was being embroidered for him with the world and the heavenly bodies depicted upon it. It remained unfinished when he lost his crown, and no successor ever dared wear it. Demetrius indeed took extravagant airs, wearing magnificent purple robes and hats with a double crown, and shoes of purple felt embroidered with gold. A vast cloak was being embroidered for him with the world and the heavenly bodies depicted upon it. It remained unfinished when he lost his crown, and no successor ever dared wear it.
chapter the forty-two
The Macedonians were angered by such pomp, and by the difficulty of gaining audience with him. He even kept an Athenian embassy waiting two full years. When Sparta sent a single ambassador, Demetrius took it as disrespect. The Macedonians were angered by such pomp, and by the difficulty of gaining audience with him. He even kept an Athenian embassy waiting two full years. When Sparta sent a single ambassador, Demetrius took it as disrespect.
"What is this? The Spartans send one ambassador? "
"Yes, " replied the envoy, "one ambassador to one king. "
One day Demetrius appeared unusually affable. Many ran to present written petitions. He took them all, placed them in his cloak, and the hopeful petitioners followed him. But when he reached the bridge over the river Axius, he shook the papers into the water. One day Demetrius appeared unusually affable. Many ran to present written petitions. He took them all, placed them in his cloak, and the hopeful petitioners followed him. But when he reached the bridge over the river Axius, he shook the papers into the water.
Thus he exasperated the Macedonians, who compared him unfavourably with the gentle Philip. Thus he exasperated the Macedonians, who compared him unfavourably with the gentle Philip.
Once an old woman begged for a hearing. When he refused, she cried, "Then be king no more! " Ashamed, he returned and afterwards for many days gave audience to all, beginning with her. Once an old woman begged for a hearing. When he refused, she cried, "Then be king no more! " Ashamed, he returned and afterwards for many days gave audience to all, beginning with her.
Nothing suits a king more than justice. Yet Demetrius rejoiced in a title opposite to that of Zeus himself. Zeus is the "preserver of cities. " Demetrius was called "the besieger. " In reverencing brute force he allowed the worse part of his nature to prevail, and his fame became stained. Nothing suits a king more than justice. Yet Demetrius rejoiced in a title opposite to that of Zeus himself. Zeus is the "preserver of cities. " Demetrius was called "the besieger. " In reverencing brute force he allowed the worse part of his nature to prevail, and his fame became stained.
chapter the forty-three
While Demetrius lay dangerously ill at Pella, Pyrrhus invaded Macedonia and overran it to Edessa. Upon recovering, Demetrius drove him out and made peace, unwilling to be entangled in petty border wars that hindered his greater designs. While Demetrius lay dangerously ill at Pella, Pyrrhus invaded Macedonia and overran it to Edessa. Upon recovering, Demetrius drove him out and made peace, unwilling to be entangled in petty border wars that hindered his greater designs.
He planned a colossal enterprise: to recover the whole empire of his father. He gathered ninety-eight thousand foot soldiers and nearly twelve thousand horse; and at Peiraeus, Corinth, Chalcis, and the ports near Pella he built a fleet of five hundred ships. He personally supervised the works. He planned a colossal enterprise: to recover the whole empire of his father. He gathered ninety-eight thousand foot soldiers and nearly twelve thousand horse; and at Peiraeus, Corinth, Chalcis, and the ports near Pella he built a fleet of five hundred ships. He personally supervised the works.
Before him no one had seen vessels of fifteen or sixteen banks of oars. Later Ptolemy Philopator built a monstrous ship of forty banks, two hundred eighty cubits long and forty-eight cubits high, moved by four hundred sailors and four thousand rowers, with room for nearly three thousand soldiers. But this was useless -- a floating building. Demetrius's ships were admirable for strength and speed as well as size. Before him no one had seen vessels of fifteen or sixteen banks of oars. Later Ptolemy Philopator built a monstrous ship of forty banks, two hundred eighty cubits long and forty-eight cubits high, moved by four hundred sailors and four thousand rowers, with room for nearly three thousand soldiers. But this was useless -- a floating building. Demetrius's ships were admirable for strength and speed as well as size.
chapter the forty-four
When this enormous armament threatened Asia, Ptolemy, Seleukus, and Lysimachus formed a confederacy. They sent a joint letter urging Pyrrhus to invade Macedonia, arguing that Demetrius's peace with him contained no pledge not to attack him later. When this enormous armament threatened Asia, Ptolemy, Seleukus, and Lysimachus formed a confederacy. They sent a joint letter urging Pyrrhus to invade Macedonia, arguing that Demetrius's peace with him contained no pledge not to attack him later.
Pyrrhus agreed. Demetrius, before completing his preparations, found himself facing great dangers: Ptolemy sailed to Greece and incited revolt; Lysimachus invaded from Thrace; Pyrrhus invaded from Epirus. Demetrius left his son in Greece and marched against Lysimachus. Pyrrhus agreed. Demetrius, before completing his preparations, found himself facing great dangers: Ptolemy sailed to Greece and incited revolt; Lysimachus invaded from Thrace; Pyrrhus invaded from Epirus. Demetrius left his son in Greece and marched against Lysimachus.
But then he learned that Pyrrhus had taken Beroea. The Macedonian camp dissolved in lamentation and cursing their king, eager not to fight but to desert. But then he learned that Pyrrhus had taken Beroea. The Macedonian camp dissolved in lamentation and cursing their king, eager not to fight but to desert.
Demetrius, hoping to place distance between himself and Lysimachus, marched toward Pyrrhus, believing no Macedonian would prefer a foreigner. This was a grave miscalculation. They admired Pyrrhus's daring courage and leniency, and longed for a new leader. Demetrius, hoping to place distance between himself and Lysimachus, marched toward Pyrrhus, believing no Macedonian would prefer a foreigner. This was a grave miscalculation. They admired Pyrrhus's daring courage and leniency, and longed for a new leader.
Desertions increased. At last some dared tell him openly to flee, for the Macedonians were weary of sustaining his extravagance. Demetrius retreated to his tent, changed his splendid cloak for a dark one, and slipped away unnoticed. Desertions increased. At last some dared tell him openly to flee, for the Macedonians were weary of sustaining his extravagance. Demetrius retreated to his tent, changed his splendid cloak for a dark one, and slipped away unnoticed.
The army immediately plundered his tent. Pyrrhus arrived and took the camp without resistance. He and Lysimachus divided the kingdom of Macedonia, ruled for seven years by Demetrius. The army immediately plundered his tent. Pyrrhus arrived and took the camp without resistance. He and Lysimachus divided the kingdom of Macedonia, ruled for seven years by Demetrius.
chapter the forty-five
After this disaster, Demetrius retired to Kassandreia. His wife Phila, unable to endure his fall from power into exile, poisoned herself. After this disaster, Demetrius retired to Kassandreia. His wife Phila, unable to endure his fall from power into exile, poisoned herself.
Demetrius, seeking to salvage something from ruin, went to Greece and gathered his generals and soldiers. The verse of Menelaus in the play of Sophocles seemed written for him:
"Ever whirling on the wheel of fate My fortune changes like the changing moon. "
At first he travelled through the cities dressed as a private man, without royal insignia. A Theban who saw him thus applied the verse of Euripides:
"A god no more, but clothed in mortal guise, He comes to where the springs of Dirce rise. "
chapter the forty-six
When he again aspired to royal state and began to reconstruct an empire, he allowed Thebes to remain free. But Athens revolted. They erased the name of Diphilus, inscribed as "priest of the saviours, " and restored the ancestral election of archons. They also sent to Macedonia to invite Pyrrhus, fearing Demetrius was becoming strong again. When he again aspired to royal state and began to reconstruct an empire, he allowed Thebes to remain free. But Athens revolted. They erased the name of Diphilus, inscribed as "priest of the saviours, " and restored the ancestral election of archons. They also sent to Macedonia to invite Pyrrhus, fearing Demetrius was becoming strong again.
Demetrius marched in anger to besiege the city; but Krates the philosopher persuaded him to withdraw, partly by entreaty, partly by showing where his true interests lay. Demetrius marched in anger to besiege the city; but Krates the philosopher persuaded him to withdraw, partly by entreaty, partly by showing where his true interests lay.
He collected what ships he could, and with eleven thousand infantry and a few horse sailed toward Asia to detach Lydia and Caria from Lysimachus. At Miletus he received Eurydice, sister of Phila, who brought him her daughter Ptolemais, promised to him earlier. Demetrius married her. He collected what ships he could, and with eleven thousand infantry and a few horse sailed toward Asia to detach Lydia and Caria from Lysimachus. At Miletus he received Eurydice, sister of Phila, who brought him her daughter Ptolemais, promised to him earlier. Demetrius married her.
He won some cities of Ionia by persuasion, others by arms. He took Sardis. Many officers of Lysimachus deserted to him with soldiers and money. But when Agathocles, son of Lysimachus, came against him with a large force, Demetrius withdrew to Phrygia, planning to seize Armenia, stir Media to revolt, and master the interior provinces where fugitives could find refuge. He won some cities of Ionia by persuasion, others by arms. He took Sardis. Many officers of Lysimachus deserted to him with soldiers and money. But when Agathocles, son of Lysimachus, came against him with a large force, Demetrius withdrew to Phrygia, planning to seize Armenia, stir Media to revolt, and master the interior provinces where fugitives could find refuge.
Famine struck; many men were swept away crossing the river Lycus by missing the ford. Yet even then they joked; one inscribed on Demetrius's tent the altered verse:
"Child of Antigonus, the blind old man, What place is this to which we now have come? "
chapter the forty-seven
Famine brought pestilence, and Demetrius abandoned the scheme after losing eight thousand men. He returned to Tarsus, reluctant to harm Seleukus's territory, though forced by dire need to do so, for Agathocles held the passes of the Taurus. Famine brought pestilence, and Demetrius abandoned the scheme after losing eight thousand men. He returned to Tarsus, reluctant to harm Seleukus's territory, though forced by dire need to do so, for Agathocles held the passes of the Taurus.
He wrote to Seleukus a moving account of his miseries, begging help as a relative. Seleukus appeared touched and ordered his generals to honour Demetrius and supply his troops. But Patrocles, a wise friend of Seleukus, warned that feeding Demetrius's army was a small matter; allowing Demetrius himself to remain was a great danger. He wrote to Seleukus a moving account of his miseries, begging help as a relative. Seleukus appeared touched and ordered his generals to honour Demetrius and supply his troops. But Patrocles, a wise friend of Seleukus, warned that feeding Demetrius's army was a small matter; allowing Demetrius himself to remain was a great danger.
So Seleukus marched in person. Alarmed, Demetrius withdrew to a strong position and wrote again, begging either for some small territory to settle or at least winter quarters in Cilicia. So Seleukus marched in person. Alarmed, Demetrius withdrew to a strong position and wrote again, begging either for some small territory to settle or at least winter quarters in Cilicia.
chapter the forty-eight
Seleukus mistrusted all proposals. He allowed him two months in Cataonia but demanded hostages, and meanwhile secured the passes into Syria. Seleukus mistrusted all proposals. He allowed him two months in Cataonia but demanded hostages, and meanwhile secured the passes into Syria.
Driven to desperation, Demetrius seized provisions by force, fought several successful skirmishes, broke through a garrisoned pass, and gained the road toward Syria. Elated by these small victories, he resolved to fight Seleukus for his kingdom. Driven to desperation, Demetrius seized provisions by force, fought several successful skirmishes, broke through a garrisoned pass, and gained the road toward Syria. Elated by these small victories, he resolved to fight Seleukus for his kingdom.
Seleukus, having refused assistance from Lysimachus and fearing Demetrius's fame and desperate courage, hesitated. Then Demetrius suffered a violent illness that ruined his cause; soldiers deserted, others went home. Seleukus, having refused assistance from Lysimachus and fearing Demetrius's fame and desperate courage, hesitated. Then Demetrius suffered a violent illness that ruined his cause; soldiers deserted, others went home.
After forty days he recovered enough to lead the remnant. He marched as if returning to Cilicia but, once night fell, crossed the pass of Amanus and plundered the plain of Cyrrestica. After forty days he recovered enough to lead the remnant. He marched as if returning to Cilicia but, once night fell, crossed the pass of Amanus and plundered the plain of Cyrrestica.
chapter the forty-nine
Soon Seleukus appeared and encamped near. Demetrius armed his men at night to surprise him. But deserters warned Seleukus. In terror the king leapt from sleep, shouting, "The savage beast is upon us! "
Hearing the noise in the enemy camp, Demetrius withdrew. At dawn Seleukus attacked. Demetrius at first gained an advantage by a flank movement; but Seleukus dismounted, removed his helmet, took only a small shield, and went directly to the mercenaries of Demetrius, showing his face and bidding them join him. Hearing the noise in the enemy camp, Demetrius withdrew. At dawn Seleukus attacked. Demetrius at first gained an advantage by a flank movement; but Seleukus dismounted, removed his helmet, took only a small shield, and went directly to the mercenaries of Demetrius, showing his face and bidding them join him.
They knew he had long spared them, and had delayed battle out of regard for them, not for Demetrius. They saluted him as King and joined him. Demetrius understood this was final ruin. They knew he had long spared them, and had delayed battle out of regard for them, not for Demetrius. They saluted him as King and joined him. Demetrius understood this was final ruin.
He fled with a few attendants to a wooded place and hid for the night. He hoped to reach the sea near Caunus, where he expected his fleet. But they lacked even a day's provisions. He fled with a few attendants to a wooded place and hid for the night. He hoped to reach the sea near Caunus, where he expected his fleet. But they lacked even a day's provisions.
Sosigenes arrived with four hundred gold pieces. They attempted to cross the mountains under cover of night, but seeing the enemy's watch-fires along the heights, they despaired. Returning to their starting place, diminished and disheartened, they debated. Sosigenes arrived with four hundred gold pieces. They attempted to cross the mountains under cover of night, but seeing the enemy's watch-fires along the heights, they despaired. Returning to their starting place, diminished and disheartened, they debated.
When someone hinted that Demetrius should surrender, he seized his sword and would have killed himself; but his friends restrained him and persuaded him to yield. He sent word to Seleukus, throwing himself utterly on his mercy. When someone hinted that Demetrius should surrender, he seized his sword and would have killed himself; but his friends restrained him and persuaded him to yield. He sent word to Seleukus, throwing himself utterly on his mercy.
chapter the fiftieth
Seleukus said it was his own good fortune, not that of Demetrius, which had saved the latter for an opportunity of royal clemency. He ordered a magnificent tent to be prepared. Seleukus said it was his own good fortune, not that of Demetrius, which had saved the latter for an opportunity of royal clemency. He ordered a magnificent tent to be prepared.
He sent Apollonides, an intimate friend of Demetrius, to comfort him with promises. Many, believing Demetrius would soon hold high place, flocked to him. This zeal aroused Seleukus's jealousy, and mischief-makers alarmed him that his army might mutiny. He sent Apollonides, an intimate friend of Demetrius, to comfort him with promises. Many, believing Demetrius would soon hold high place, flocked to him. This zeal aroused Seleukus's jealousy, and mischief-makers alarmed him that his army might mutiny.
Thus, while Apollonides and others brought messages of hope, Pausanias arrived with about a thousand troops, surrounded Demetrius, separated him from his companions, and conveyed him not to Seleukus but to the Syrian Chersonese. There he was held under guard yet treated honourably, allowed exercise, hunting, and companionship, and received courteous messages promising that when Antiochus and Stratonike arrived he would be restored. Thus, while Apollonides and others brought messages of hope, Pausanias arrived with about a thousand troops, surrounded Demetrius, separated him from his companions, and conveyed him not to Seleukus but to the Syrian Chersonese. There he was held under guard yet treated honourably, allowed exercise, hunting, and companionship, and received courteous messages promising that when Antiochus and Stratonike arrived he would be restored.
chapter the fifty-first
Demetrius now sent letters to his son and to the commanders of his garrisons at Athens and at Corinth, warning them to pay no attention to any despatches that might come in his name, nor even to his royal signet, but to regard him as practically dead, and to hold the cities in trust for his heir Antigonus. His son, deeply grieved at hearing of his father's capture, put on mourning and wrote to all the other kings, and to Seleukus himself, begging for his father's release. He offered to surrender all the places which he still held, and even proposed to give himself as a hostage in place of his father. Demetrius now sent letters to his son and to the commanders of his garrisons at Athens and at Corinth, warning them to pay no attention to any despatches that might come in his name, nor even to his royal signet, but to regard him as practically dead, and to hold the cities in trust for his heir Antigonus. His son, deeply grieved at hearing of his father's capture, put on mourning and wrote to all the other kings, and to Seleukus himself, begging for his father's release. He offered to surrender all the places which he still held, and even proposed to give himself as a hostage in place of his father.
Many cities and princes supported his petition, except Lysimachus, who offered Seleukus a great sum of money if he would put Demetrius to death. But Seleukus, who had always disliked Lysimachus, now regarded him with loathing as a savage villain, and continued to keep Demetrius in captivity on the pretext that he was waiting for the arrival of his son Antiochus and of Stratonike, that they might enjoy the pleasure of restoring him to liberty. Many cities and princes supported his petition, except Lysimachus, who offered Seleukus a great sum of money if he would put Demetrius to death. But Seleukus, who had always disliked Lysimachus, now regarded him with loathing as a savage villain, and continued to keep Demetrius in captivity on the pretext that he was waiting for the arrival of his son Antiochus and of Stratonike, that they might enjoy the pleasure of restoring him to liberty.
chapter the fifty-second
Demetrius at first bore his misfortunes with manly spirit, and learned to endure captivity. He took exercise as well as he could, hunting in the park and running; but little by little he neglected these pursuits, and addicted himself to drinking and to dicing, in which manner he spent most of his days -- either to escape the thoughts of his present condition by intoxication, or because he felt that this was the very life he had always wished to lead, and that he had caused great suffering both to himself and to others by fighting by sea and by land in pursuit of that comfort which he had now discovered unexpectedly in repose and leisure. Demetrius at first bore his misfortunes with manly spirit, and learned to endure captivity. He took exercise as well as he could, hunting in the park and running; but little by little he neglected these pursuits, and addicted himself to drinking and to dicing, in which manner he spent most of his days -- either to escape the thoughts of his present condition by intoxication, or because he felt that this was the very life he had always wished to lead, and that he had caused great suffering both to himself and to others by fighting by sea and by land in pursuit of that comfort which he had now discovered unexpectedly in repose and leisure.
Indeed, what is the aim of the wars and dangers which bad kings endure in their folly, unless it be this? Yet they not only strive after luxury and pleasure instead of virtue and honour, but do not even understand wherein real luxury and enjoyment consist. Indeed, what is the aim of the wars and dangers which bad kings endure in their folly, unless it be this? Yet they not only strive after luxury and pleasure instead of virtue and honour, but do not even understand wherein real luxury and enjoyment consist.
Be that as it may, Demetrius, after living for three years in confinement in the Chersonese, died of sloth, surfeit, and over-indulgence in wine, in the fifty-fourth year of his age. Seleukus was much blamed for the suspicions which he had entertained of Demetrius, and greatly repented that he had not imitated Dromichaetes, the wild Thracian, who had dealt so kindly and royally with Lysimachus when he took him prisoner. Be that as it may, Demetrius, after living for three years in confinement in the Chersonese, died of sloth, surfeit, and over-indulgence in wine, in the fifty-fourth year of his age. Seleukus was much blamed for the suspicions which he had entertained of Demetrius, and greatly repented that he had not imitated Dromichaetes, the wild Thracian, who had dealt so kindly and royally with Lysimachus when he took him prisoner.
chapter the fifty-third
Even the funeral of Demetrius had the air of tragedy and theatrical pageant. His son Antigonus, as soon as he heard that the ashes of his father were being brought to him, collected his entire fleet and sailed to meet the vessels of Seleukus near the Cyclades. There he received the relics in a golden urn on board his own flagship, the largest in his fleet. Even the funeral of Demetrius had the air of tragedy and theatrical pageant. His son Antigonus, as soon as he heard that the ashes of his father were being brought to him, collected his entire fleet and sailed to meet the vessels of Seleukus near the Cyclades. There he received the relics in a golden urn on board his own flagship, the largest in his fleet.
At every harbour where they touched, the citizens laid garlands upon the urn, and sent deputies clad in mourning to attend the funeral. When the fleet reached Corinth, the urn was displayed in a conspicuous place upon the stern of the ship, adorned with a royal robe and diadem, and surrounded by armed soldiers of the king's bodyguard. Near it sat the celebrated flute-player Xenophantus, performing a sacred hymn; and the measured stroke of the oars, keeping time with the music, sounded like the refrain of a dirge. At every harbour where they touched, the citizens laid garlands upon the urn, and sent deputies clad in mourning to attend the funeral. When the fleet reached Corinth, the urn was displayed in a conspicuous place upon the stern of the ship, adorned with a royal robe and diadem, and surrounded by armed soldiers of the king's bodyguard. Near it sat the celebrated flute-player Xenophantus, performing a sacred hymn; and the measured stroke of the oars, keeping time with the music, sounded like the refrain of a dirge.
The multitudes who thronged the shore were especially moved by the sight of Antigonus himself, bowed with grief, his eyes full of tears. After due honours had been rendered at Corinth, he deposited the relics in the city of Demetrias, which had been named after his father, and which had been formed by uniting the small villages near Iolkos. The multitudes who thronged the shore were especially moved by the sight of Antigonus himself, bowed with grief, his eyes full of tears. After due honours had been rendered at Corinth, he deposited the relics in the city of Demetrias, which had been named after his father, and which had been formed by uniting the small villages near Iolkos.
Demetrius left by his wife Phila one son, Antigonus, and one daughter, Stratonike. He also had two sons named Demetrius: one, surnamed Leptus, by an Illyrian woman; the other, who became ruler of Cyrene, by Ptolemais. By Deidameia he had a son named Alexander, who spent his life in Egypt. It is said too that he had a son named Korrhagus by Eurydike. His family held the throne of Macedonia for many generations, until it ended with Perseus, in whose reign the Romans conquered that country. Demetrius left by his wife Phila one son, Antigonus, and one daughter, Stratonike. He also had two sons named Demetrius: one, surnamed Leptus, by an Illyrian woman; the other, who became ruler of Cyrene, by Ptolemais. By Deidameia he had a son named Alexander, who spent his life in Egypt. It is said too that he had a son named Korrhagus by Eurydike. His family held the throne of Macedonia for many generations, until it ended with Perseus, in whose reign the Romans conquered that country.
Now that we have brought the career of the Macedonian hero to its close, it is time for us to bring the Roman upon the stage. Now that we have brought the career of the Macedonian hero to its close, it is time for us to bring the Roman upon the stage.