J. P. Moreland
Universals
Central
Problems of
Philosophy
General Editor
John Shand\nUniversals\nCentral Problems of Philosophy
Series Editor: John Shand
This series of books presents concise, clear, and rigorous analyses
of the core problems that preoccupy philosophers across all
approaches to the discipline. Each book encapsulates the essential
arguments and debates, providing an authoritative guide to the
subject while also introducing original perspectives. This series of
books by an international team of authors aims to cover those
fundamental topics that, taken together, constitute the full breadth
of philosophy.
Published titles
Free Will
Graham McFee
Forthcoming titles
Action Paradox
Rowland Stout Doris Olin
Analysis Perception
Michael Beaney Barry Maund
Artificial Intelligence Relativism
Matthew Elton & Michael Wheeler Paul O'Grady
Causation and Explanation Rights
Stathis Psillos Jonathan Gorman
Knowledge Scepticism
Michael Welbourne Neil Gascoigne
Meaning T ruth
David Cooper Pascal Engel
Modality Value
Joseph Melia Chris Cherry
Ontology
Dale Jacquette\nUniversals
J. P. Moreland
\n© J. P. Moreland, 2001
This book is copyright under the Berne Convention.
No reproduction without permission.
All rights reserved.
First published in 2001 by Acumen
Acumen Publishing Limited
15a Lewins Yard
East Street
Chesham
Bucks HP5 1HQ
www. acumenpublishing. co. uk
ISBN: 1-902683-22-6 (hardcover)
ISBN: 1-902683-23-4 (paperback)
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from
the British Library.
Designed and typeset by Kate Williams, Abergavenny.
Printed and bound by Biddles Ltd. , Guildford and King's Lynn. \nPreface and acknowledgements vii
1 The problem(s) of universals 1
2 Extreme nominalism and properties 23
3 Moderate nominalism and properties 50
4 Minimalist realism: Wolterstorff's kinds and
Armstrong's properties 74
5 T raditional realism: properties are abstract objects 97
6 T raditional realism: issues and objections 114
7 The individuation of particulars 140
Notes 158
Bibliography 170
Index 181
Contents\n\nPreface and
acknowledgements
This book is a study in analytic ontology with a focus on issues and
options at the core of the problem of universals. The problem of
universals is actually a cluster of related issues central to debates
among extreme nominalists, moderate nominalists and advocates
of various forms of realism about the ontological status of proper-
ties. The book is intended to be an introduction to the topic and I
have aimed the level of exposition at upper level undergraduates,
graduate students and professional philosophers, and I believe the
book should be of value to all three groups. Given the intended
audience, the book is an introduction, not in the sense of being
aimed at beginning students in philosophy, but in the sense of seek-
ing to focus on the most important issues central to the subject
matter. Because of this focus and space limitations, I have of neces-
sity refrained from addressing certain topics in the study of
universals that have been prominent in the past ten years, specifi-
cally: the relationship between higher and lower order universals;
the relationship between universals and causation, laws of nature
and scientific explanation; the use of moderate (especially trope)
nominalism to do work in various areas of philosophy. As interest-
ing as these topics may be, those who study them bring to their
reflections positions on the more fundamental topics about
universals. And, often, philosophers who discuss these current
issues seem unfamiliar with or inadequately appraised of important
distinctions and arguments at the core of those more fundamental
topics. For these reasons, I have chosen to focus in this book on
those subjects that have been of perennial importance to the study\nviii UNIVERSALS
of universals. There is a gap in the recent literature in these areas on
which I focus, and I have tried to make a contribution to filling
that gap.
Several people have been instrumental in helping me with this
project. I want to thank Dan Yim and Joshua Blander for their
encouragement to undertake the book. I am grateful to Paul Copan
for informing me about the series to which my book contributes,
and I have been helped greatly in the manuscript preparation by
Lisa Vasquez and Robert Garcia. My two editors, John Shand and
Steven Gerrard, have been an absolute delight to work with.
Finally, my philosophical mentor, Dallas Willard, and my
colleagues in philosophy at Biola University have played a special
role in my own philosophical development, and it is a joy for me to
acknowledge them in this way.
J. P. Moreland\n11111 The problem(s) of universals
Along with the metaphysics of substance, the problem of universals
is the paradigm case of a perennial issue in the history of philoso-
phy. The problem of universals is actually a set of related issues
involving the ontological status of properties. Prima facie, it would
seem that properties exist. Indeed, one of the most obvious facts
about the world is that it consists of individual things that have
properties and that stand in relations to other things.
1 It would also
seem that several objects can have the same property; for example,
several things can possess the same shade of red. But both the exist-
ence and nature of properties have long been a matter of dispute
and the problem of universals is the name for the issues central to
this debate.
Those who accept the existence of universals have appealed to a
number of phenomena to make their case (e. g. the meaningfulness
of language, the lawlike nature of causation, the inter-subjectivity
of thinking, our ability to classify and recognize new entities,
gradation and the need for perfect standards or ideal paradigms).
However, historically, the problem of universals has been mainly
about the "One and Many" (a. k. a. "One over Many", "One in
Many"), which involves giving an account of the unity of natural
classes. T o illustrate, consider the following words: RED, RED,
BLUE. How many words are in the sequence? T wo answers seem
possible: either two or three words. There would seem to be two
word types and three word tokens, where a type is a kind of word
that can be instanced in different places and a token is a specific
instance of a type. If we form a set containing the first two tokens, \n2 UNIVERSALS
the unity of the set would seem to be grounded in the fact that both
tokens have the same word type in common. Similarly, if we had
seven red and three blue balls, there would be a sense in which we
would have two different colours and another sense in which we
would have ten different colours. There would be two kinds of
colours - red and blue - and ten instances of colour. A set contain-
ing the seven red balls seems to exhibit a natural unity in that each
ball has something in common not possessed by any of the blue
balls; namely, the colour red. Issues and options regarding the One
and Many have formed the core of the problem of universals since
the time of Plato. What are we to make of sameness of type? What
distinguishes a class of tokens that mark off a real natural class from
a contrived artificial class?
2 What grounds class membership in
natural classes?
However, since the problem of universals is about the ontologi-
cal status of properties, it goes beyond the One and Many and
includes these questions:
• Do properties exist?
• If properties exist, are they universals or particulars?
• If properties are universals, are they abstract objects?
• What is the relationship between a property and the thing that
has it? Is the property in what has it and, if so, what sort of "in"
is this (spatial, non-spatial)?
• If properties exist, can they exist even if no particulars exem-
plify them?
• In addition to properties and concrete particulars (roughly,
individual things like balls and baboons), are there property-
instances? If so, are they simple or complex entities?
• If properties are universals, what account can be given of the
individuation of two entities that have all their pure properties
in common?
3
The chapters to follow take up each of these questions along with
other topics central to debates about universals. The remainder of
this chapter highlights central issues and distinctions relevant to
debates about properties. \nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 3
Issues and options regarding the ontological status of
properties
Attribute-agreement and extreme nominalism, moderate
nominalism and realism
The issues and options in the debate about exemplification can be
clarified by an example of what is called attribute-agreement.
4 Sup-
pose we have before us two round red spots. Suppose further that
each spot has the "same" shade of red and the same roundness.
5 Let
us call the two spots Socrates and Plato. Let us also use red 1 and
red2 to stand for the redness of Socrates and the redness of Plato,
respectively.
Attribute-agreement can be interpreted in three general ways.
First, there is an interpretation called extreme nominalism. There
are several varieties of extreme nominalism, but they all exclude
attributes as they are construed by the realists or nominalists. The
extreme nominalist offers this reductive analysis:
a has the attribute F, if and only if, Q.
Different versions of extreme nominalism will spell out Q in differ-
ent ways.
6 A predicate extreme nominalist parses Q as "the predi-
cate 'F' is true of a"; a class extreme nominalist as "a is a member of
the class of F-things"; and a concept extreme nominalist as "a falls
under the concept F". The fundamental feature of this account of
attribute-agreement and exemplification is its denial that attributes
form an additional category of being distinct from the things that
have them (unless, of course, a new category other than that of
property is introduced, to which properties are reduced, e. g. predi-
cates, classes, concepts, etc. ). Rudolf Carnap, Nelson Goodman, W.
V. O. Quine, Wilfrid Sellars and Anthony Quinton are important
extreme nominalists.
The second major interpretation of attribute-agreement is called
moderate nominalism. A moderate nominalist acknowledges the
existence of qualities but denies that attribute-agreement is to be
explained along realist lines where qualities are universals. The
moderate nominalist denies that the redness of Socrates is numeri-
cally identical to the redness of Plato. Socrates and Plato may both
have a determinate shade of colour that is "exactly alike". But the\n4 UNIVERSALS
two do not share the same numerically identical quality. Plato
and Socrates each has a particular entity that is not multiply
exemplifiable; a little red. Quality instances construed along
moderate nominalist lines have various labels: "tropes",
7 "abstract
particulars", 8 "perfect particulars", 9 "cases", 10 "aspects", 11 "unit
properties", 12 "property instances"13 and "moments". 14 G. F. Stout,
D. C. Williams, C. B. Martin, and Keith Campbell are four impor-
tant contemporary nominalists.
Finally, there are realist treatments of attribute-agreement.
There are different varieties of realism. For example, Aristotelian
realists disagree with Platonic realists over the question of the exist-
ence of uninstantiated universals. T raditional realists like Rein-
hardt Grossmann hold universals to be non-spatio-temporal
abstract entities and realists like D. M. Armstrong take them to be
multiply spatialized entities, located at the various places where the
things exemplifying them exist. But realists are agreed in holding
that when attribute-agreement obtains, it is to be explained by an
appeal to universals. The realist will argue that Socrates and Plato
both "partake of", "exemplify" or "instantiate" a single attribute:
redness. Thus, properties are universals that are multiply-
exemplifiable, and attribute-agreement involves various particulars
having literally the same property. Recent important realists are
Edmund Husserl, Gustav Bergmann, Reinhardt Grossmann,
Nicholas Wolterstorff, Michael Loux and D. M. Armstrong.
Three important phenomena relevant to the debate about
properties
As mentioned above, from the time of Plato realists have offered a
wide variety of arguments in support of their views. However, three
phenomena have been most important in the debate: predication,
exact similarity and abstract reference.
15 In each case, the realist
appeals to what appear to be obvious facts, claims that they have a
straightforward and powerful way of accounting for those facts and
challenges the extreme nominalist and moderate nominalist to come
up with an equally plausible analysis. In this way, the realist believes
that the burden of proof is on the other two schools of thought.
T o probe the dialectic more deeply and relate these three
phenomena to the traditional problem of universals (the unity of\nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 5
natural classes), let us begin with predication by considering the
following true statements:
(1) Socrates is red.
(2) Plato is red.
Realists have a very powerful, direct way of explaining the truth of
sentences like (1) and (2): Socrates and Plato, have a property -
redness - and the exemplification of redness by Socrates and Plato,
respectively, is what grounds the truth of (1) and (2). Moreover, in
relation to the One and Many, the redness of Socrates is identical to
the redness of Plato and, more generally, redness is what grounds
the unity of the natural class of red entities. Entities like Socrates
and Plato are members of this (non-arbitrary) class because each
has the same property which grounds class membership. A blue
spot is not a member of this class because it fails to exemplify the
relevant property. In light of the realist analysis of sentences like (1)
and (2), the realist challenges the extreme and moderate nominalist
to come up with alternative accounts that are adequate to explain
the truth of sentences of this sort.
The second argument for realism focuses on certain obvious
facts about resemblance. Many particulars in the world exactly
resemble other particulars in various ways and these various ways
constitute the respects of resemblance that obtain between or
among the particulars. For example, Socrates and Plato are exactly
similar to each other in being red. Moreover, the exact similarity
between two objects can be made the object of an intuitive act; the
resemblance itself can be made an object of direct awareness, it can
be concretely distinguished, talked about and known. The realist
will explain these facts by grounding exact similarity in a property
exemplified by the two resembling entities that constitutes their
respect of resemblance. Thus, the resemblance between Socrates
and Plato mentioned above is grounded in the fact that both Socra-
tes and Plato share the very same property, redness, and redness is
the respect in which they exactly resemble each other. Related to
the One and Many, the unity of a class of exactly resembling red
objects is grounded in a numerically identical property - redness -
exemplified by each class member while failing to be exemplified
by objects excluded from class membership and that constitutes the\n6 UNIVERSALS
respect in which all members of the class resemble each other. The
realist challenges the extreme and moderate nominalist to offer a
better explanation of exact similarity.
The third argument for realism involves the phenomenon of
abstract reference or, to state it non-linguistically, the fact that
properties themselves have properties and stand in relations to
other properties. Moreover, these facts appear to be necessary,
unchanging ones in that they run throughout possible worlds. For
example, consider the following sentences:
(3) Red resembles orange more than it resembles blue.
(4) Red is a colour.
The realist has a straightforward, powerful explanation for the
truth of sentences (3) and (4) and the states of affairs they describe.
They can claim that the key terms in (3) and (4), e. g. the subject
term in (4), are abstract singular terms that refer to universals. This
can be made explicit by the following paraphrases:
(3a) Redness resembles orangeness more that it resembles
blueness.
(4a) Redness is a colour.
The realist also has a way of explaining the de re necessity that,
prima facie, appears to characterize the relations among redness,
orangeness and blueness expressed in (3a) and redness and coloured-
ness in (4a). In (3a), the relations are internal relations (see below)
among universals in the same quality-order and in (4a), the relation
is a determinable/determinate predication relation between a second
and first order universal. Historically, the phenomenon of abstract
reference has not been an explicit aspect of debates about the One
and Many to the degree that predication and exact resemblance
have. Still, abstract reference is related to the One and Many in at
least this way: redness, blueness, etc. , are all entities in their own
right, they form a natural class of colours (and are not members of
the class, say, of tastes) in that redness et al. have the property of
being coloured that grounds their membership in the class. Put
differently, they are all determinates of the determinable coloured-
ness. The realist challenges the extreme nominalist and nominalist to
offer a better account of the truth of sentences like (3) and (4). \nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 7
Three important issues in the exemplification of properties
Extreme nominalists deny that properties exist and in Chapter 2 we
will analyse and evaluate alternative forms of extreme nominalism.
Moderate nominalists and realists agree that properties exist but
they give very different treatments of the nature and "exemplifica-
tion" of properties. Morever, there are differences on these issues
within the moderate nominalist and realist camps and Chapters
3-5 will examine these differences in detail. For now, it will be
helpful to introduce a taxonomy of the main versions of moderate
nominalism and realism regarding three important issues in analys-
ing properties and exemplification. For clarity, I shall focus our
discussion on the fact that Socrates is red. These three issues are:
• the nature of the "universal" redness;
• the relationship between redness and the quality-instance red
1,
which is a constituent of Socrates;
• the problem of giving an assay of the quality-instance itself.
Let us consider these in order.
The Nature of the "Universal"
There are two major views - realist and moderate nominalist - of
the "universal" redness, with important varieties of each. First,
there is the realist position with four main versions. The first two
(allegedly) realist versions hold that the universal does not enter
into the being of its instances and, thus, is a one- over-many. One
example of this version is model/copy realism according to which
properties are abstract entities that exist outside space and time and
do not enter into the particulars that supposedly have them.
Instead, each particular has a copy of that property.
The model/copy view is not widely held because of the difficul-
ties that have been raised against it. One such difficulty has been
called the Third Man Argument. This argument points out that the
model/copy view of properties and exemplification makes two
assumptions that, taken together, lead to a vicious infinite regress:
• The Non-identity assumption: F things are F in virtue of some
other thing, F-ness, which makes them F.
• The Self-predication assumption: F-ness is itself F. \n8 UNIVERSALS
The non-identity assumption asserts that, for example, several
red things (Socrates, Plato, a brick) are red in virtue of some other
entity, redness itself, which is copied in each red thing. The self-
predication assumption implies that not only are individual red
things red, but redness itself is red.
Many realists accept the second assumption but reject the first
one. They argue that the non-identity assumption only applies to
particulars and not universals; for example, it is true that all red
particulars are red in virtue of some other entity (redness), but
redness itself is red and not in virtue of something else. But the
main point here is that the model/copy view implies both of these
assumptions and, taken together, they lead to a vicious infinite
regress, which can be seen as follows. If we ask of a set of several
red things (Socrates, Plato, a brick) what it is that accounts for them
being red, the non-identity assumption will tell us that this is due to
some other entity besides the red things, redness itself, that makes
them red by being copied in them. So Set 1, composed of three
things (Socrates, Plato, a brick), is a set of red things because of
redness.
But now, the self-predication assumption assures us that not only
are Socrates, Plato and a brick red, but redness itself is red. This
means that we can now puzzle over what it is that accounts for the
redness of all the items in a new set, Set 2, composed of Socrates,
Plato, a brick and redness itself. The non-identity assumption will
demand that our answer must appeal to some other entity, call it
redness
2, possessed by all the members of Set 2. But now we can
form a new set, Set 3, composed of Socrates, Plato, a brick, redness
and redness
2, and ask what it is that accounts for the fact that all
members of this new set are red. The answer will appeal to redness3,
copied by all members in Set 3. This procedure generates a vicious
infinite regress and, thus, the model/copy view should be rejected.
Another One over Many approach that is purportedly realist
takes the universal to be a "kind". Advocates of this position usually
accept the existence of both universals and abstract particulars.
Adherents of this view have been J. R. Jones,
16 the Nicholas
Wolterstorff of On Universals, 17 Michael Loux for universals in the
category of substance 18 and many others. 19 Some would add
Husserl to the list as well. 20 Wolterstorff, for example, tells us that
a kind has two similarities and two differences when it is compared\nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 9
to a set, 21 where "set" is defined in the standard way, viz. as a collec-
tion of members and such that Set A and Set B are identical if and
only if they have all their members in common. Kinds are like sets
in that examples of a kind are members of that kind. Kinds are
universals to which instances belong. Thus, red
1 is a token of the
kind redness. Secondly, there can be kinds of kinds, just as there can
be classes of classes.
Despite these similarities, there are two decisive differences
between sets and kinds. First, no set could have had different
members from those it does have, whereas many kinds can have
had different examples from those they do have. For example,
there might have been some current examples of the dodo,
although it is now extinct. There are possible worlds where a kind
has fewer members and there are possible worlds in which a kind is
extendible; where it has more members.
22 Secondly, while sets are
identical just in case they have the same membership, kinds are not.
Non-identical kinds may be coextensive in their members. For
example, the dodo and the passenger pigeon are different kinds
that have the same number of current members, namely, zero. I
have suggested that this position is purported to be a realist one by
its advocates, but in Chapter 4 we will find reasons for taking it as
a version of moderate nominalism. The moderate nominalist orien-
tation of this position will become clear, I hope, when we turn to
the relationship between redness and red
1.
The next two versions of realism depict the universal as a One in
Many. When Socrates is red, Socrates has the universal redness in
it. The universal is not some perfect particular over and above
Socrates' being red that is somehow copied in or otherwise related
to Socrates. Redness is literally in Socrates as a constituent. The
first variety of One in Many realism can safely be called the tradi-
tional view. It takes universals to be non-spatiotemporal abstract
entities. Universals are literally in their instances, but they are not
at the spatiotemporal location of those instances and the former are
in the latter by means of a primitive non-spatiotemporal tie of
predication. Gustav Bergmann,
23 Reinhardt Grossmann 24 and
Michael Loux25 (in the categories of property and relation) repre-
sent this view. 26
A second version of One in Many realism is offered by D. M.
Armstrong. 27 Armstrong rejects the axiom of localization (no entity\n10 UNIVERSALS
can exist at different places or at interrupted time intervals) and
claims that universals are capable of being at several spatio-
temporal locations at once. The universal redness is at the spatio-
temporal location where Socrates exists. If naturalism is the view
that the spatiotemporal world is all there is, then we can make a
distinction between pure naturalism (all entities have a single loca-
tion) and impure naturalism (some entities have multiple location).
Moderate nominalists are pure naturalists and Armstrong is an
impure naturalist.
So much for varieties of realism. The second major view of
"universals" is a moderate nominalist one that comes in two main
forms. The first moderate nominalist position was advanced by G. F.
Stout.
28 He held that the "universal" redness is not a single
indivisible quality numerically the same in each red thing. Rather, it
is a class of abstract particulars or quality-instances where these are
to be understood as simple entities that can only occur at one point
in space at a given time. By "simple" Stout means basic or non-
complex. An abstract particular is not itself a complex of more basic
entities. Each abstract particular in the class "redness" exactly resem-
bles each other abstract particular in the class and there is nothing
outside the class that exactly resembles each member in the class;
thus, redness is a class of abstract particulars or little reds which
stand to one another in the relationship of exact resemblance.
According to Stout, the unity of the class of reds is not to be
explained by their exact similarity to one another. Rather, exact
resemblance is grounded in a fundamentum relationis, the distribu-
tive unity of the class.
29 On this view, a relation between two
entities presupposes a complex unity into which both entities and
the relation are combined. For example, consider two concrete
particulars a and b existing in the relation above and below. In this
view, this state of affairs presupposes a spatial complex in which a
and b exist in that specific relationship. This spatial complex is a
complex unity and is the fundamentum relationis of the spatial
relation above and below. Likewise, with regard to resembling
abstract particulars, the complex unity which is the fundamentum
relationis of this resemblance is the distributive unity of the class.
This distributive unity is ultimate and cannot be analysed. So
abstract nouns like "redness" are not singular terms for Stout but
general terms. "Redness" refers to a class of reds that are exactly\nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 11
alike and this resemblance is grounded in the distributive unity of
the class. 30
The second version of moderate nominalism has been advanced
by D. C. Williams31 and Keith Campbell: 32 the "universal" redness
is a set of little reds called tropes. T ropes are qualities that are, at
the same time, particulars and not universals. The view differs from
Stout's view in that now the unity of the set is grounded in the
relation of exact similarity.
33
Moderate nominalists differ in their analysis of exact similarity.
Exact similarity is like identity in that it is transitive and symmetri-
cal. It is hard to know what to say about reflexivity. One motive for
making exact similarity irreflexive would be the moderate nomi-
nalist's desire to ground the diversity between two exactly similar
tropes. If exact similarity were reflexive, then a given trope could
be two instead of one. This is not a problem with identity, for even
though it is reflexive, identity only holds between a thing and itself
and not another thing. This is not the case, however, with exact
similarity. If exact similarity is reflexive, it can hold between trope
a and trope b, or between trope a and itself. A moderate nominalist
might find some other ground for why a is one and not two, or they
might leave it as a brute fact. But they could ground the diversity of
exactly resembling tropes by holding that this relation, unlike iden-
tity, is irreflexive. So there is some presumption for taking it as
irreflexive, but I do not think this is conclusive.
In addition to the formal features of exact similarity, there is the
issue of whether to take it as an internal or external relation. D. C.
Williams took it as an internal relation. Gustav Bergmann went so
far as to say that "Provided one rejects the Platonic alternative
(separable universals), one cannot make an articulate case for
perfect particulars without introducing an alleged internal relation
of equality, or, as it is also called, exact similarity".
34 Consider two
entities, a and b, standing in a relation R. There are two things true
of internal relations as they are normally construed. First, if the R
of a to b is internal to a, then anything which does not have that R
to b is not identical to a. If a relation is internal to some x, then
when x loses R, it ceases to exist. Put another way, two or more
entities are internally related if and only if there are properties of
those entities that necessitate that the relation holds. Examples of
internal relations would be "is the capital of" or "is larger than". \n12 UNIVERSALS
Secondly, internal relations are not primitive but, rather, are
grounded in the natures of the entities they connect. As Gustav
Bergmann put it,
The ontological ground of an internal connection lies wholly
"in" the two or more entities it connects. More precisely, it lies
in their natures. The notion is so crucial that I reword it. The
ontological ground of an internal connection is the natures of
the entities it connects and nothing else. Still differently, an
internal connection has no ontological ground of its own.
35
More recently, D. M. Armstrong has defined an internal relation
as a relation which is logically determined by the nature of the
related terms.
36 Armstrong goes on to point out that we can explain
why internal relations are such that given two internally related
entities a and b, there is no possible world in which the objects
remain unaltered but in which the internal relation fails to obtain
by recognizing that internal relations are derived from and
grounded in the natures of the entities so related.
37 If a is larger
than b, then this state of affairs is grounded in the size of a and the
size of b. Another way of putting this is to say that an internal rela-
tion is not a basic entity (which need not be grounded in a further
entity) but is a derived one.
By contrast, exact similarity may be taken as an underived,
primitive relation external to the entities it connects. External rela-
tions are those that are not internal. If two entities, a and b, stand in
external relations to each other, then a and b can cease to stand in
that relation and still exist. This may be the view of Keith
Campbell, but as we shall see in Chapter 3, his writings are unclear
in this regard and he has changed his position during the last few
years.
The relationship between redness and the quality-instance red1
Some philosophers reject the existence of quality-instances and
accept only properties and concrete particulars in their analysis of
properties and exemplification. On this view, if one embraces qual-
ity-instances, then one is a moderate nominalist. Thus, Reinhardt
Grossmann says: \nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 13
A certain view about the nature of properties has had a grip on
the minds of many philosophers. According to this view, the
whiteness of billiard ball A is not the same thing as the white-
ness of billiard ball B. Each ball has its own whiteness, so that
we must distinguish between whiteness
1 and whiteness2, white-
ness1 being the colour of A and whiteness2 being the colour of
B. 38
Grossman seems to think that if a philosopher uses definite descrip-
tions like "the F of A " or "the F of B" to refer to non-identical
entities, then that philosopher is a moderate nominalist. In later
chapters we will evaluate this claim. For those who accept quality
instances like red
1, there are four major treatments of the relation
between them and their associated universals. First, there is what
can be called the traditional realist view, which assays a quality-
instance as a complex entity consituted by three entities: the uni-
versal, a non-spatiotemporal nexus of exemplification and an
individuator. The state of affairs of Socrates' being red is to be ana-
lysed as follows: a complex entity - a quality-instance, moment,
etc. - which is "predicatively" red, is a part of the whole, Socrates.
In this view, then, redness is "predicated" of red
1. This relation
has been called a variety of names: type/token, genus/species, part/
whole and the relation of instancing or exemplification. Three
important features of this relation should be mentioned. First, this
predication relation is one of essential predication. This is why
some philosophers call it a genus/species relation. The important
point here is that the universal "covers the nature" of the quality-
instance. Redness is an essential constituent in red
1. There is no
possible world in which red1 exists and is not red.
A second feature is a very crucial one. Regardless of how it is done,
if the position is to remain a realist one, both the universality and the
particularity of the abstract particular must be given an ontological
ground. For the realist, the quality-instance must be a complex entity.
There have been a variety of grounds given for the individuation of
the quality-instance, including bare particulars, coordinate qualities,
relations like space and time, and Leibnizian qualities like "being
identical to red
1". W e will explore problems of individuation in
Chapter 7. Advocates of this general viewpoint would be Husserl (on
one interpretation), Bergmann and Armstrong. \n14 UNIVERSALS
Finally, neither the universal nor the exemplification relation is
spatiotemporal. When a particular exemplifies a universal, the
resultant state of affairs - the particular having the universal - is
itself particular. This is sometimes called the victory of particular-
ity. Similarly, on this first view, when a universal is exemplified by a
quality-instance, the resultant state of affairs, for example red
1, is
spatiotemporal even though two of the entities that compose it (the
universal, exemplification) are non-spatiotemporal.
An alternative realist view has been offered by D. M. Armstrong
according to which a universal is in the thing that exemplifies it and
both the universal and the exemplification relation are spatio-
temporal entities. The universal is spatially in and, therefore,
located at the same place as the entity possessing it. Aside from this
difference, Armstrong's analysis is the same as version one above.
A third position on the relation between redness and red
1 is a
moderate nominalist one. The relation is often called type/token,
genus/species or kind/case. This view assays red
1 as a simple entity.
Unfortunately, it fails to ground adequately the individuation of the
quality-instance. This position is held by Loux in the category of
substance, and it can be found in Wolterstorff. As I mentioned
earlier, it might seem surprising to identify this view as a moderate
nominalist one, since both Loux and Wolterstorff claim to be
realists. I am sure that both of them would disagree with my label
and we will probe this tension in Chapter 4. T o state the main issue
briefly, since they hold that quality-instances are simple entities,
neither of them adequately solves the problem of grounding
individuation and their positions fall into moderate nominalism.
Since a quality-instance is simple, there appear to be two options
about the kind and the kind/case relation. First, the kind may be a
type of set or collection of quality-instances (without the exten-
sional aspects of sets) that stand to those instances in a relation very
similar to the of set membership. Secondly, it may be a perfect
particular over and above the being of its instances and not a
constituent of them. Here the kind/case relation is some sort of
model/copy relation or a primitive that would seem to bear an
analogy to the model/copy relation. What makes this a moderate
nominalist view regarding properties is the simplicity of quality
instances and the rejection of a constituent ontology regarding
them. Properties as kinds could still be abstract objects like sets, but\nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 15
they are not true universals if such are taken to be multiply
exemplifiable entities that are constituents of their instances.
Position four is uncontroversially a moderate nominalist one.
This view clearly takes the relation between redness and red1 to be
the  of set membership. T o say that red1 "manifests" (Williams's
term) the universal redness is to simply assert that red1 is a member
of the similarity set of exactly resembling red tropes. This view is
held by Williams and Campbell.
An assay of the quality-instance red1
Quality-instances have been assayed in a variety of ways, but from
what we have already seen, there are two crucially different assays
of them relevant to the realist/moderate nominalist debate: realists
take quality instances to be complex entities with their natures in
them as constituents and moderate nominalists take those instances
to be simples.
First, "the F of a" can be assayed as a complex entity. Realists
like Gustav Bergmann would assay "the redness of Socrates" as the
universal redness, the nexus of exemplification, and an individu-
ator; in his case, a bare particular. "The redness of Socrates" is a
fact or state of affairs. Realists are concerned to ground both the
universal nature (redness) and the particularity (red
1 or "this red-
ness") in a quality-instance.
Second, the F of a (e. g. , the redness of Socrates) can be assayed as
a simple entity. J. R. Jones says it is the universal particularized; 39
Wolterstorff says it is the type tokened; 40 and Stout, Williams and
Campbell say it is a member of the set or class of Fs. A trope in this
view is a simple entity that has no other constituent outside the
infimae species that grounds its exact similarity with other tropes in
the same set. Thus, while the trope is simple, it sustains two func-
tions: grounding exact similarity with other tropes in its similarity set
and being individuated from them. This view is stated clearly by
Campbell: " we must construct an ontology which does not accord
the particularizing role to one sort of being while attributing
sortedness (quality) to another. We require one item with both roles;
the Williams system attempts this".
41 Both these functions are
captured by "red" and the subscript "1" in "red1". Likewise, both
functions are captured by "a" and "red" in "a red". The nature and\n16 UNIVERSALS
Figure 1. 1
The nature of the universal
Four (supposedly)
realist views
Two moderate
nominalist views
Universals not in instance
(One over Many)
Universals in instance
(One in Many)
Model/copy
realism
Kind/case
realism
(moderate
nominalism? )
Traditional
realism
("in" not
spatiotemporal)
Armstrong's
realism ("in" is
spatiotemporal)
Primitive unity
of class of
abstract
particulars
(Stout)
Unity of class of
asbtract particulars
grounded in exact
similarity (Campbell,
external relation? ;
Williams, internal
relation)
Relationship of universal (redness) to quality-instance (red1)
Quality-instances do not
exist (only properties and
concrete particulars)
Quality-instances do exist
Two realist views Two moderate
nominalist views
Traditional
realism
(properties/
exemplification
abstract)
Armstrong's realism
(properties/
exemplification
spatiotemporal)
Kind/case relation
(Wolterstorff)
(realism or moderate
nominalism? )
Set membership
relation
(Campbell,
Williams, Stout)
Figure 1. 2
Assay of the quality-instance
Complex state of affairs with property,
exmplification, individuator as constituents
Simple entity with no constituents
Figure 1. 3\nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 17
particularity of a trope differ by a mere distinction of reason and
whenever A and B differ by a distinction of reason, A is identical to B.
Our discussion of properties and exemplification may be
summarized as shown in Figures 1. 1-1. 3.
Universals and philosophical naturalism
The debate about properties can be related to the debate about
philosophical naturalism and abstract entities. Howard Robinson
has claimed that "materialist theories are incompatible with realist
theories of universals. The tie between nominalism and material-
ism is an ancient one";
42 his remark is intended to apply to certain
forms of contemporary philosophical naturalism. Along similar
lines, Reinhardt Grossmann argues that naturalists are at war with
what he calls ontologists.
43 According to Grossmann, the universe
is the spatiotemporal totality of physical entities and the world
includes every existent whatever, including non-spatiotemporal
abstract entities. Naturalists deny the world and only believe in the
universe; ontologists like Grossmann accept the world.
These claims are controversial and not all philosophers would
accept them. At appropriate points in Chapters 2-7, we will inves-
tigate more fully the relationship between philosophical naturalism
and the existence of universals, but for now it will be helpful to
introduce this topic.
Following Grossmann, let us define the universe as the total spatio-
temporal system of matter and (impersonal) energy; that is, as the sum
total of material objects, in some way accessible to the senses and to
scientific investigation. Let us also define the world as the sum total of
everything that exists including non-spatiotemporal abstract entities.
Various issues are involved in a complete analysis of the notion
of "abstract object", but for our purposes two different uses are
important. The first is metaphysical: an abstract object is a real
entity that is not in space or time. Something is in space (or time) if
it has spatial (or temporal): (1) duration (we can ask how big or
how long is it); and (some would say "or") (2) location (we can ask
where or when is it). Abstract objects have neither spatial (nor
temporal) location nor duration. For the naturalist under consid-
eration, nothing exists that does not have spatial (or temporal)
location and/or duration. A second sense of "abstract object" is\n18 UNIVERSALS
epistemological: an abstract object is one that is placed before the
mind by an act of abstraction, by concentrating on that object and
disregarding other things in one's field of awareness. As a rule of
thumb, realists use the ontological sense of abstract object and
extreme nominalists and nominalists employ the epistemological
sense. The naturalist under consideration could accept abstract
objects in the epistemological sense. We will use the ontological
notion unless otherwise indicated.
How does the debate about naturalism and the world relate to
the debate about properties? First of all, naturalists are either
extreme or moderate nominalists. Advocates of these views believe
only in the existence of spatiotemporal concrete or abstract
particulars. They deny that properties are universals. Secondly, all
realists agree that properties can be exemplified by many things at
once; for example, the very same redness can be predicated of
many red things at the same time. Does this mean that all realists
believe that properties are abstract entities; that is, entities that are
not inside of space and time? Let us review three realist views of
properties and exemplification.
There are three main ways that realists have understood this
relationship. The first is the model/copy view, according to which
properties are abstract entities that exist outside of space and time.
Moreover, properties remain outside space and time and do not
enter into the particulars that "have" them. Instead, each particular
has a copy of that property.
The next two realist views are advocated by impure realists and
pure realists. These two schools of thought differ over a principle
known as the axiom of localization:
No entity whatsoever can exist at different spatial locations at
once or at interrupted time intervals.
Focusing on spatial location, concrete particulars like Socrates are
at only one spatial location at one time. They cannot be in more
than one place at the same time. Now, the axiom of localization
says that nothing can be in more than one place at the same time.
Impure realists like D. M. Armstrong deny the axiom of localiza-
tion. For them, properties are spatially contained inside the things
that have them. Redness is at the very place Socrates is and redness\nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 19
is also at the very place Plato is. Thus, redness violates the axiom of
localization. Impure realists are naturalists at heart. Why? Because
they accept the fact that properties are universals; that is, as entities
that can be exemplified by more than one thing at once. But they do
not want to deny naturalism and believe in abstract entities that are
outside space and time altogether. Thus, impure realists hold that
all entities are, indeed, inside space and time. But they embrace two
different kinds of spatial entities: concrete particulars (Socrates)
that are in only one place at a time, and universals (properties like
redness) that are at different spatial locations at the very same time.
For the impure realist, the exemplification relation is a spatial
container relation. Socrates exemplifies redness in that redness is
spatially contained inside of or at the same place as Socrates.
Pure realists such as Grossmann hold to a non-spatial (and
atemporal) view of exemplification. Redness is "in" Socrates in the
sense that Socrates has or exemplifies redness within its very being.
But neither redness nor the exemplification relation itself is spatial.
Properties are not in the concrete particulars that have them like
sand is in a bucket. The nexus of exemplification is not a spatial
container type of relationship.
Thus, the impure realist accepts properties as universals but
rejects them as abstract objects. The pure realist claims that the best
way of understanding what it means to say that properties are
universals is to view them as abstract objects. Moderate nominalists
are pure naturalists because they accept the axiom of localization,
impure realists are impure naturalists because they reject the axiom
of localization but accept the idea that everything is in space and
time is some sense, and pure realists reject naturalism altogether
and embrace abstract objects.
Our discussion about extreme nominalism, moderate nominal-
ism, and different form of realism can be summarized in Figure 1. 4.
Key philosophical distinctions relevant to the problem of
universals
It will be helpful for the pages to follow to close this first chapter
with a brief description of two laws of identity and three meta-
physical distinctions that surface regularly in discussions about
universals. \n20 UNIVERSALS
Figure 1. 4
Do properties exist?
No
Extreme nominalist (Sellars)
Yes
Pure realist (Grossman); Model/copy realist;
Impure realist/impure naturalist (Armstrong);
Pure naturalist/moderate naturalist (MN) (Campbell)
Are properties abstract (outside
space and time)?
No
Pure naturalist/MN;
Impure realist
Yes
Pure and model/copy realist
Acceptance of axiom of localization?
No
Impure realist
Yes
MN; Pure and model/copy realist
Are properties universals?
No
Extreme nominalist; MN
(Model/copy realist? )
Yes
Pure realist; Impure realist
(Model/copy realist? )
Are properties "in" concrete
particulars?
No Yes
Impure realist
Pure realist; MNModel/copy realist
Is this "in"
spatial?
No
Pure realist
Yes
MN; Impure
realist
Extreme
nominalist\nTHE PROBLEM(S) OF UNIVERSALS 21
Two laws of identity
There are two general laws of identity relevant to the problem of
universals. The first is known as Leibniz's law of the indiscernibility
of identicals:
(x)(y)[(x = y) (P)(Px  Py)]
This principle states that for any x (e. g. that person who is J. P.
Moreland) and for any y (that person who happens to be Eileen
Spiek's youngest son), if "they" are identical to each other ("they"
are, in reality, the very same entity), then for any property P (being
5'8", being human), P will be true of x (J. P. Moreland) if and only
if P is true of y (Eileen Spiek's youngest son). In general, everything
is what it is and not something else. Everything is identical to itself
and, thus, shares all properties in common with itself. This implies
a test for non-identity or difference: if we can find one thing true of
x not true of y or vice versa, then x is not identical to y. Leibniz's
law of the indiscernibility of identicals is relatively uncontroversial
in philosophy and from now on "the law of identity" shall be used
to express this principle.
There is another, highly controversial law of identity that will be
an important part of the discussion in Chapter 7: Leibniz's law of
the identity of indiscernibles:
(x)(y)[(P)(Px  Py)  (x = y)]
This says that, for all x and y, if x and y have all and only the same
properties, then they are identical to each other. Many philoso-
phers take this principle to be false because, among other things,
they believe that there is more to a particular than its properties.
For example, we could have two red and round discs that had the
very same colour, shape, size, and so forth. They could share all and
only the same properties but still be two discs and not one because
an individual thing like a disc is not exhausted by its properties. But
as we shall see in Chapter 7, not everyone agrees with these claims.
Three important distinctions
Closely related to the nature of identity is a set of distinctions that
will be of critical importance for evaluating the arguments in later\n22 UNIVERSALS
chapters. The best place to turn for help in this regard is a discus-
sion of three important distinctions by the great medieval philoso-
pher Francis Suarez in Disputation VII of the Disputationes
Metaphysicae. The first distinction Suarez mentions is the real
distinction. This consists in the fact that two entities, A and B (e. g.
my chair and my desk), are not identical and can exist as independ-
ent entities in separation from each other. The second major
distinction is the distinction of reason. This is a purely mental
distinction that does not actually intervene between the entities
designated as distinct, as they exist in themselves, but only as they
are distinguished in thought. According to Suarez, there are two
types of distinctions of reason. First, there is the distinction of
reasoning reason ( distinctio rationis ratiocinantis ) This has no
foundation in reality and arises exclusively from the temporal
activity of the process of thought. For example, we distinguish
Peter from himself in referring to him twice when we say "Peter is
Peter". Second, there is the distinction of reasoned reason (distinc-
tio rationis ratiocinatae). This distinction arises from an inadequate
conception by the mind of the object. Assuming with Suarez that
God is a simple entity, an example here would be the distinction
between God's mercy and justice. The key thing about any distinc-
tion of reason is this: if A and B differ by a distinction of reason (of
either type), then A is identical to B.
Suarez goes on to argue that there is a third distinction that
occupies a middle ground between the first two. This distinction is
an actual one found in nature prior to any activity of the mind but
it is not as great as the real distinction between two separable
entities. Suarez says the modal distinction intervenes between an
entity and its mode. He illustrates this by saying that the modal
distinction obtains between the property known as quantity and
the-inherence-of-quantity-in-a-specific-substance. A mode is a
dependent, inseparable, genuinely distinct entity from that of
which it is a mode. If a modal distinction obtains between two
entities A and B (where B is a mode), there is non-identity between
A and B and inseparability in this sense: A can exist without B but
not vice versa.
These three distinctions and the two laws of identity are impor-
tant to remember while grappling with the issues in the chapters to
follow. \nExtreme nominalism and
2 properties
Realists claim to have a straightforward analysis of predication/
exemplification, resemblance and abstract reference and they place
a burden of proof on extreme and moderate nominalists to offer
equally plausible accounts. Extreme nominalists deny the existence
of properties altogether and offer the following reductive analysis:
a is F  Q
Different versions of extreme nominalism (EN) spell out Q in
different ways. Five such versions are predominant. Predicate
extreme nominalists analyse Q as " a falls under 'F'" or "'F' cor-
rectly applies to a". Concept extreme nominalists take Q as "a falls
under the concept F" or "the concept F correctly applies to a".
Mereological or exploded object extreme nominalists understand
Q as "a is a part of the aggregate of F things". Class extreme nomi-
nalists reduce Q to "a is a member of the class of F things". Finally,
resemblance extreme nominalists treat Q in one of two way: " a
appropriately resembles a paradigm case of an F thing" or "a is a
member of the class of appropriately resembling F things".
After presenting three preliminary issues, the chapter analyses
these versions of EN in the context of predication/exemplification,
resemblance and abstract reference. It is important to bear in mind
that resemblance may be either the phenomenon to be analysed or
part of the analysis of predication/exemplification. With this in
mind, the first four versions of EN shall be presented in the context
of predication/exemplification. Resemblance EN will be discussed\n24 UNIVERSALS
in connection with both the phenomenon of predication/exemplifi-
cation and resemblance and, finally, abstract reference will be
probed as it relates to EN in general.
Preliminary issues
Before investigating EN treatments of the three core issues, it is
important to grasp certain relevant topics.
Infinite regresses
Infinite regress arguments figure prominently in debates about
universals. An infinite regress argument tries to show that some
thesis, task or state of affairs is defective because it involves a
problematic "infinite regress". There are at least three forms of
infinite regress arguments. Form one argues that a thesis is defec-
tive because it generates an infinite series that, in fact, does not
exist. Form two argues that a thesis is defective because it generates
an actual infinite ( 
0) number of entities (or tasks) and this is
uneconomical. 0 may be defined as a set that can be put into one-
to-one correspondence with either the set of natural numbers or
with a proper subset of itself.
Form three involves claiming that a thesis generates a "vicious"
infinite regress. How should "vicious" be characterized here? At
least three characterizations have been offered. Roderick Chisholm
says that "One is confronted with a vicious infinite regress when one
attempts a task of the following sort: Every step needed to begin the
task requires a preliminary step".
1 For example, if the only way to tie
together any two things whatever is to connect them with a rope,
then one would have to use two ropes to tie the two things to the
initial connecting ropes, and use additional ropes to tie them to these
subsequent ropes, and so on. According to Chisholm, this is a vicious
infinite regress because the task cannot be accomplished.
D. M. Armstrong claims that when a reductive analysis of some-
thing contains a covert appeal to the very thing being analysed, it
generates a vicious infinite regress because the analysis does not
solve anything, but merely postpones a solution.
2 No advance has
been made. He says that this is like a man without funds who writes
cheques to cover his debts, and so on, forever. \nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 25
Thomas Aquinas distinguishes per se and per accidens regresses
and claims that the former are vicious, while the latter are not. 3
According to Aquinas, there are two features of a per se regress:
• It is not just a list of members, but an ordering of members in
the sequence.
• The relationship among the members of the series is transitive.
If a stands in R to b and b in R to c, then a stands in R to c, and
so on.
Per accidens regresses may or may not fulfil the first condition but
they do not exhibit the second. Aquinas uses a series of efficient
causes as an example of a per se regress and a series generated by the
"father of" relation to illustrate a per accidens regress. According to
Aquinas, if there is not a first member in the series that simply has
the relevant feature in itself, no other member of the series will
have that feature since each subsequent member can only "pass on"
that feature if it first receives it.
Other philosophers add to this that a per se regress is impossible
because it involves traversing an actual infinite and that cannot be
done. T o illustrate, one cannot count from 1 to 
0 for no matter
how far one has counted, he will still have an infinite number of
items to count. Such a task can begin, but it cannot be completed.
Moreover, trying to count from -
0 to 0 can neither be completed
(it involves the same number of tasks as going from 1 to 0) nor
begun for the reasons given above by Chisholm: trying to reach any
number in the past will itself require an infinite traversal as a
preliminary step. Now in a per se regress, the transitivity of the
relation ordering the regress implies that the dependence among
members runs from the earlier to latter members. Thus, such
regresses are precisely like traversing from -
0 to 0.
When we examine predicate EN, we will look at the difference
between object and relation regresses.
Primitives
Some entities are derivative, that is, they may be analysed in terms
of more fundamental constituents. A primitive is a entity (e. g.
concept, thing) that cannot be further analysed. Virtually all\n26 UNIVERSALS
metaphysical theories have primitives and it is always open to a
philosopher to claim that some entity or other is unanalysable. For
example, some say that personal identity through change is primi-
tive; others reject this and analyse personal identity in more basic
terms (e. g. continuity of memory, character, bodily resemblance).
When one philosopher claims an entity is primitive and another
rejects this assertion, how should the dialectic proceed? There are
three things one can do in association with a claim that an entity is
primitive. First, one can point to the phenomenon itself and invite
others to attend to it similarly in the hopes that their awareness of
the phenomenon will persuade them that the entity is primitive.
Secondly, one can clarify the relations in which the primitive entity
stands to other entities and thereby show the intellectual fruit of
taking the entity as primitive. Thirdly, one can highlight problems
that follow from denying that the entity is primitive, including
rebutting proffered analyses of the entity. Generally speaking, such
a dialectic involves a cost-benefit analysis of the different positions
and decisive refutation is usually hard to obtain.
The truth-maker principle
D. M. Armstrong has advanced what he calls the truth-maker prin-
ciple:
[F]or every contingent truth at least (and perhaps for all truths
contingent or necessary) there must be something in the world
that makes it true. The "making" is not causality, of course:
Rather, it is that in the world in virtue of which the truth is
true.
4
The truth-maker is the ontological ground that makes the proposi-
tion true in the sense that it is the relevant intentional object (e. g.
substance, property, state of affairs) the proposition is about and to
which it corresponds so as to be true. It is important to note that in
cases where a proposition is about dependent, say supervenient
entities, it is the supervenient entity itself, and not its subvenient base,
that is the relevant truth-maker. Thus, on an epiphenomenal view of
mental states, the truth-maker for "Jones is in pain" is Jones being in
pain, not the brain state on which this state of affairs depends. \nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 27
The truth-maker principle seems to be correct, although not all
philosophers accept it. In fact, certain versions of EN require its
rejection.
Arguments for EN
The remainder of the chapter will investigate EN treatments of the
three phenomena of central importance to the problem of
universals. T o close out these preliminary remarks, it will be helpful
to list briefly three main arguments for EN:
• The problems with moderate nominalism and realism are
severe and justify acceptance of EN. We will look at these
claims in Chapters 3 and 5.
• Philosophical naturalism is true and it either entails or else is
best explicated in terms of EN. T wo responses have been
offered to this claim. Some accept it and reject philosophical
naturalism (see Chapter 6). Others reject the claim and attempt
to make room for either moderate nominalist or realist proper-
ties within a naturalist framework.
• EN is justified in light of Ockham's (or Occam's) Razor (a. k. a.
the principle of simplicity, parsimony, economy) and, therefore,
should be preferred. In response, two different forms of
Ockham's Razor should be distinguished. First, there is the epis-
temological/methodological interpretation according to which
one should not make an assertion, assume the existence of some-
thing, or multiply explanations without adequate reason. Given
a simpler and more complicated explanation of something (as
measured by their relative number of entities or kinds of entities,
axioms, principles), one should prefer the simpler if they are
equally adequate explanations because the more complicated
one includes superfluous factors. Now this principle is hardly
controversial and amounts to little more that the claim that
something should be justified if it is employed in an explanation,
assertion, etc. So understood, it applies to all views of universals.
Specifically, realists claim that they do have adequate reasons for
embracing universals and that entities should not be subtracted
without necessity. So while this first interpretation may place a
small burden of proof on the realist, it is negligible. \n28 UNIVERSALS
There is a second, ontological interpretation according to which
reality itself is simply and, thus, a simpler ontology is a more
accurate representation of reality than a less simple one. There are
at least two problems with this interpretation. First, it is not clearly
true and actually seems false in some cases. For example, the
famous ideal gas equation, PV = nRT, is much simpler than the Van
Der Waals equation, (P+a/V
2)(V - b) = nRT, but the latter is a more
accurate representation of reality. Secondly, it is not easy to decide
what criterion of simplicity should be employed. For example, one
ontology may be simpler than its rival in the number of kinds of
entities while the rival contains fewer entities overall. It is hard to
come up with a non-question-begging way to decide which is
simpler in the honorific sense. It would seem, then, that Ockham's
Razor is best construed in the epistemological sense. So under-
stood, it applies to all views, it places a slight burden on the realist
to justify belief in universals, and the issue then becomes the
strength and weaknesses of the different views regarding predica-
tion/exemplification, resemblance, abstract reference and other
phenomena. With this in mind, let us turn to EN treatments of
predication/exemplification.
Predication/exemplification
The realist challenge
Recall from Chapter 1 our two qualitatively indistinguishable red,
round spots, Socrates and Plato. Realists claim that, linguistically,
sentences such as "Socrates is red" employ the predicate term
"red" that in some way or another picks out a universal, redness,
that all and only red things possess. Put in a directly ontological
way, realists claim that when one attends to Socrates and Plato,
one can see that: Socrates' redness is not identical either to Socra-
tes or to any other feature of Socrates; and the redness in Socrates
appears to be identical to the redness of Plato. These claims are
best explained by saying that Socrates and Plato have the same
entity, redness, in them and this "way of being in" is properly
called the nexus of exemplification. The realist challenges
extreme nominalists to provide alternative analyses of predica-
tion/exemplification. \nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 29
Predicate, concept, and mereological extreme nominalism
Predicate, concept, and mereological EN have enough features in
common to allow us to analyse them together. Arguably, these are
the weakest versions of EN and at least two criticisms have been
widely taken to be successful against them. For exposition
purposes, I shall focus on predicate EN, the view that "a is F" is to
be analysed as "a falls under 'F'" or "'F' correctly applies to a".
First, linguistic predicates are neither necessary nor sufficient
for specifying a property. They are not sufficient for there are
contrived predicates that express no properties. For example, sup-
pose we introduce the predicate "Rzim" to stand for being the
Empire State Building, being the square root of minus one, and
being the 1995 Super Bowl. Clearly, "Rzim" is a predicate but it
determines no property whatsoever. Neither are predicates neces-
sary. Socrates would still be red in a world bereft of language. The
simple fact is that properties are far more numerous than are the
predicates in human language. Moreover, on reflection, it is obvi-
ous to most people that properties are what make our predicates
correctly apply to reality not vice versa. Put differently,
(1) "Red" correctly applies to Socrates.
is not primitive as predicate EN implies, but rather capable of
analysis:
(1) Socrates is red and "red" correctly applies to Socrates' red-
ness.
A predicate EN could respond by appealing to possible predicates.
In a world without language and where Socrates is red, he could say
that there is a possible world where the predicate "red" does apply
to Socrates. It is beyond the scope of our discussion to enter a dia-
logue about possible worlds. Suffice it to say that the ground for the
possible applicability of "red" to Socrates seems to be the redness of
Socrates, not vice versa.
D. M. Armstrong has raised a second objection to predicate
EN:
5 it is involved in two vicious infinite regresses, an object and a
relation regress. First let's consider the the object regress. Accord-
ing to predicate EN, each red thing is red because it falls under the\n30 UNIVERSALS
predicate "red". Consider this famous statement made by David
Hume (my italics):
When we have found a resemblance among several objects,
that often occur to us, we apply the same name to all of them, .. . After we have acquired a custom of this kind, the hearing
of that name revives the idea of one of those objects and
makes the imagination conceive it with all its particular
circumstances.
6
As the italicized words bring out, predicate EN analyses one type (a
property) in terms of another type (the predicate). The redness of
red things is constituted by their relations to tokens of the word
type "red", all tokens of this word type are so in virtue of falling
under a second order word type, and so on to infinity. This regress
is both uneconomical and vicious since it merely postpones but
does not solve the problem of removing types from the EN frame-
work.
Secondly, the relation regress. Consider all pairs of red things
and predicate tokens of "red". In each pair, the red thing stands in
the falling under relation to its word token, and this relation is itself
a type of relation. The predicate EN may leave the falling under
relation unanalysed, in which case they are stuck with a type or may
claim that each first order falling under token is of the same type
because a second order relational predicate correctly applies to it.
But this generates both a new object regress (the second order
predicate "falling under" itself, and so on) and the regress relation
within our purview (since each first order falling under relation
stands in the same type of relation - a first or second order falling
under relation - with respect to the second order predicate, and so
on). Either way, a type is part of the analysans and the regress is
vicious.
These two objections have convinced most philosophers to
reject predicate (concept, mereological) EN.
7
Class extreme nominalism
A class is a collection of entities called members. T wo classes are
identical just in case they share all and only the same members. \nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 31
Class EN is the view that some object a has the property of being F
just in case a is a member of the class of F things. Moreover, on this
view it is a brute fact that classes have the members they do and
class inclusion/exclusion is not grounded in something more basic,
e. g. resemblance between members. Socrates' being red turns out
to be the fact that Socrates is a member of the class of red things.
At least five objections have been raised against class EN. First, a
distinct class is not a necessary condition for there being a distinct
property. This can be seen by what is known as the companionship
difficulty, where there is a possible world with co-extensive proper-
ties that, contrary to class EN, are distinct. Consider a possible
world with only three green sticky objects in it. Letting g and s
stand for being green and being sticky, respectively, we can form the
class of these three objects as follows: { gs, gs, gs}. Now class EN
implies that there is only one property here since there is only one
class, but clearly being green is a distinct property from being sticky
in spite of the fact that there are not two distinct classes. Again, the
properties of being a unicorn and of being a griffin are distinct,
even though the class of griffins is identical to the null set as is the
class of unicorns and, therefore, identical to each other.
A class EN could invoke a framework of possible worlds to solve
this problem. It could be argued that the class of griffins and
unicorns and the class of green objects and sticky ones will be
different classes and, thus, different properties if we let the classes
range throughout all possible worlds. But this response seems inad-
equate. In addition to problems with taking all possible worlds as
being equally real with each other and with the actual world, there
are properties that are necessarily coextensive (e. g. being trilateral
and being triangular) and necessarily unexemplifiable (e. g. being a
square circle and being a red taste). In these cases, the classes are
identical, and, therefore, class EN implies that the properties are
identical but, in fact, they are distinct. It will do no good to claim
that in these cases the properties are really identical because clearly
they are not; for example, being triangular has, but being trialateral
fails to have, the property of being an angle.
Secondly, a distinct class of particulars is not a sufficient condi-
tion for there being a distinct property, as can be seen in the famous
imperfect community argument. Consider a world with only these
three objects in it: a red wooden thing (rw), a square wooden thing\n32 UNIVERSALS
(sw), and a red square thing, Even though this is a legitimate class -
indeed, it is one in which each member exactly resembles all other
members in the class - it is a contrived class for which there is no
property. In general, contrived classes fail to have corresponding
properties as class EN would seem to imply.
Thirdly, class membership does not determine a property; it's the
other way around. Socrates' being red is an intrinsic feature of
Socrates; one can decide its truth by inspecting Socrates alone. But
Socrates' being a member of a set of other objects is a function of
Socrates standing in relation to other things and one cannot decide
whether or not this is the case by examining Socrates alone. More-
over, at least typical properties form what are called unrestricted
classes; they can have a variable, potentially infinite number of
exemplifications that form variable classes. Now the property itself
does not change depending on how many times it is exemplified. But
the identity conditions for a class imply that when classes change
members they lose their identity. The class of red things might have
turned out differently, but redness itself could not have turned out to
be something else. Again, a framework of possible worlds could be
invoked to solve this problem but the projection of a class of entities
into a possible world seems to depend on which particulars have the
relevant property in that world, and not vice versa.
This last remark suggests a fourth criticism: Some classes are
natural and some are clearly contrived with nothing in common
among their members except class membership. Now the realist
grounds the difference in the fact that all the members of natural
classes have a property in common while all the members of con-
trived classes fail to one. Obviously, this move in unavailable to an
advocate of class EN since it implies that: properties just are classes
of particulars; and there is nothing prior to class membership to
distinguish natural from contrived classes.
T wo responses have been offered to this argument. Some claim
that all classes do, in fact, count for a property so that there is no
real distinction between natural and contrived classes, but this
seems clearly false. The class of red objects is natural; the class
listed above in connection with the imperfect community is not.
Others argue that it is just a brute fact that some classes are natural
and others are not and there is no metaphysical ground for this
brute fact. But this appears to be a mere assertion and, in light of\nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 33
the arguments listed above, it is more plausible to hold that there is,
indeed, a ground for the difference. It may not be the one realists
offer (e. g. resemblance EN implies it is the relation of exact similar-
ity among all and only members of a natural class) but that such a
ground exists seems hard to deny.
Finally, class EN seems to generate both the object and relation
regresses. Regarding the object regress, class EN says that a has the
property F if and only if a is a member of the class of F things. But
now the class of F things must be taken to exist and it seems to have
the property of being a class or, more precisely, classhood. Now a
class EN could respond that the fact that the class of F things has
the property of being a class may be analysed in terms of the class of
F things itself being a member of the unit class whose sole member
was the class of F things. Still, it seems reasonable to ask of this new
class just what it is that makes it a class. After all, it is a type of thing.
Moreover, whatever it is that makes it a class must be intrinsic to
it and not some external relation it sustains to something else (e. g.
membership in a higher class). And it would seem to be the case
that it is the property of classhood that makes this second order
class a class. If so, then the object regress is generated. This is a
vicious regress because at each stage the analysans has a property
and this is precisely the target of reductive analysis, so no advance
has been made.
If a class EN denies that it is the property of classhood, then they
are still committed to an actual infinite number of ascending orders
of classes. At the very least, this is uneconomical, a value EN advo-
cates embrace. Moreover, this regress seems vicious. Why? Let the
class of F things be level 0, the unit class containing the class of F
things be level 1, and so on. Now a class at level n cannot have
members if it does not exist and it cannot exist if it doesn't have the
proper "nature" to be a class. Y et this class's nature at level n
consists in its being a member of a class at level n + 1. If a thing
ontologically depends on its nature (however it is analysed) to exist
in the sense that its nature could exist if it did not but not vice versa
(e. g. being human could exist without Quine existing but not vice
versa), then there appears to be the kind of ontological dependency
from higher to lower entities in the series of classes that constitutes
the per se type regress. If so, then on this alternative, there is a
vicious object regress. \n34 UNIVERSALS
Less controversially, class EN seems to generate the relation
regress. According to class EN a is F if and only if a is a member of
the class of F things. Now this means that a stands in the membership
relation () to that class. Since this is a type of relation (it has several
tokens, it differs from, say, various spatial relations), the analysans
still has a type in it (i. e. universality, kindedness) and this is just what
the analysis sought to avoid. It will do no good to analyse all the first
order tokens of  in terms of ordered pairs; for example, to say that
Socrates is a member of the class of red things is to say the ordered
pair <Socrates, the class of F things> is a member () of the class
of all ordered pairs standing in the class membership relation.
This analysis explicitly employs e as a kind of relation because
"<Socrates, the class of F things> is a member () of. .. " means
that <Socrates, the class of F things> stands in the  relation (a kind
of relation) to the relevant set and, thus, it fails to eliminate reference
to a kind. Therefore, it falls victim to the relation regress.
Resemblance as a phenomenon and a solution to predication
Resemblance may be taken as either a phenomenon for metaphysi-
cal analysis or as part of the correct analysis to the phenomenon of
predication. Taken as a phenomenon, cases where a resembles b
can be analysed in terms of predication, e. g. "red" or the concept
red is true of both a and b (predicate/concept EN), a and b are both
parts of the relevant aggregate (mereological EN) or co-members
of the same "natural" class (class EN).
None of the versions of EN studied so far leaves resemblance as
part of its analysis of predication. In this way, resemblance EN is
different and it may be understood as either an analysis of predica-
tion or the phenomenon of resemblance. In the former case, resem-
blance EN amounts to the view that a has the property F if and only
if either a suitably resembles a paradigm case(s) of F things or a is a
member of the class of all and only suitably resembling F things.
Each disjunct spells out a slightly different variant of resemblance
EN. In the latter case, the fact that a resembles b is analysed in
terms of a and b suitably resembling an appropriate paradigm case
or cases or a and b being co-members of the relevant similarity
class. In what follows, we will examine resemblance EN as a
solution to the phenomenon of predication, since many of our\nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 35
observations are relevant to resemblance as a phenomenon or a
solution to predication. And while resemblance comes in degrees,
we will focus our discussion on cases of exact similarity. In Chapter
3, we shall look at some additional issues regarding resemblance as
a phenomenon in association with nominalism. Some of our obser-
vations there are relevant to EN.
Resemblance EN is clearly superior to class EN in its ability to
justify the distinction between natural and unnatural classes, since
the former offers a clear ground for natural classes, viz. resem-
blance among all and only members of the class. For the realist,
cases of exact similarity where a exactly resembles b are cases
where there is some respect of resemblance, F, such that a and b
both exemplify F. Thus, realists claim that exact similarity can be
reduced to an identity of universal which constitutes the respect of
resemblance. Socrates and Plato are exactly similar in, say, being
red since each exemplifies the very same property, redness. Resem-
blance EN proponents deny that exact similarity can be analysed in
terms of identity of property and take exact similarity (and resem-
blance generally) to be a primitive, dyadic, internal relation that is
symmetrical, transitive and, for some, reflexive.
8 Resemblance EN,
as well as the other versions of EN, are what has been called a blob
theory: while ordinary concrete particulars may be composed of
separable parts, those particulars (and their parts, for that matter)
are metaphysically structureless, undifferentiated wholes that, as a
primitive fact, exactly resemble other such wholes.
Several objections have been raised against resemblance EN. For
one thing, it suffers from certain forms of the companionship and
imperfect community difficulties. The companionship difficulty
arises when you have a possible world with co-extensive proper-
ties, which, contrary to resemblance EN are distinct (or cases of
necessarily co-exemplified properties such as being triangular and
being trilateral). Letting g and s stand for being green and being
sticky, respectively, given a possible world with only three green
sticky objects in it, we can form the class of these three objects as
follows: {gs, gs, gs}. Now resemblance EN implies there is only one
property here since there is only one class with objects that exactly
resemble each other and only each other, but clearly being green is
a property different from being sticky in spite of the fact that there
are not two distinct classes. \n36 UNIVERSALS
Moreover, there is a different contribution that being green and
being sticky make to the resemblances between the various pairs of
these three particulars. The realist can bring this out by saying that
they resemble each other in two respects, being green and being
sticky, and these are properties each object has. But the resem-
blance EN, armed merely with a primitive exact similarity relation,
cannot account for these different respects of resemblance. They
might try to appeal to different paradigms - a green one and a
sticky one - and claim that the three particulars resemble each. But
this won't work because the EN proponent must specify how the
green paradigm is to be used in the analysis, but it is not clear how
this is to be done without making appeal to one being green and the
other being sticky.
Alternatively, one might try to introduce two primitive predi-
cates: green-resembles and sticky-resembles. But these appear to be
contrived primitives. Why? Note that among the myriad of types of
exact resemblances in the word, the resemblance EN must now
introduce a new primitive for each. Now given a new case of exact
resemblance, how are we to recognize the new primitive based on
experience of past cases of resemblance since the new case is a
completely new primitive? The realist does not face this problem.
On their view, there is a pattern to all this. Each pair of exactly
resembling particulars has a respect of resemblance such that it is a
property identical in each member of the pair. Thus, each new
resembling pair does not involve a new primitive; rather, it
involved the identity relation and a new property. By contrast, the
resemblance EN account not only seems contrived, it is uneco-
nomical on two accounts: it multiplies primitives; and it has two
primitive relations - identity and exact similarity - while realism
has only identity. EN attempts to avoid this last point by reducing
identity to exact similarity are highly counter-intuitive, since it
seems obvious that the identity relation is a primitive metaphysical
entity.
The imperfect community argument shows that a distinct class
of exactly resembling particulars is not a sufficient condition for
there being a distinct property. In a world with only these three
objects in it, a red wooden thing (rw), a square wooden thing (sw),
and a red square thing, one could form a class in which each mem-
ber exactly resembles every other member and nothing else. In this\nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 37
case, resemblance EN would imply that there is a property reduc-
ible to this class, but it seems pretty obvious that no such property
exists.
In addition, exact resemblance to a paradigm or membership in
a class of exactly resembling particulars cannot be equated with a
property for another reason. It seems clearly possible that there be
only one red thing in the world. If one objects that in this case, the
red thing would have a host of separable parts that are themselves
red things, so the conceived possible world is not possible, then it
could be pointed out that even if we grant the infinite divisibility of
a concrete particular - a questionable thesis in its own right - it
seems clear that below some minimum extension, colour can no
longer be exemplified. Thus, we can conceive a possible world in
which the concrete particular has this minimum extension. Now
this object is red but it stands in no exact similarity relation. The
problem cannot be solved by appealing to red objects in other
possible worlds, since this seems backward. It is because the object
in question is red that it would exactly resemble these other possi-
ble objects if they were real, not vice versa.
There is a final objection to resemblance EN made famous by
Bertrand Russell, Edmund Husserl and others.
9 It amounts to the
claim that a vicious infinite relation regress is involved in resem-
blance EN.
10 Suppose we add another exactly resembling spot,
Aristotle, to form a threesome with Socrates and Plato. Resem-
blance EN says that each is red in virtue of standing in the exact
similarity relation to each other. Not this seems to be both a type of
relation and the same relation multiply exemplified by each pair of
relata. Thus it is a universal. T o avoid this, one could say that there
are three different exact similarity relations for each pair, but
unfortunately, these three exact similarity relations all stand in the
exact similarity relation to each other, and so on, to infinity. Not
only is this an uneconomical situation, but at each stage of analysis
there is a type, and thus the regress is vicious. The EN proponent
cannot say that at each stage analysis the type is just a collection of
tokens because that does not accurately capture the situation.
Rather, at each stage, the collection of tokens is a collection of
tokens of a new type, and thus type occurs at each level of analysis.
The only way to avoid the regress is to admit at least one universal,
viz. the exact resemblance relation. \n38 UNIVERSALS
Some philosophers, including realists Loux and Butchvarov,
claim that while uneconomical, this regress is not, in fact, vicious. 11
T o understand the issues, let us form a diagram using superscripts
to stand for the level of being at which an entity exists and is related
in the hierarchy and subscripts for the entities related within a level
of being (Fig. 2. 1. ).
Aristotle (1) Plato (2)
Socrates (3)
ES1
12
ES
1 23ES
1
13
ES
2
12, 23
ES2
13, 23
ES
2 13, 12ES3
13, .. ., 13
ES
3 12, .. ., 23
ES
3
13, .. ., 12
ES1
ES2
ES3
Figure 2. 1
Loux and Butchvarov claim that the regress is epistemic/
explanatory. 12 The EN advocate can give an account, can explain
the fact that the three spots are all red by pointing out that they all
stand in an exact similarity relation (ES) at level one. If asked, he
can go on to account for the resemblances among these relations in
terms of ES relations at level 2, and so on. T wo features of this claim
stand out.
First, Butchvarov notes that this regress is only a potential and
not an actual infinite. Secondly, at each level in the hierarchy, the
correct description of the entity in question treats it as complete
without needing to include reference to the next highest level. This
is often thought to be true of explanatory regresses in general. If x
is explained in terms of y, then x is what it is with or without y. This
can be seen from the fact that x would remain in tact if y, not y
were the adopted explanation. One way to put this is to note that
the need for y depends on x actually being a datum and, in general, \nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 39
in explanatory regresses, the order of dependency runs from lower
to higher levels in the hierarchy. A datum must be accepted before
an explanation is required, that explanation must be accepted,
before it requires explanation, and so forth.
Moreover, y can explain x even if we don't have an explanation
for y. If we seek such an explanation in terms of z, then we treat y
as a new datum which remains the same whether z or z is adopted.
As an analogy, consider a chain of people borrowing a typewriter.
Whether or not the chain is vicious depends on one's view of the
correct description of entities at each level in the chain. Suppose a
goes to b to borrow a typewriter and b complies, claiming to have just
what a needs. If asked how b has a typewriter to loan, he claims to
have borrowed it from c, who, having already borrowed one from d,
has one to give to b. Allegedly, at each stage in the chain, the relevant
entity can be described as "a possessor of a typewriter who can loan
it to another". Thus, it is alleged, the regress is not vicious. The same
point is being made regarding the resemblance regress.
Does this argument successfully rebut the claim that the resem-
blance regress is a vicious one? It does not. First, the regress
depicted in the chart above is ontological, not epistemological.
After all, the three spots exist, they actually stand in the first order
ES relations, as do the first and higher order ES relations. There is
nothing potential involved. Either the regress is actual and finite or
it is actual and infinite. Clearly, it cannot be the former since that
would require postulating at some level a triad of ES relations that
either do not resemble each other, which is absurd, or that all stand
in the same ES relation, which is a universal. Thus, the regress is an
actual infinite.
Secondly, at each level in the ontological regress, the entity in
question must exist and be self-identical to do the ontological work
required of it. For example, given the reality of the three spots, at
least part of what makes them the entities they are is that they are
exactly similar to each other. There is no possible world in which
they exist and are not exactly similar to each other. Thus, part of
the description of each spot must include its exact similarity to the
others and, on the EN analysis, this requires reference to the first
level ES relations. "Aristotle is red" is incomplete and a more
adequate description would be "Aristotle is a red spot that by
nature stands in the relevant ES relations to Plato and Socrates". \n40 UNIVERSALS
The same point could be made about level one ES relations.
They must exist or else the three spots could not exist since part of
the nature of the latter is to be so related to each other. That is part
of what it means to call ES an internal relation. Moreover, in order
for level one ES relations to exist, then must be self-identical, and
part of what makes them the entities they are is their exact similar-
ity to each other; that is (on the EN view) their standing in the rel-
evant ES relations at the next level. Thus, at each level, an entity is
what it is (partly) in virtue of, in dependency on the entity at the
next highest level.
Returning to the typewriter analogy, it is incomplete to describe
each person as "a possessor of a typewriter who can loan it to
another". Rather, each person is "a possessor of a typewriter who can
loan it to another who first had to borrow it from another". At each
level, the persons qua lenders depend on being a borrower from
another and this means that, given the nature of the series, each level
cannot be adequately described without reference to the next level.
Understood in this way, the typewriter regress and, more impor-
tantly, the resemblance regress is vicious because:
• entities at each level in the hierarchy are incomplete and
require reference to entities at the next level to be adequately
described so as to capture everything needed to make the enti-
ties self-identical;
• the dependency among members in the hierarchy is both tran-
sitive and runs from higher to lower levels in the hierarchy, not
vice versa;
• an ontological traversal through the dependency hierarchy is a
per se regress and it requires traversing an actual infinite analo-
gous to counting from -
0 to 0. It seems, then, that the regress
is vicious and resemblance EN must be rejected.
Abstract reference
Most would grant that the following sentences are true:
(2) Necessarily, red resembles orange more than it resembles
blue.
(3) Necessarily, red is a colour. \nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 41
The realist has a straightforward way of accounting for the truth of
these sentences:
(2a) Necessarily, redness resembles orangeness more than it
resembles blueness.
(3a) Necessarily, redness is a colour.
The realist claims that the terms "redness", "orangeness" and "blue-
ness" are abstract singular terms; terms that in one way or another
express or refer to a single, abstract universal, viz. redness, orange-
ness and blueness, respectively. Most realists explain the modality of
(2) and (3) by reference to the de re necessity of the internal relations
between and among the relevant universals which are themselves
taken as necessary beings. The realist challenges EN proponents to
provide alternative accounts of the truth of (2) and (3).
There are four different EN strategies for meeting this
challenge. The first, and least plausible, is to agree that the relevant
terms in these sentences are, indeed, abstract singular terms and to
hold that they refer to the corresponding sets and not to universals.
Thus, (2) becomes:
(2b)Necessarily, the set of all and only red things resembles the
set of all and only orange things more than it does the set
of all and only blue things.
It seems obvious that (2b) simply changes the subject. If sets exist,
then they may resemble other sets in being sets, being abstract, having
the same number of members and so forth. But sets are not coloured
and one set cannot be brighter than another nor closer in colour to
one set over against another. Thus, (2b) is not equivalent to (2).
In response, an EN could offer the following:
(2b)Necessarily, the set of all and only red things and the set of
all and only orange things are co-members in more
natural sets than are the set of all and only red things and
the set of all and only blue things.
Sentence (2b) failed because it replaced properties with sets but kept
resemblance unaltered. Sentence (2b) is more consistent, replacing\n42 UNIVERSALS
properties with sets and resemblance with set membership. But this
move fails as well. For one thing, as (2a) makes explicit, (2) is clearly
about colours and the way they resemble each other, and colour
resemblance is just not the same as co-membership in sets. So even if
(2) and (2b) are materially equivalent, they do not capture the same
states of affairs. Moreover, the notion of a natural set in (2b) would
suffer from problems raised above in our discussion of class EN.
Thirdly, consider a possible world in which all red and blue
things also have the same shape, size, taste and weight while the
orange objects have nothing resembling the red and blue ones
except their colour. In this world, the set of all and only red things
and all and only blue things would be co-members in more natural
sets than the set of all and only red things and the set of all and only
orange things, but redness would not resemble blueness more than
it does orangeness. It could be responded that if we take into
account the relevant sets throughout all possible worlds, this objec-
tion fails. But this is not clearly correct. The problem is that
concrete particulars are complex in a way not true of properties.
Thus, the former resemble each other in a larger number of ways
than do the associated properties. For example, all red, orange and
blue particulars are extended entities. So it is hard to tell just how
many natural classes the set of relevant particulars share co-
membership with throughout possible worlds, but it is not at all
hard to tell that red resembles orange more than it does blue.
Finally, in taking sets to be the referents of abstract singular
terms, this first EN strategy identifies properties with classes and
this is false because necessarily co-exemplified properties (being
triangular, being trilateral) or unexemplifiable properties (being a
square circle and being a red taste) are not identical even though
their membership sets are.
A second EN strategy is the exploded object theory. Focusing on
(3), one gets
(3b) Necessarily, the exploded object composed of all and
only red things is a coloured thing.
Does (3b) work? It fails for at least two reasons. First, granting that
it is successful in those cases where the exploded object has the
property possessed by each and every one of its parts (as in the case\nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 43
of red), it won't work for properties where this is not the case.
Consider the exploded object composed of all and only humans.
Now, (3b) is true:
(3b) Necessarily, humankind is a substance-kind.
But the exploded object paraphrase (3b) is false:
(3b) Necessarily, the exploded object composed of all and
only humans is a human thing.
Smith and Jones are human things but the exploded object they
compose is not. Second, consider the scattered location, L, of all
red things. In this case, everything red is L located, but redness is
not L location. Moreover, necessarily, everything red is extended,
shaped and located somewhere, but it is not true that, necessarily,
redness is extension, being shaped or being located.
The third EN strategy employs a reductive paraphrase in which
an abstract singular term (e. g. triangularity) is replace by what EN
proponents call a concrete general term (e. g. being triangular),
which, they claim, is a device for referring to the multiplicity of
concrete particulars that satisfy the term. Thus, abstract singular
terms really refer to a plurality of particulars, not to a single prop-
erty. Sentence (2) now becomes
(2c) Necessarily, anything red resembles anything orange
more than it resembles anything blue.
But (2c) is not equivalent to (2). It could be the case that some red
things resemble some blue things more than they resemble orange
things, since there are other respect besides colour in which par-
ticulars resemble each other. As a reply, (2c) could be replaced with
the following:
(2c) Necessarily, anything red color-resembles anything or-
ange more than it color-resembles anything blue.
But (2c) has been subjected to two criticisms. First, "colour-resem-
bles" seems to be a fabricated predicate like "believes-that-the-cat-\n44 UNIVERSALS
is-on-the-mat", and not one that is really primitive as (2c ) would
have it. "Colour-resembles" does not stand on its own. A whole
variety of shapes, smells and other qualities will resemble one
another as do red, orange and blue. But if (2c ) is correct, each of
these cases of resemblance will require a new primitive predicate.
But it seems clear that we understand the pattern that is common to
all these predicates and this understanding is what permits us to
form new resemblance predicates in new cases. And this ability is
best explained by arguing that what is common to these predicates
is resemblance and what is unique is the respect of resemblance.
Thus, the best way to understand the predicate "colour-resembles"
is to hold that when it is true that x colour-resembles y; this means
that x and y resemble in being coloured as the realist claims.
Secondly, consider a possible world where these three pairs are
co-extensive: "red" and "triangular", "orange" and "sweet",
"blue" and "square". In this world, anything triangular colour-
resembles anything sweet more than it does anything square. But it
would not be the case that triangularity would resemble sweetness
more than it does squareness. There is more to redness resembling
orangeness more than it does blueness than what (2c ) captures
and, thus, it is inadequate.
A final argument against the reductive paraphrase strategy was
raised by Edmund Husserl.
13 His main point was that we are
conscious of universals in acts that are different from those in
which we are conscious of individual things. Thus, the ideal unity
of the former cannot be reduced to the dispersed multiplicity of the
latter. These acts have different intentional objects. Three features
of the acts make this evident.
First, when one intends a group of red things, either at a single
glance or in single acts of comparing each red thing to another,
there is an implicit recognition of multiplicity and an act of
comparison. One notices similarities. When one intends the univer-
sal redness, however, no such multiplicity is involved, nor is there a
need for comparison. We intend the single entity, redness, in its
unity. Thus, the two acts are essentially different because their
objects are different.
Secondly, one never has before himself all the red things there
are. So if redness is just the totality of all red things, then there is
more one can learn about redness. On the other hand, when one\nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 45
attends to the universal redness, one knows all of it because it is
entirely present before him. There is nothing essential to it that is
left out and that can be known only by seeing and comparing other
red things to the one currently present.
Finally, when redness is construed as a multiplicity, the question
arises as to what unifies the diverse particulars. But no such
question arises when one's intentional object is the universal
redness. For these three reasons, Husserl argued that the reductive
paraphrase fails.
The fourth EN strategy is a metalinguistic one most effectively
advanced by Wilfrid Sellars.
14 On this view, sentences with abstract
referring devices are metalinguistic; that is, they do not refer to
nonlinguistic objects (e. g. sets, exploded objects, properties, multi-
plicities of concrete particulars). Rather, they are covert ways of mak-
ing claims about the words we use to talk about nonlinguistic objects.
T o probe more deeply, let us distinguish an abstract singular
term that, prima facie, appears to refer to a single abstract object,
and a concrete general term that, extreme nominalists claim, is a
way of referring to the concrete particulars that satisfy the term.
Examples are, respectively, "wisdom"/"wise", "triangularity"/
"triangular", "humankind"/"human". Now, as a first approxima-
tion, we can understand the metalinguistic view to imply that
sentences with abstract singular terms turn out to be making claims
about the corresponding general terms. For example,
(4) Wisdom is a virtue.
is reduced to
(4a) "Wise" is a virtue predicate.
So far, the metalinguistic view under consideration is not well
developed and, as it stands, suffers from at least two obvious criti-
cisms. First, it falls victim to the object and relation regresses. The
metalinguistic analysans (4a) offered for (4) explicitly contains a
word type ("wise") and implicitly entails that various objects
(Moses, Aristotle) and predicate tokens of "wise" enter into the
satisfaction relation (is true of relation, etc. ). In a way that should
now be familiar, it can be argued that two vicious infinite regresses
are generated. \n46 UNIVERSALS
Secondly, this analysis of (4) asserts that it actually makes a claim
about the English word (or tokens of the word) "wise". Now, when
a speaker of other languages utters the equivalent of (4a), they are
clearly not talking about the English word "wise". Thus, the corre-
sponding foreign language utterances are all completely different
from each other and from (4a), but this won't do since they are all
legitimate, equivalent translations of (4).
Sellars has offered a sophisticated version of the metalinguistic
approach that, he claims, does not fall prey to these two problems.
Regarding problem one, Sellars says that abstract singular terms
("wisdom") may, indeed, be replaced with their associated general
terms ("wise"), but the latter should be taken as equivalent to the
expression "the word '_____'"; for example, "the word 'wise'".
These expressions, he indicates, are distributive singular terms, that
is devices for signalling that a claim is being made about the various
individual tokens of the relevant word. So (4) is neither a claim about
wisdom nor the word type "wise"; rather, it is a general claim about
all the relevant token utterances and inscriptions, the "wise"s.
Sellars also purports to have a way out of the second difficulty.
Instead of ending up with a language bound analysis of abstract
reference, he asserts that a proper analysis requires recognizing
linguistic expressions that are functionally equivalent across vari-
ous languages; for example, terms such as "man", "homme",
"Mensch", "hombre", that are subject to the same linguistic rules,
express the same behavioural responses to perceptual situations,
enter into the same inferential patterns, etc. Sellars adopts a special
form of quotation - dot quotation - to capture these cross linguistic
commonalities. For example, the dot quote term "·T·" is a
metalinguistic common noun which is true of all the tokens of all
the various functionally equivalent linguistic expressions in differ-
ent languages. Thus, (4a) becomes
(4b)·Wise· is a virtue predicate.
or, more accurately,
(4c) ·Wise·s (i. e. all tokens of ·wise·) are virtue predicates.
What should we make of Sellars' account of abstract reference?
First, (4c) changes the subject since, prima facie, (4) is about objects\nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 47
in the world and the features they have. Sentence (4) can be verified
as true by simply inspecting the relevant entities, but (4c) is about
multiplicities of linguistic entities and practices. Sentence (4)
would be true even if there were no language users but not so with
(4c), and if possible predicates are employed to rebut this point, the
realist will argue that (4) provides the ground for the appropriate-
ness of the application of possible predicates, not vice versa.
Moreover, the arguments from Husserl mentioned above could be
applied to Sellars' position.
Finally, it is necessarily the case that (4) is true, but this is not so
with (4c). No specific set of functionally equivalent predicate
tokens had to be about wisdom and, indeed, it is conceivable that
language could have evolved with no predicates for wisdom what-
ever. If it is responded that in this case we would not be dealing
with expressions that are functionally equivalent to the English
"wise", then the realist will want to know on what basis a given
predicate is or is not functionally equivalent to "wise". The realist
says the answer lies in the fact that predicates do or do not involve
expressing or referring to the same property, but this move is not
available given EN. If an EN advocate responds that the basis is
whether or not the predicate expresses the same linguistic pattern,
this just renames the problem, for the realist will claim that same-
ness of linguistic pattern in the cases under examination are,
ultimately, grounded in sameness of properties involved.
This insight leads to a second area of difficulty, viz. Sellars's view
leads to a vicious object and relation regress. According to Sellars,
dot quote terms are true of all tokens of the various functionally
equivalent expressions in different languages. In a way that should
be familiar, dot quote terms and Sellars's notion of the expression
"the word '____'" are types and, thus, they seem to generate an
object regress. Moreover, the various linguistic tokens of a dot
quoted term and its associated concrete particular stand as a pair in
a certain type of relation, viz. the true of or satisfaction relation,
and, thus, a relation regress would seem to follow.
In response, Sellars could deny that the dot quote terms in his
analysans are word types; rather, they are just distributive singular
terms that refer to the various individual tokens of the relevant
words. But which tokens? The answer is all and only the ones with
the same linguistic function. Now here, again, we have a type in the\n48 UNIVERSALS
analysans. One suspects that any attempt to reduce "the same
linguistic function" to distributive expressions about various
tokens of linguistic behaviours would face the same problem, for
these token behaviours would count only if they were of the proper
kind.
Finally, even if Sellars's account works for sentences with
abstract singular terms such as
(5) Wisdom is a property.
it would seem to run into difficulty with sentences that employ
definite descriptions to refer to properties. For example,
(6) The attribute most frequently attributed to Aristotle is a
property.
Prima facie, (6) makes reference to a property - wisdom - every bit
as much as does "wisdom" in (4). How would Sellars account for
(6)? He may try
(6a) ·The attribute most frequently as ascribed to Aristotle·s are
adjectives.
Sentence (6a) parallels (4c) above. But (6a) is false since ·the
attribute most frequently as ascribed to Aristotle· is a noun phrase,
not an adjective, since it occupies the subject position of (6a).
Sellars could respond that ·the attribute most frequently as ascribed
to Aristotle· is just a proxy for "·wise·"; that is it is a way of talking
about another term, ·wise·, which is most frequently ascribed to
Aristotle and ·wise· itself is a distributive singular term for linguistic
tokens functionally equivalent to the English "wise", and these are,
in fact, adjectives. So (6b) is the correct reading of (6):
(6b)The general term most frequently ascribed to Aristotle,
namely, ·wise· is an adjective.
But now (6b) is not equivalent to (6) because they have different
truth conditions. Sentence (6) could be true and (6b) false in possi-
ble worlds where wisdom is the property most frequently ascribed\nEXTREME NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 49
to Aristotle, but the various linguistic equivalents for the adjective
"wise" are not the most frequently used terms because people in
those worlds more often use definite descriptions and not abstract
singular terms to refer to wisdom.
Sellars could respond by claiming that whenever a definite
description is used that is functionally equivalent to an abstract
singular term, then the former is identical to the latter. But this just
seems false. As linguistic inscriptions/utterances, they are clearly
different objects. Further, arguably, abstract singular terms are rigid
designators that name their respective objects and definite descrip-
tions are nonrigid designators that refer to whatever satisfies them.
Thus, there is no reason to think that, say, "wisdom" and "the gen-
eral term most frequently ascribed to Aristotle" are coextensive,
much less identical in any or throughout all possible worlds unless,
of course, one makes a covert appeal to sameness of referent, the
property of being wise, say, throughout possible worlds to guaran-
tee the result. In the end, the claim that an associated abstract
singular term and definite description are identical or even materi-
ally equivalent appears to be a mere assertion without adequate
justification. It would seem, then, that the metalinguistic strategy,
no less than the others just examined, fails to provide EN with an
adequate analysis of abstract reference and the extra-linguistic
states of affairs associated with it.
Summary
The case against EN, of which the considerations in this chapter are
an important part, have seemed persuasive to many philosophers
and EN has not been widely embraced throughout the history of
reflection on universals. This should not be surprising. If one
simply attends to Socrates, it becomes evident that the redness,
circularity, size and other features of Socrates are neither identical
to each other nor to Socrates as a whole, yet they are real features,
that is to say, properties. Does this mean that realism is correct?
No, it does not, because moderate nominalism is an attempt to
embrace the existence of properties while eschewing universals. In
Chapter 3, moderate nominalism will occupy our attention. \nModerate nominalism and
3 properties
In Chapter 2, reasons were given for thinking that extreme nomi-
nalism is an inadequate view of properties. However, even if this is
correct, it would be premature to conclude that properties are
universals because moderate nominalism - the view that properties
exist and are abstract particulars - is a live option. On this view,
Socrates and Plato each has its own redness, red
1 and red2, respec-
tively, and red 1 and red 2 are individualized properties. In this
century, the three most prominent moderate nominalists have been
G. F. Stout, D. C. Williams and Keith Campbell. Rather than
analysing moderate nominalist treatments of predication, resem-
blance and abstract reference in topical fashion, it will be more
useful to approach moderate nominalism by stating and evaluating
the positions of its major advocates. Stout's moderate nominalism
will be mentioned only briefly because although it is an important
and distinctive version of moderate nominalism it has not been
particularly influential, at least not in its idiosyncratic features.
Williams's moderate nominalism has been appropriated, clarified
and expanded by Keith Campbell, who is, arguably, the most
articulate advocate of moderate nominalism. Thus, Williams's
views will not be examined directly and will be mentioned only
when it is helpful in clarifying the exposition of Campbell. In what
follows, Stout's moderate nominalist will be investigated, followed
by a detailed treatment of Campbell's position. Along the way,
issues in predication, resemblance and abstract reference will be
central to the dialogue. \nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 51
The moderate nominalism of G. F. Stout
G. F. Stout's view of properties is the moderate nominalist counter-
part to class EN except, of course, the members of Stout's classes
are abstract and not concrete particulars.
1 According to Stout, the
"universal" redness is not a single indivisible quality, numerically
the same in each red thing. Rather, it is a class of abstract particu-
lars understood as simple entities that can occur only at one point
in space at a given time. By "simple" Stout meant basic or non-
complex. An abstract particular is not itself a complex of more
basic entities. It is, perhaps, the central defining feature of moder-
ate nominalism that it requires property-instances to be simples.
This will become more evident later when we examine Campbell's
notion of a trope. But for now, Stout's assertion regarding the
simplicity of abstract particulars provides a fitting occasion to
make an important point: to the degree that a realist accepts prop-
erty-instances in addition to universals and concrete particulars,
the realist must assay them as complex entities to avoid the charge
that his/her ontology is actually a moderate nominalist one.
Returning to Stout, each abstract particular in the class "red-
ness" exactly resembles each other abstract particular in the class
and there is nothing outside the class that exactly resembles each
member in the class. Thus, redness is a class of abstract particulars
or little reds that stand to one another in the relationship of exact
resemblance.
T wo important points should be noted. First, the members of the
class "redness" are not red things like red balls or lollipops, but are
abstract particulars or reds. Secondly, Stout argues that the unity of
the class of reds is not to be explained by their exact similarity to one
another. Rather, exact resemblance is grounded in a fundamentum
relationis, the distributive unity of the class.
2 To elaborate, a relation
between two entities presupposes a complex unity into which both
entities and the relation are combined. For example, consider two
concrete particulars a and b existing in the relation above and below.
In this view, this state of affairs presupposes a spatial complex in
which a and b exist in that specific relationship. This spatial complex
is a complex unity and is the fundamentum relationis of the spatial
relation above and below. Likewise, with regard to resembling
abstract particulars, the complex unity that is the fundamentum
relationis of this resemblance is the distributive unity of the class. In\n52 UNIVERSALS
a way similar to class EN, this distributive unity is ultimate and
cannot be analysed. Moreover, abstract nouns like "redness" are not
singular terms for Stout but general terms. "Redness" refers
distributively to a class of reds that are exactly alike and this resem-
blance is grounded in the distributive unity of the class.
3
Stout's moderate nominalism will not be criticized in much
detail. For one thing, in a number of areas, he is in agreement with
Keith Campbell and D. C. Williams, and the bulk of this chapter will
be devoted to Campbell's moderate nominalism. Moreover, it is not
necessary to go into any great detail to refute the idiosyncrasies of
Stout's position, particularly his view of the distributive unity of the
class. No one in recent times has held this view. Even in Stout's own
day, philosophers who generally agreed with his total position on
universals did not usually go along with Stout on this point.
4 The
fact that few philosophers have followed Stout here is not sufficient
to rule out his view, but it does make his position less interesting
unless there are strong arguments for it, and Stout did not offer
strong arguments. He simply tried to refute the idea that the unity of
a class of abstract particulars can be adequately grounded in a rela-
tion of exact resemblance and then went on to assert his position.
Before turning to Campbell's moderate nominalism, three
further points should be made. First, the distributive unity of a class
for Stout has both an intension and extension. On this score, it is
hard to see how Stout's position differs from a realist one, for he
seems to have implied that the distributive unity, intension or
nature of the universal is something each member has. At the very
least, Stout was not as clear on this point as one would have wished.
Secondly, as D. M. Armstrong says,
the notion of a distributive unity seems to be a restatement of
Stout's problem rather than a solution of it. It is a way of saying
that the members of certain classes of particulars are many, but at
the same time one, while failing to express what that oneness is.
5
Armstrong seems correct. Stout's "solution" is little better than a
restatement of the problem. Finally, Stout's position is almost
identical to Campbell's in the sense that the most persuasive aspects
of Stout's moderate nominalism are part of Campbell's ontology as
well. \nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 53
The moderate nominalism of Keith Campbell
The most articulate version of moderate nominalism currently
available is the trope nominalism of Keith Campbell. 6 Campbell's
moderate nominalism has evolved over the years and it is possible
to distinguish an early and late version of his thought. With this in
mind, Campbell's early moderate nominalism will be described and
critiqued. This will provide clarity on the features of his early
ontology he took to be in need of repair. The section will close with
an evaluation of his later, mature form of moderate nominalism.
Campbell's early version of moderate nominalism
According to the early Campbell, the proper way to assay "Socrates
is red" is this: the simple trope (Campbell's term for an abstract
particular), red
1, which is a member of the similarity set "redness",
is a part of the whole, Socrates, and Socrates is a bundle of
compresent tropes.
7 This assay contains at least four key elements
that made up Campbell's earlier position: the nature of a trope, the
nature of a "universal", the relationship between a trope and its
"universal" and the relation between a trope and a concrete
particular that has it.
In Campbell's earlier writings, a trope was taken to be an
abstract particular. By "particular" he meant an entity that is
exhausted in one embodiment; by "abstract" Campbell meant an
item that is got before the mind by an act of abstraction, that is, by
concentrating attention on some, but not all, of what is presented.
In this way, Campbell follows the moderate nominalist tendency of
treating "abstract" as an epistemic, and not ontological, notion.
Examples of tropes are the specific, numerically singular taste of a
lollipop, or its specific colour, shape, and so on.
Further, tropes are basic, primitive entities. Campbell says of a
trope, "It embraces no variety at all".
8 Again, "They are infimae
species, taken as particulars". 9 In another place he says, "They are
in Hume's sense substances, and indeed resemble his impressions,
conceived realistically rather than idealistically".
10
On this view, a trope, construed as a basic particular, is simple,
fundamental and independent. By "simple" is meant that they have
no further real parts (ones that can be separated from the whole in
reality and not merely in thought). The notion of being fundamen-\n54 UNIVERSALS
tal is explained in this way. Entity A is fundamental relative to
entity B if B's existence depends on A but not vice versa. Finally,
"independence" means that an entity is truly independent if it
could be the only entity in the universe. T ropes (at least non-
emergent ones), then, are basic particulars. Concrete particulars
like Socrates are derivative and it is a contingent fact that tropes
usually come grouped together as concrete particulars.
An additional, important feature of tropes on Campbell's earlier
view was the central role that space (or space-time) played in spell-
ing out what a trope is. First of all, tropes do not exclude one
another from being at the same place. In fact, a concrete particular
is just a "clump" of compresent tropes at a place. Secondly, a trope
exists at one definite location; it is a quality-at-a-place. Campbell
claimed that this should not be taken to imply that a trope has two
different constituents, viz. its qualitative nature (which is a univer-
sal) and its place (which is particular). A quality-at-a-place is a
single, particular reality.
This is clarified by Campbell's view of the special status of the
geometric figures of an entity; its form and volume. Form and
volume are special tropes not like any others. Their presence in a
particular compresent sum of tropes is not contingent; tropes
cannot be present except by being in a formed volume. T ropes are,
therefore, essentially regional. Wherever a trope is, there is formed
volume. On the other hand, Campbell asserted that shape and size
are not found except in company with characteristics. So formed
volume is both essential to ordinary tropes and in itself insufficient
to count as a proper being. Since the shape and size of a trope are
inseparable from its color, then the former are not really different
entities from the latter. Inseparable entities appear to be identical
for Campbell; they differ only by a distinction of reason (when A
and B differ by a mere distinction of reason, then A is identical to
B). Put differently, the place (located, formed volume) and qualita-
tive nature of a trope are identical and differ only as different ways
of thinking of or speaking about the trope.
So much, then, for tropes. For Campbell, the relationship
between Socrates and all the tropes "in" Socrates is a part/whole
relation. Each trope is part of a bundle of compresent tropes that is
Socrates. Thus the predication relation is reduced to a type of part/
whole relation in Campbell's moderate nominalism. \nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 55
The "universal" redness is merely a set of exactly resembling
tropes; for example, red1 (in Socrates), red2 (in Plato), and so on. In
this way, Campbell's moderate nominalism may be seen as a counter-
part to resemblance EN. In Campbell's earlier writings the relation-
ship between each trope and its corresponding "universal" is clear
and straightforward: it is the  of set membership. However, when
we turn to an analysis of the exact similarity relation that obtains
between or among tropes in a set, things are not so clear. In fact, the
early Campbell's treatment of similarity is easily the weakest part of
his version of moderate nominalism. Space considerations require
that we limit ourselves to making some general observations
relevant to our current discussion.
11 One thing that is clear is that the
unity of a set of tropes is grounded in the exact similarity relation.
And the exact similarity relation is like the relation of identity in that
it is symmetrical, transitive and, arguably, reflexive.
On the other hand, it is not clear whether in Campbell's earlier
views of exact similarity he saw it as an internal or external relation
and he appears to have equivocated between the two views. T o see
this, we need to recall two things true of internal relations as they
are usually construed. First, if the R of a to b is internal to a, then
anything that does not stand in R to b is not identical to a. Secondly,
internal relations are not primitive but, rather, are derived
subsistences grounded in the natures of the entities they connect.
As Gustav Bergmann put it,
The ontological ground of an internal connection lies wholly
"in" the two or more entities it connects. More precisely, it lies
in their natures. The notion is so crucial that I reword it. The
ontological ground of an internal connection is the natures of
the entities it connects and nothing else. Still differently, an
internal connection has no ontological ground of its own. ..
12
More recently, D. M. Armstrong has defined an internal relation
as a relation that is logically determined by the nature of the related
terms.
13 Armstrong goes on to point out that we can explain why
internal relations are such that given two internally related entities
a and b, there is no possible world in which the objects remain
unaltered but in which the internal relation fails to obtain by recog-
nizing that internal relations are derived from and grounded in the\n56 UNIVERSALS
natures of the entities so related. 14 Since internal relations are
ontologically grounded in the more basic metaphysical natures of
the related entities, internal relations are derived subsistents, not
primitive entities.
Now Campbell explicitly patterns his version of moderate
nominalism after that of D. C. Williams and Williams clearly held
that exact similarity between two tropes is an internal relation.
15
Moreover, Campbell says,
Can't we ask about two white tropes, no less than about two
white things, what it is that gives them their resemblance?
Perhaps we can answer legitimately just that they resemble
each other because of what they are like, or because of their
character or nature. Perhaps if we quantify over tropes we will
have a cause to quantify over universals as well. But I for one
have no confidence either way.
16
In this passage Campbell does not clearly reject the internal rela-
tion view. But for three reasons, this interpretation should be
rejected. For one thing, in the passage just cited, Campbell grasps
the fact that an admission that exact similarity is an internal
relation makes it hard to avoid universals as the ground for exact
similarity, and his entire system is meant to be an alternative to
realism about properties. Secondly, elsewhere Campbell explicitly
states that the relation of exact similarity is an unanalysable, primi-
tive, brute fact and this can only mean that the relation is an
external one.
17 Finally, although Campbell claims that an anti-
naturalist could embrace moderate nominalism (e. g. by accepting
the existence of mental tropes), nevertheless, he clearly wishes to
advocate moderate nominalism as a way of allowing the existence
of qualities within the confines of a naturalist stance. And as D. M.
Armstrong has pointed out, naturalists, if they are self-reflective
and consistent, should eschew treating internal relations as real
entities.
18 I do not wish to defend Armstrong on this point,
although I think he is right. Suffice it to say that if internal relations
should be eschewed by a naturalist, then since Campbell wishes his
ontology to be an expression of naturalism, he should avoid
treating exact similarity as an internal relation. And it is charitable
to interpret him in this way. \nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 57
Before leaving the topic of exact similarity, it should be pointed
out that, at present, Campbell sees exact similarity as an internal
relation.
19 It is important to note that Campbell's earlier confusion
here, his change of position and problems in his current treatment of
exact similarity are rooted in a tension endemic to moderate nomi-
nalism: (basic) tropes are simple entities - particularized natures -
and there is a mere distinction of reason between either a trope's
nature and location (or formed volume) or its nature and particular-
ity. Thus, when one thinks about the fact that two red tropes are red,
it is easy to see how their resemblance could be grounded in their
colour. But such a temptation does not arise if we think of two
resembling tropes as merely located entities (or particulars). The
relation of similarity between the "natures" of two red tropes is an
internal one, but the relation between the location or particularity
of those tropes is external. But how can this be if the nature and
particularity of a trope differ by a distinction of reason and thus, are
identical? This tension need be probed no further except simply to
point out that Campbell's use of a distinction of reason here
obscures his views and causes him to be inconsistent.
These remarks about exact similarity have made reference to the
notion of a distinction of reason and this, along with other distinc-
tions, is crucial for understanding the problems with moderate
nominalism. Therefore, it may be helpful to review three important
distinctions mentioned in Chapter 1. The first distinction is the real
distinction. This consists in the fact that two entities, A and B (e. g.
a chair and a desk), are not identical and can exist as independent
entities in separation from each other. The second major distinc-
tion is the distinction of reason. This is a purely mental distinction
that does not actually intervene between the entities designated as
distinct, as they exist in themselves, but only as they are distin-
guished in thought. There are two types of distinctions of reason.
First, there is the distinction of reasoning reason (distinctio rationis
ratiocinantis). This has no foundation in reality and arises exclu-
sively from the temporal activity of the process of thought. For
example, we distinguish Peter from himself in referring to him
twice when we say "Peter is Peter". Secondly, there is the distinc-
tion of reasoned reason ( distinctio rationis ratiocinatae ). This
distinction arises from an inadequate conception by the mind of the
object. Assuming that God is a simple entity, an example here\n58 UNIVERSALS
would be the distinction between God's mercy and justice. The key
thing about any distinction of reason is this: If A and B differ by a
distinction of reason (of either type), then A is identical to B.
There is a third distinction that occupies a middle ground
between the first two. This distinction is an actual one found in
nature prior to any activity of the mind but it is not as great as the
real distinction between two separable entities. The modal distinc-
tion intervenes between an entity and its mode; for example, the
modal distinction obtains between the property known as quantity
and the-inherence-of-quantity-in-a-specific-substance. A mode is a
dependent, inseparable, genuinely distinct entity from what it is a
mode of. If a modal distinction obtains between two entities A and
B (where B is a mode), there is non-identity between A and B and
inseparability in this sense: A can exist without B, but not vice versa.
With this in mind, we are in a position to understand three
puzzles that are problematic for Campbell's earlier views. Indeed,
Campbell saw these puzzles in earlier critiques of his moderate
nominalism and admitted that they were decisive against his early
position.
20 Consider a concrete particular, say, an apple. The taste
trope and colour trope of the apple, indeed all the apple's tropes,
are at the same place since the apple is merely a bundle of
compresent tropes. Now the nature of the taste trope differs from
its location/formed volume by a distinction of reason only. Like-
wise, with the colour trope and all the others. But then, the taste of
the apple is identical to its place as are all the other tropes in the
bundle. Now by the transitivity of identity, all the tropes of the
apple are identical to each other and, indeed, the apple is reduced
to a bare location. Concrete and abstract particulars turn out to be
bare simples and this is incoherent. This is puzzle one.
T o understand puzzle two consider two compresent bundles of
tropes, A and B. Bundle A includes a red trope and a taste trope at
the same location. Bundle B includes a blue trope and a taste trope
from the same exact similarity set as the taste trope in bundle A. In
other words, the concrete particulars A and B differ in colour but
have the "same" taste. Now, the red trope of A is in a set of other
red tropes exactly similar to it. Since the red trope's "redness" is
identical to its place/formed volume (they differ merely by a
distinction of reason) and since the nature of A 's taste trope is also
identical to the same place, A 's red trope (by the transitivity of\nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 59
identity) is identical to A 's taste trope. The same is true of B's taste
trope and blue trope. Furthermore, A 's taste trope is in the same
exact similarity set as B's taste trope. But this means that A 's red
trope and B's blue trope are in the same similarity set of taste
tropes. And since exact similarity is transitive, B's blue trope will be
in the similarity set of red tropes exactly like A 's redness. If this is
true, it is hard to make sense out of the idea of a similarity set based
on a trope's nature. If an exact similarity set of red tropes includes
a blue trope, the very idea of an exact similarity set of red tropes
becomes vacuous.
The third puzzle is this. According to the early trope view, tropes
are basic, independent existents and concrete particulars are
derivative bundles of tropes. It is a purely contingent matter that a
given trope is in a given bundle. The trope could have existed in
another bundle of tropes or without being in any bundle at all.
Now, a trope cannot exist if it is not individuated. But since place is
the principle of individuation, this means that a given trope could
not have existed at another place since that would make it a differ-
ent trope. This same point holds for all the tropes at a given loca-
tion, which together form a compresent bundle. But then, it is not
a contingent fact that these particular tropes combine to form a
specific concrete particular, because in order that these tropes be
these tropes, they must be at a given location. It is a matter of neces-
sity that a concrete particular have just the tropes it does. In fact,
the concrete particular is identical to the bundle of tropes, and,
therefore, to each trope. And since the concrete particular is iden-
tical to each trope, it is identical to a mere place.
It is important to see just what is going on in these puzzles. The
trope view must assay a basic trope as a simple in order to avoid
assigning the individuating and qualitative roles to non-identical
constituents in the quality-instance, for this is what realists do (e. g.
red
1has an individuator, say, a bare particular expressed by 1, the
universal redness, and a tie of predication). Since tropes are simples
and since place/formed volume is identical to a trope's nature
(differing by a distinction of reason only), then the trope nominal-
ist must either remove the 1 and make the identity reflect the entity
redness or else remove redness and make the identity reduce to
bare location. The former collapses into realism and the latter is in-
coherent as the puzzles indicate.
21\n60 UNIVERSALS
Campbell's revised version of moderate nominalism
In light of these and other criticisms, Campbell has modified his
trope nominalism. 22 T wo aspects of his current thinking are
especially relevant to our present concerns: his assay of a trope,
especially the role of location in that assay; and his clarification of
the relation of exact similarity. As moderate nominalism would
seem to require, he continues to hold that a basic trope like red
1 is
a simple entity - a particularized nature that as a matter of brute,
unanalysable fact sustains two roles: to be a particularized nature
that is exactly similar in nature to other tropes in its similarity set
and that is individuated from all other tropes. A basic trope is not a
union of a particularizing entity and a particularizer. It is a single,
simple item - a particularized nature. Campbell is not entirely clear
about the distinction between the nature and particularity of a
specific trope.
23 On the one hand, he seems to continue to hold that
the difference is just a distinction of reason since the nature and
particularity of a trope do not constitute a genuine duality of
entities, which would turn tropes into complex entities. On the
other hand, he says that the distinction between the nature and
particularity of a basic trope is, perhaps, the formal distinction of
Duns Scotus and, for Campbell, this amounts to the level of
abstraction at which an entity is being considered (either as a
particular or as a qualitative nature).
For two reasons it seems that Campbell's mention of the formal
distinction really amounts to a reassertion of a distinction of reason
in different terms. First, Suárez summarizes the medieval discus-
sion of Scotus's formal distinction, correctly in my view, as being
somewhat confused and hard to understand. But, nevertheless,
based on the remarks of Scotus himself and his disciples, Suárez
claims that the formal distinction turns out the be the distinction of
reasoned reason.
24 Secondly, Campbell's own clarification of his
use of the formal distinction reduces it to a distinction of reason
since, for him, the distinction is an epistemological one only and
identity obtains between the entity singled out differently.
Campbell goes on to say that a trope is not individuated by
place. As a matter of a posteriori Kripkean necessity, tropes are
located, but the location of a trope is a quasi-trope (roughly, a mere
appearance or pseudo-entity that is part of the manifest world -
more on this latter), and as a matter of necessity is always\nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 61
connected to a trope (it is contingent at which place a trope is
located but not that it be located):
let us abandon the view that a colour trope is individuated by
its place. Take compresence as a more abstract, more formal
matter, recognize that a colour trope and a spatial quasi-trope
are distinct entities and assay the presence of green at a place as
the compresence of a green trope with a place one.
25
I have not been able to tell what distinction Campbell sees between
a trope's formed volume and its place. But regarding formed
volume, he says that it is also a quasi-trope, a sub-region of space
whose boundaries are fixed by the presence of the trope's nature
(e. g. colour), that is not identical to the qualitative content within
that formed volume.
So much, then, for Campbell's new view of tropes. It was noted
above that he has tried to clarify his view of exact similarity. In most
places he says that this is an internal relation grounded in and
supervenient upon the natures of the resembling tropes.
26 How-
ever, in other places he says that the exact similarity between two
tropes is an ultimate, basic, unanalysable, primitive fact.
27 There
are at least two problems with these claims. First, Campbell is
committed to the idea that causal power is the mark of being.
28
Now it is not at all clear what the ontological status is for super-
venient entities in Campbell's ontology since they do not appear to
have causal power. Jaegwon Kim has pointed out that for those
with this metaphysical commitment, "T o render mental events
causally impotent is as good as banishing them from our ontol-
ogy".
29 Kim's remark applies to Campbell's assay of exact similar-
ity if that assay takes the relation to be a supervenient one. And
Campbell himself admits that supervenient facts are mere pseudo-
additions to our ontology in which no new being is involved.
30
Secondly, if exact similarity is primitive, then no further analysis
can be given either of the relation itself or of the fact that it obtains.
But if the relation is internal, it is not primitive, not in the sense that
the relation must now be reduced to identity - a reduction that
realists accept but that Campbell is free to deny - but in the sense
that exact similarity is grounded in the natures of the resembling
tropes. As will be shown below, once the need for a ground is\n62 UNIVERSALS
admitted, difficulties follow that do not arise if such a need is
denied. There are other interesting features of Campbell's moder-
ate nominalism, but rather than examine those features, it will
suffice if we can see what is wrong with these two fundamental
aspects of his, or for that matter, any version of moderate nom-
inalism.
The first set of remarks target Campbell's new assay of a basic
trope, starting with his claim that the new role that location or
formed volume plays in his refurbished moderate nominalism
avoid problems that plagued his earlier position. Note, first, that
since a realist assay of a quality-instance treats it as a complex entity
with its nature being a universal predicatively tied to an individu-
ator (for more on this, see Chapter 5), to avoid realism Campbell
must hold that a basic trope is simple and this is where the main
problems with moderate nominalism lie.
Apparently, Campbell fails to recognize that these problems turn
on the simplicity of a trope and not on the role of location/formed
volume in a trope's assay. In fact, Campbell's new view of the role
of location/formed volume makes his moderate nominalism less
available to the naturalist than was his former position and
Campbell is clearly concerned to present his trope nominalism as
an attractive option for a naturalist ontology.
Why is his new position more problematic for a naturalist? While
it would be difficult to define contemporary philosophical natural-
ism to everyone's satisfaction, a widely accepted understanding of a
naturalist ontological commitment is that the spatio-temporal
universe of strictly physical entities that constitute the appropriate
objects of natural scientific study is all there is. Campbell accepts
this understanding of naturalism at least in the sense that he under-
stands naturalism to require all entities to be spatiotemporal. In his
earlier view, it was easy to see why tropes could be viewed as natural
entities that are entirely within the spatiotemporal world of natural
entities. But the current picture of the role of location/formed
volume actually comes perilously close to turning tropes into tradi-
tional abstract (non-spatiotemporal) entities or Platonic abstract
perfect particulars with the proviso that they must be exemplified by
a spatiotemporal particular to exist.
As we shall see in Chapters 4 and 5, for the traditional view of
properties as abstract entities, properties are "in" the particulars\nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 63
that exemplify them, but they are not themselves spatiotemporally
located at the place of those particulars. Nor is the way they are
"in" those particulars a spatial relation; rather, it is the primitive
nexus of exemplification. Redness is (non-spatiotemporally,
predicatively) in a ball and the ball is on the table, but neither
redness nor exemplification are natural, spatiotemporal entities. It
is widely recognized that when a universal is exemplified by a
particular, the resulting state of affairs (the having of the universal
by the particular) is itself a particular. This has been called the
victory of particularity. Now in the same way there is a victory of
spatiotemporality. When a ball is red, the ball is spatiotemporally
located as is the state of affair consisting in the-having-of-redness-
by-the-ball. But neither redness nor exemplification is spatio-
temporal. If one were to add the Aristotelian constraint that prop-
erties must be exemplified in order to exist, the result would rule
out transcendental (unexemplified) universals, but it would not
turn exemplification or exemplified properties into spatiotem-
poral, natural entities. They would still be abstract objects.
Now Campbell's current views seem to parallel this picture
precisely. A trope's nature is a metaphysically complete entity
ontologically prior to its tie to the quasi-trope of location, formed
volume since the nature is not identical to the location and neither
enters into the being of the other in a part/whole way. This means
that the trope's nature itself is not spatial but receives spatiality
from its tie to the quasi-trope of location/formed volume. Nor is it
clear that this tie is spatial since it connects a nature to a location.
Now how is this different from the victory of spatiotemporality in
the traditional realist view? The only difference is that a trope can
be embodied only in one place. But not only is it now difficult to see
why this is the case - if natures are identical to locations it is easy to
see this, but since spatiotemporality is not inherent in their being,
but rather, tied to them, it is less clear and more ad hoc to say such
a tie can occur only once - it is also hard to see how a naturalist
could appropriate such an analytic ontology into their world view.
And even if we grant that a nature can be tied to space in one
embodiment only, tropes turn out to be perfect particulars on one
interpretation of Plato, and such entities were still non-natural
abstract entities, as was the tie that Plato claimed connects them to
particulars in the space-time world. \n64 UNIVERSALS
Secondly, the simplicity of a basic trope in Campbell's refur-
bished moderate nominalism generates the same metaphysical
difficulties that he admits were telling against his earlier position.
Consider two red tropes. Qua red entities they stand to each other
in an internal exact similarity relation grounded in their natures.
But qua particulars they are spatially related to each other in exter-
nal primitive spatial relation. But the particularity and nature of a
trope are identical to each other (they differ by a mere distinction
of reason). It follows from this that the two simple entities stand to
each other in internal and external relations due to the same meta-
physical features of the relata. But how can this be? Further, by the
transitivity of identity, the particularities of the two tropes stand in
an internal exact similarity relation to each other and the two red
natures are externally related to each other. But this seems unintel-
ligible.
Moreover, since the nature and particularity of a trope are
identical to each other, the same dilemma of simplicity presents
itself to Campbell: either tropes are reduced to properties as
universals or to bare particulars. This dilemma is a matter of ontol-
ogy, not epistemology. The nominalist tendency of focusing on
epistemic and not straightforwardly ontological issues, or of reduc-
ing the former to the latter, e. g. the use of the epistemic notions of
the distinction of reason, abstraction and different modes of count-
ing, obscure the real metaphysical problems involved here.
Campbell's shift from using the distinction of reason between a
trope's nature and location to using it between that nature and
particularity does not solve the problem, which centres primarily
on the simplicity of tropes and not the special role of place in their
assay. And as we have already seen, his new view of place is less not
more compatible with the naturalist stance.
Someone may respond that a similar problem can be raised
against universals. A universal has a nature (what it is, e. g. redness
for the universal red) and universality. If a trope's nature and
particularity are identical for a trope, then the nature and universal-
ity of a universal are identical. Thus, red and green would be differ-
ent by nature but identical by universality, which is incoherent. This
response against the realist does not work. The realist need not take
redness and greenness as simples. Therefore, if a realist grounds the
universality of redness and greenness in a property possessed by\nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 65
both - being universal - he can distinguish this property from the
natures of red and green. But the same option is not available to the
trope nominalist, given the fact that a trope's nature and particular-
ity differ only by a distinction of reason.
There is a further problem with the simplicity of a basic trope. A
property-instance, in this case a trope, must be extended in space or
else it is not clear how a colour nature can be present. A bare math-
ematical point of space cannot have a colour nature at it. Unfortu-
nately, something that is spread out (i. e. extended) has to be a
complex and not a simple entity because it has non-identical (even
if inseparable) parts at different spatial locations. In fact, it would
seem that the very same nature (redness) occupies all the sub-
regions throughout the extended formed volume. If an entity is to
be extended (as an instance of colour must be), it must be a com-
plex entity (e. g. it contains non-identical inseparable parts) and a
colour trope, therefore, cannot be simple. G. Dawes Hicks raised
this point against moderate nominalist G. F. Stout when moderate
nominalism was just coming on the contemporary metaphysical
scene earlier in this century:
What, for example, in his view, is really meant by saying that
"qualities are in the same place as the things they qualify? " In
what sense can it be asserted that a visual sense-datum has a
specific colour? Each infinitesimal portion of such a sense-
datum is ex hypothesi no less numerically distinct from every
other portion than one sense-datum is numerically distinct
from another. If, then, the colour of one sense-datum A cannot
be identical with the colour of another sense-datum B, how can
the colour of the part x of the sense-datum A be said to be iden-
tical with the colour of the part y of the sense-datum A? In
other words, where, in such a case, do we ever reach a concrete
particular thing which can be rightly said to have a particular
character?
31
Campbell is sensitive to these difficulties, especially to problems
with stating identity conditions for spatially or temporally
extended tropes that seem to constitute the primary and secondary
qualities of ordinary macro-objects. Put briefly, his solution is
this.
32 Campbell claims that basic tropes must be found that are\n66 UNIVERSALS
partless, changeless and unambiguous in their boundaries and he
identifies five or six of them: space-time (construed as an absolute,
non-relational trope), each of the four fundamental forces of
physics taken as different space-filling fields that distribute some
quantity across space-time to varying degrees, and, perhaps, con-
sciousness understood as a pan-psychic field.
By contrast, the manifest world is composed of the things and
qualities, both primary and secondary, that are given to us in every-
day experience. This world is composed of quasi-tropes: super-
venient entities that are mere appearances. Such quasi-tropes are
not truly real and, while they are not human inventions, neverthe-
less there is a air of arbitrariness and conventionality about them
regarding both their existence and identity conditions.
33 A manifest
trope is a quasi-trope, a pseudo-entity, a mere appearance. Such
quasi-tropes are taken in thought via abstraction to be separable
entities. They are chunks of field tropes treated as if they were
distinct and independent realities. For Campbell, an ontologist
does not need to specify identity conditions for such multiply-
located quasi-entities so my objections raised against them are wide
of the mark. By contrast, the five or six omni-located basic tropes
have clear identity conditions and that is all that should be required
of Campbell's trope ontology.
Does Campbell's refurbished trope ontology provide an
adequate response to the types of criticisms raised above? Is it an
adequate analytic ontology and speculative cosmology? For at least
three reasons, it seems not. First, it is not clear that his response
allows room for the types of considerations that justify the accept-
ance of tropist qualities in the first place. As far as ontology is
concerned, the existence of such entities is justified in terms of
various metaphysical or linguistic arguments from the manifest
world, especially the phenomena of predication, resemblance and
abstract reference. T o the degree that Campbell's basic tropes still
exhibit these phenomena (e. g. most of his tropes have the property
of being a field), then to that degree he has not solved difficulties in
regard to them but merely relocated those difficulties. If basic
tropes do not exhibit these phenomena, they why accept the exist-
ence of basic tropes? A decision to do so seems to me to be an
arbitrary choice. For example, Campbell calls space (or space-
time) a trope. But he also tells us that it can change and expand. \nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 67
Space also has various properties (e. g. elasticity, extension, shape,
volume, various other geometrical and topological properties), and
the trait (whatever it is) that distinguishes empty space from the
material stuff or fields that fill it. Given that Campbell is an absolut-
ist regarding space, what is it that justifies treating it as a trope as
opposed to a substance with various properties? He doesn't tell us
and one suspects that, given the above characterization, most
philosophers would take it in substantival terms.
Secondly, Campbell admits that the basic forces of nature are
normally thought of as being exerted by various bodies with
properties in virtue of which the fields of nature are generated.
34
On this view, the existence and properties of bodies are basic and
fields are derivative. Campbell's ontology reverses this order. But
as far as I can tell, he does not offer a single argument in favour of
his preference. Perhaps this omission could be excused if his claims
about these matters were merely speculative explorations of an
ontology already justified on other grounds. But that is not the
case. Campbell's field ontology is foundational to his trope nomi-
nalism precisely because his exposition of fields is meant as a
response to serious criticisms like those raised above that are both
damaging to the entire trope ontology and used to justify a realist
view of qualities. In light of this fact, Campbell's failure to justify
his field ontology limits the acceptability of his view of tropes to
those who agree with him about fields and, more importantly,
leaves his analytic ontology resting on what amount to mere asser-
tions in speculative cosmology. This failure will not convince many
realists to adopt trope nominalism.
Thirdly, Campbell's exposition of manifest tropes is so ambigu-
ous that it is hard to tell what their ontological status is. On the one
hand he says that the meaning of statements about supervenient
entities cannot be captured by reductive paraphrases using only
terms referring to subvenient entities, but for two reasons this
seems to have no ontological implications for Campbell.
35 First, he
explicitly says that supervenient entities are "pseudo-additions"
and not real additions to our ontology; they provide cases that
expand our descriptive resources without involving a commitment
to the realities described. Secondly, for Campbell causal power is
the mark of being and on his view supervenient entities lack this
power.
36\n68 UNIVERSALS
The same ambiguity characterizes his statements about dependent
entities like relations, manifest tropes and sub-regions of space or
fields. On the one hand he says that relational facts exist, but he also
claims that they are non-existent supervenient entities. Such entities
are not real because they are dependent entities. He also excepts
foundationism, the view that all relational facts can be accounted for
in terms of non-relational foundational facts with no further
ontology beyond the latter. So while talk about relations cannot be
paraphrased away, relations do not exist.
37 Manifest tropes and other
sub-regions of space or fields are quasi- or pseudo-entities that are
not mere inventions, yet they are not distinct items and do not give
us additional entities in our ontology.
38 They are not illusions, yet
they are mere appearances that are treated as if they are independent
entities by an act of abstraction and they do not really exist.
This confusion seems to be the result of an inadequate set of
distinctions. Campbell has no modal distinction that allows him to
affirm the existence of dependent entities (e. g. Husserlian
moments).
39 Only fundamental, separable entities exist. T alk about
dependent entities may be irreducible but this has no ontological
implications. T wo inseparable "entities" differ by a mere distinction
of reason. If this is correct, than Campbell's ontology amounts to a
denial of the existence of macro-objects and their qualities, which
many will find implausible.
It may be that he accepts some sort of modes-of-being view in
which dependent entities like manifest tropes are appearances in
the sense that they have some sort of existence between non-being
and full being. Now the difficulties with modes of being views of
existence are widely recognized and they cannot be discussed here.
Suffice it to say that if this is Campbell's position, he has not made
that clear. But in any case, whether he denies or accepts a dimin-
ished sort of reality for manifest tropes, he would still face the
difficulties presented in the past few paragraphs. If manifest tropes
don't exist, his basic ones still exhibit predication, resemblance
and abstract reference and the debate about nominalism will be
located there. If they have enough existence to be coloured,
extended and so forth, then problems of identity conditions for
manifest tropes will still be relevant.
The simplicity of Campbell's revised tropes presents another
difficulty for him: Campbell is inconsistent and, in fact, equivocal\nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 69
in his description of tropes. The fact that a trope is a simple entity
that must simultaneously play two roles (have a qualitative nature
that stands in the internal relation of exact similarity with other
tropes like it and be individuated) in a basic, primitive way is not a
clear or natural way of thinking about property-instances, and one
must try hard to keep the view in one's mind without unwittingly
treating the property-instance as would a realist. Arguably, this is
why Campbell's own description of his position moves back and
forth between what are apparently two inconsistent positions. T o
illustrate, here are two areas where this happens.
First, he repeatedly tells us that tropes have their natures.
40 On
the other hand, he also says that tropes are identical to their
natures.
41 Which is it? The having relation is not the same as the
identity relation (the latter is reflexive and symmetrical, the former
is not) and it is the simplicity tension that causes this lack of clarity.
Secondly, he says that the exact similarity between two tropes is an
internal one grounded in the trope's natures and he also claims that
this relation is primitive and unanalysable.
42 The former view tends
to treat tropes as complex entities that have natures as constituents
and the latter tends to view tropes as simples. Of course, the realist
will accept the former horn and claim that property-instances have
natures that ground the derived relation of similarity between two
instances with the same nature. Campbell clearly needs the second
horn - two tropes of the "same" kind are simples that stand in a
primitive similarity relation - and it is this option that suffers from
the problems already raised.
Campbell is aware of these difficulties about simplicity and he has
two basic responses to them. First, he offers a sort of tu quoque
argument against those who hold to bare particulars as individuators
(see Chapter 7). He says that even though tropes qua simples must
simultaneously sustain two different roles, the same problem
attaches to bare particulars: they are simple and must simultaneously
individuate and particularize.
43 According to Campbell, a particular-
izer gives the object in which it occurs a particular reality, as a
definite object. But a specific object is not just an object, but this very
object. And therefore, an object needs an individuator in addition to
a particularizer, and bare particulars must sustain both roles.
Unfortunately, there is no genuine metaphysical distinction
between particularity and individuation in this context. In fact, \n70 UNIVERSALS
Campbell's treatment of them closely parallels Thomas Aquinas's
discussion of undesignated and designated matter, which, as
Aquinas pointed out, differ by a mere distinction of reason with
undesignated matter (e. g. flesh and bone in general), simply being a
more general, abstract way of attending to designated matter (e. g.
this flesh and bone). In Campbell's sense, particularity is not a
different metaphysical entity from individuation. The former
differs from the latter only in the level of epistemic abstraction one
uses in attending to an object. Thus, there are not two metaphysical
facts that need grounding as there are with so-called particularized
natures (e. g. red and 1). If Campbell thinks these are, indeed,
different metaphysical facts, then he has not given sufficient argu-
ments for believing this to be the case. It seems that Campbell
merely asserts his views in this regard without arguing for them. By
contrast, we have investigated reasons for thinking that a trope's
nature and particularity are different metaphysical entities.
Campbell admits that some of the arguments listed above were
successful against his identification of a trope's nature with its
location/formed volume, but as we have seen, these same argu-
ments apply to the particularity and nature of a trope.
Campbell offers a second response to difficulties surrounding
the simplicity of tropes. He uses an illustration to argue that there
is no problem with cases where a simple entity plays two roles: "A
point is as simple as you can get. Y et points are both different from
all other points and also, for example, 10 mm distant from some
others. That x is involved in more than one sort of fact does not
show that x is complex".
44
But this example reveals a deep misunderstanding of the prob-
lem with tropes. A point is an individuated entity and this is so
either because it has an individuator in it or else because it is iden-
tical to a bare individual. Either way, its particularity is a feature
intrinsic to its being. But a point's spatial relation to another point
is an external relation and is not intrinsic to the point. If that point
were the only entity to exist, it would be an individual point but it
would not be spatially related to anything else. Moreover, if a point
is to the left of x but to the right of y, these two facts are not
grounded in two different, intrinsic features of the point itself, but
in two relations external to the point. By contrast, red
1 is intrinsi-
cally individual and red. If it were the only entity in existence it\nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 71
would be both red and particular. Thus, the ground for these two
facts about red 1
 must be sought in its intrinsic being and not in
external relations it sustains to other things. It is because red1 is red
that it exactly resembles other red tropes and it is because it is a
particular that it is individuated from other entities. So Campbell's
analogy breaks down.
We have seen that the role of location or formed volume in
Campbell's moderate nominalism, along with the simplicity of
tropes, are serious difficulties in his understanding of properties. A
third problem area for Campbell involves abstract reference.
Consider again statements like
(1) Red is a colour.
or
(2) Necessarily, red is a colour.
For reasons noted in Chapter 2, it is generally recognized that
arguments based on inadequate paraphrases of such statements
have been decisive against extreme nominalism. For example,
consider the scattered location, L, of all red things. An extreme
nominalist might paraphrase statements (1) and (2):
(1a) Red things are coloured things.
or
(2a) Necessarily, red things are coloured things.
Unfortunately, this paraphrase won't work, because red things are
extended things or L located things (and this is necessarily the case
for naturalist advocates of extreme nominalism), but redness is not
extension or L location. The problem is that concrete particulars
are complex entities in a way not true of first and second order
universals (redness, colouredness).
In my view, the phenomenon of abstract reference is equally tell-
ing against moderate nominalism. A moderate nominalist would
paraphrase the relevant sentences as:
(1b)Reds are colours.
or
(2b)Necessarily, reds are colours. \n72 UNIVERSALS
But this will not work. In Campbell's earlier view, the counter
example could read (with or without the modal operator):
(1c) Reds are formed volumes.
or
(1c) Reds are L located.
(where L is the scattered location of all red tropes). But redness is
not formed volume or L location. In Campbell's current position,
the counter example could read:
(1d) Reds are particulars.
but redness is not particularity. Again, the problem here is not
essentially one about location but complexity: in spite of what
Campbell tells us, tropes exhibit a complexity (a nature and
individuation) that is not like what is the case for first and second
order universals.
Campbell's response to a closely related problem provides an
insight as to how he would handle this difficulty.
45 Campbell's
strategy involves what D. C. Williams called painless realism.
Consider a case where an interior decorator says they used four
colours to decorate a house. Obviously, four tropes is not what is
meant by this assertion and, in fact, the statement seems to view
colours as universals. Moderate nominalists, says Campbell, must
make sense of cases where we appear to assert that matching tropes
have something in common when, according to moderate nominal-
ism that cannot be the case. Following Williams, Campbell makes a
distinction between inherent and adherent properties. Inherent
properties are the qualitative, monadic characteristics (e. g. being
red) intrinsic to a specific item; that is, that a complex concrete
item can have in its own right. Adherent or "external" characteris-
tics are relational properties of an object (e. g. being the heaviest
man in the room).
Now particulars can be "alike" in inherent (matching) character-
istics and they can be distinguished by different adherent features,
for example their compresent relations. The difference between a
case (trope) and a kind (a "universal") is not a difference in
ontological category, but rather, a difference in the rule used for\nMODERATE NOMINALISM AND PROPERTIES 73
counting. If we look at six red tropes that match in inherent but not
adherent features, if you count one for each case, you treat the
tropes as particulars. When, without regard to adherent characters,
you only count more than one where there is a difference in inher-
ent traits you take note of, you identify all occurrences of matching
tropes; that is, you treat them in a way that likens them to a realist
universal. Applied to abstract reference, reds can be viewed as
colours or as particulars, depending on what rule you use for
counting.
It seems that painless realism is smoke and mirrors. For one
thing, it is simply a label for the problem to be solved and is not a
solution to the problem. The issue is not that we can notice a set of
entities in a natural class and either count them as one entity on the
basis of their common nature or as many entities according to their
individuality. That is just what at least one version of the problem of
the One and the Many has always been about. The real issue is what
grounds this activity, and Campbell has no answer to this question.
Moreover, his appeal to different rules of counting is just another
example of the inevitable strategy of moderate nominalists of reduc-
ing metaphysical issues to epistemological ones. Indeed, they have
no alternative since, for them, tropes are simples that sustain two
functions, and these two functions will differ by the epistemic
distinction of reason. In fact, Campbell's (and Williams's) appro-
priation of epistemology to solve a metaphysical problem obfuscates
an obvious difficulty with the appeal to adherent features. If the
problem of individuation is basically an epistemological one,
namely, the task of counting, then it may well be that external
relations are what we use to single out distinct entities in order to
count them. But if the problem is metaphysical, adherent, external
relations like compresence will not do, because such relations
presuppose and therefore cannot constitute the individuation of
their relata.
46\nMinimalist realism:
Wolterstorff's kinds and
4 Armstrong's properties
In Chapter 2, reasons were given for rejecting extreme nominalism
(EN). Among other things, EN is what has been called a blob theory
regarding concrete particulars. A blob theory of ordinary concrete
particulars is consistent with a mereological analysis of those
particulars as wholes constituted by separable parts; but a blob
theory renders concrete particulars structureless entities with no
internal differentiation of properties and relations within those
concrete particulars. In this sense, EN treats concrete particulars as
simples and thereby fails to acknowledge that the redness, circular-
ity, size and other features of Socrates are real entities that are
neither identical to each other nor to Socrates as a whole.
A similar conclusion surfaced in Chapter 3 regarding moderate
nominalist treatments of abstract particulars according to which
they are simple entities that somehow sustain exact similarity to
other members of their associated similarity classes, individuation
and location. Moderate nominalism is a blob theory regarding
abstract particulars and this, along with other things, is a serious
problem sufficient to justify the search for a more adequate treat-
ment of properties and their instances.
Now all of this is good news for advocates of traditional realism.
As will be argued in Chapter 5, traditional realism is the view that a
property is a universal construed as a multiply exemplifiable
abstract entity that is a numerically identical constituent in each of
its instances. Thus, instances are not simples for a traditional realist;
they are complex entities. When a universal is exemplified, the
universal is modified and constitutes the essence of its instances, \nMINIMALIST REALISM 75
which, in turn, are certain kinds of states of affairs, namely,
complex, dependent particulars. Moreover, when a property is
exemplified, neither the property itself nor the way it is in its
instances is spatiotemporal. Specifically, exemplification turns out
to be an inhomogeneous non-spatiotemporal nexus.
However, it would be premature to conclude from the failure of
extreme and moderate nominalism that the best account of proper-
ties is the traditional realist one. T wo powerful alternatives, both
claiming to be realist alternatives, have been proffered by Nicholas
Wolterstorff and D. M. Armstrong. The purpose of this chapter is
to examine and evaluate their ontological analyses of properties,
property-instances and exemplification to see if they are viable
rivals to traditional realism.
Among other things, it will be argued that Wolterstorff's views are
inadequate for several reasons, chief among them being the fact that
he holds to a blob theory of property-instances. In the end,
Wolterstorff 's blob theory justifies treating it as a moderate nominal-
ist position in spite of its purported realist alignment. Armstrong's
views are not altogether clear on this issue, but the most plausible
way to understand him, especially in his later writings, is to take his
property-instances as complex states of affairs. This is a step forward
in the quest for an adequate assay of properties and their instances.
But, it will be argued, Armstrong's commitment to a certain form of
philosophical naturalism leads him to some problematic features of
properties and their instances that are avoided in the more adequate
analyses that are part of the classic realist alternative developed in
Chapter 5.
Nicholas Wolterstorff
Universals as kinds
Let us begin by examining what Wolterstorff means by a universal. 1
Here is what he tells us:
All universals, I suggest, are kinds - not sets or classes, but
kinds. A property, for example, is the kind whose examples
consist of the cases of the property - wisdom is identical with
the kind, case of wisdom. A symphony is identical with the\n76 UNIVERSALS
kind whose examples are the performances of that symphony -
Beethoven's Ninth is identical with the kind, performance of
Beethoven's Ninth. This, then, is our major thesis concerning
the nature of universals generally, substance as well as predica-
ble. Universals are, all of them, kinds.
2
Wolterstorff explains what a kind (type) is by comparing it with a
class.
3 A kind is not the same thing as a class, although the two are
similar in at least two ways. First, the relation of a class to its
members is very close to the relation between a kind and its
instances or examples. Examples are members of a kind. Secondly,
there are kinds of kinds, just as there are classes of classes.
In spite of these similarities, however, there are two key differ-
ences between a kind and class. First, no class can have different
members from those it does have, but this is not so with kinds. Kinds
could have had examples different from those they do in fact have.
Secondly, two classes are identical just in case they have all the same
members. But there can be non-identical kinds such that there is
nothing that is an example of one and not an example of the other.
Wolterstorff's use of "kind" is meant to capture what he believes
to be
a close analogy between, on the one hand, the relation of a
single predicable to its exemplifications, and, on the other, the
relation of a single literary work to its many copies, a single
musical work to its many performances, a single natural kind
to its many examples.
4
So universals are kinds or types with examples or tokens as their
instances. An instance of a universal is a member of that universal.
The universal, wisdom, is identical to the kind, case of wisdom. In
general, a universal is a kind whose examples are cases of that
universal.
A crucial question for Wolterstorff is whether or not his account
involves universals as multiply exemplifiable entities where these are
understood as being numerically identical entities in non-identical
instances. If not, then it will be difficult to sustain the claim that
Wolterstorff's position is a realist one. T o answer this question, it is
necessary to describe what Wolterstorff means by a case. \nMINIMALIST REALISM 77
Cases as simples
Wolterstorff uses a variety of terms to talk about cases. A case is a
token, occurrence, example or member of a kind. It is an aspect of
a substance. He tells us that the only way to understand the differ-
ence between a property (universal) and a case is by the way of
examples. Thus, being courageous or being red are properties, but
Wilson's courage and the redness of Socrates are cases. So cases are
abstract particulars.
For several reasons, it appears that a case is a simple entity; that
is, an entity that has no further constituents in it. First, Wolterstorff
tells us that ordinary things like horses, spots or men are simple,
basic entities.
5 He means by this that they are non facts (i. e. states of
affairs); they are not complex entities composed of their constitu-
ents. Elsewhere, he holds that ordinary things, such as horses or
men, are cases of their kind (universal). Thus, the man Socrates is a
case of the kind, man. He is a simple entity. So, in general, a case of
a kind is a simple entity that does not have that kind as one of the
constituents in the case. In general, Wolterstorff is against constitu-
ent ontologies that turn ordinary things into facts. Secondly,
Wolterstorff explicitly states that his cases are like the abstract
particulars (tropes) of Stout and Williams. Since Stout and Williams
hold that abstract particulars are simples, then cases must be as
well. It would seem, then, that Michael Loux, a former student of
Wolterstorff, was correct when he said that Wolterstorff's cases are
simple, basic entities.
6
Wolterstorff is not clear on this, however, and certain statements
he makes seem to indicate that the universal is a numerically identi-
cal constituent in all its constituents. He tells us that a universal is
that which can be predicated of many, it is "shared in common" by
all its exemplifications, and when a universal is predicated of a thing,
that thing "possesses" or "has" that universal. Furthermore, he says
that there are cases of abstractive attention where one attends to a
universal. This would happen, for example, when one looks at the
colour of his coat and the colour of a paint chip and goes on to affirm
that the two colours are identical.
7 Similarly, in seeing a token-word
or writing a token-poem one sees or writes the respective types. 8
Finally, a universal is an entity that is repeatable like a word type is
repeatable.
9 All of this seems to indicate that the universal is a
multiply exemplifiable constituent in all its (complex) instances. \n78 UNIVERSALS
In spite of this prima facie evidence of cases being complex, it
still seems accurate to hold that a case for Wolterstorff is a simple
entity. The evidence for the complexity of a case can be given a
different interpretation by examining what Wolterstorff means by
exemplification.
Exemplification
Consider the diagram from On Universals shown in Figure 4. 1. 10
Wolterstorff would say that Socrates is an exemplification of
wisdom (since he is a wise thing) and the case "Socrates's wisdom"
is an instance of wisdom. Thus, when wisdom is exemplified by or
predicated of Socrates, this is to be analysed in terms of a case (a
simple entity) and two relations, "being a case of" and "being an
aspect of". Socrates exemplifies wisdom or wisdom is "in" Socrates
in the sense that the-wisdom-of-Socrates, a simple entity that is a
case or member of the kind, case of wisdom, is an aspect of Socra-
tes. It is clear from this that wisdom is not a numerically identical
constituent that is directly in all its exemplifications (Socrates,
Plato, etc. ). Wisdom can only be "in" its exemplifications as a
constituent, if it is "in" its instances (Socrates' wisdom, Plato's
wisdom, etc. ), which are in turn "in" Socrates.
11
WWWWWisdomisdomisdomisdomisdom
SocratesSocratesSocratesSocratesSocratesSocrates'sSocrates'sSocrates'sSocrates'sSocrates's
wisdomwisdomwisdomwisdomwisdom
is a case of
is exemplified by
is an aspect of
Figure 4. 1
This means that if wisdom is to be a numerically identical
constituent of many non-identical entities, this can be so only if
wisdom is a constituent of each of its cases. As noted above,
Wolterstorff holds that one can attend to a universal, say redness, in
abstractively attending to a red ball. But this is not quite accurate.
Wolterstorff does say this, but he clarifies his position by saying\nMINIMALIST REALISM 79
that what one attends to in this case is an exemplified universal. So
the way a universal is "in" its exemplification is by a case of that
universal being "in" that exemplification.
The crucial issue, then, comes down to this. What is the relation
"being a case of" that obtains between the universal and its cases?
Is this relation such that the universal is a multiply instanced entity
in the sense of it being a constituent in each of its instances? This
does not seem to be Wolterstorff's view, and to show this, it is
important, first, to analyse his relation "being a case of".
Wolterstorff seems to say that this relation varies depending on
what one is talking about. The performances of a symphony bear
the relation "performance of" to the symphony, books are "copies
of" book-types, greens are "examples of" greenness. In general,
however, he says this relation is a type-token relation.
12 This,
however, is not very helpful. In fact, it is either circular or vacuous.
It is circular if the type-token is construed primarily as a linguistic
phenomenon, since in this case the linguistic phenomenon presup-
poses and is merely one set of examples of the more general kind-
case distinction. So "type-token" could not be used to explain
"kind-case" distinctions because the former is a species of the latter.
If, on the other hand, "type-token is merely a label for "kind-case",
then it adds no real content to the latter and is hardly illuminating.
Elsewhere, Wolterstorff states that the relation of "being a case
of" is very much like the  of set membership in the sense that cases
are members of their kind.
13 But neither the notion of "being a
member of" not that of "type-token" lend themselves (without
further clarification) to an attempt to analyse "is a case of" in terms
of the kind being a constituent of the case.
There is a deeper reason, however, why the relation "being a case
of" cannot be understood in terms of the universal being a constitu-
ent in its cases. This reason has to do with his wholesale rejection of
constituent ontologies.
14 According to Wolterstorff, such ontologies
are reductionistic, for their advocates seek to discover the constitu-
ents of ordinary things (and by extension, cases) when the latter
should be treated as basic, simple entities. For Wolterstorff, the
relation "being a constituent of" does not obtain between all quali-
ties and ordinary things. It only holds for accidental qualities.
For example, recall our red, round spot Socrates. The relation
"being a constituent of" obtains between it and its constituents. In\n80 UNIVERSALS
other words, Socrates is a simple entity and red and round can be
constituents of Socrates provided that a case of red and case of
round are "in" Socrates. But "being a spot" cannot be a constituent
of Socrates, for the relation "being a constituent of" only holds
between the spot and its (accidental) constituents. In order for the
relation "being a constituent of" to obtain, the spot must already
exist, ontologically speaking, so that it and its constituents can be
related.
If A and B cannot stand in the relation of "being a constituent of"
unless they already exist as self-contained entities ontologically prior
to entering the relation, it should be clear that B cannot be a complex
entity that has A in it as an essential constituent. B is simple. "Being
a spot" cannot be a constituent of Socrates, for if it were, Socrates
and "being a spot" would already have to exist, according to
Wolterstorff, before the relation obtains. But how could Socrates
already exist as a spot before it has "being a spot" in it?
This same argument applies to greenness and a green case. In
general, "being a constituent of" obtains in cases of accidental
predication.
15 Redness is a constituent of Socrates in that a case of
redness is a constituent of Socrates. But redness is not a constituent
of the red case nor is being a spot a constituent of Socrates. Socrates
and a case of redness are simples without essential constituents that
constitute their natures. For they must exist before (in the sense of
ontological priority) they can have constituents. But if their essen-
tial natures were constituents in them, they obviously could not
exist ontologically prior to the having of their essences as constitu-
ents. So the essence of a case is not a constituent of that case. Put
another way, the kind-case relation is not one in which the former
is a constituent of the latter.
16
Objections to Wolterstorff's "realism"
If this portrayal of Wolterstorff is accurate, then his version of
"realism" is objectionable for a number of reasons. First, it is hard
to make sense out of his account of exemplification because the
relation "being a case of" is unclear. What is this relation? The
mere assertion that it is a type-token relation is simply inadequate.
The point is not that Wolterstorff has failed to define this relation.
It is certainly open to him as an ontologist to assert that this\nMINIMALIST REALISM 81
relation is basic and undefined. This is clearly his position. The
main difficulty is that it is hard to see how this relation so under-
stood does the job required of it, viz. relating the kind to its case. It
is not a part-whole relation of any kind because the kind is not a
constituent of the case. And if the relation of predication is taken as
some sort of constituent-whole relation (if A is predicated of B,
then A is a constituent in B), then this is not a predication relation.
Neither is it a model-copy relation.
The only interpretation of "is a case of" that seems plausible is
to take it as an "is" of classification. In other words, when Socra-
tes's redness is a case of the kind, redness, then this means that
Socrates's redness is to be classified with other red cases as being
members of the kind, redness. So "being a case of" is very close to
the  of set membership, except for Wolterstorff's caveat about the
differences between sets and kinds. But if this is what Wolterstorff
means by "is a case of", then he gives no ground whatsoever as to
why a red case is in the kind redness and a green case. It cannot be
due to the red case having redness as a constituent while the green
case does not. The red case does not have redness as a constituent.
Not does Wolterstorff ground membership in a kind in some sort of
exact similarity relation. It may be that the unity of the members of
a kind is some sort of ultimate, distributive unity, like Stout's
position on the distributive unity of a class. But in Chapters 1 and
3 we have already found problems with this view, so they shall not
be repeated here. Thus, the relation of "being a case of" is unde-
fined and inadequate and, therefore, so is Wolterstorff's treatment
of exemplification.
Furthermore, many of the problems that surfaced in Chapter 3
regarding tropes also apply to cases because cases are tropes. Most
importantly, both are simple entities. It will be useful to highlight
two main problems here. For one thing, how does a case get its
nature? Since the cases of the kind, redness, do not have redness as
a constituent in them (cases are not complex entities), then they
reduce to bare particulars. The "red" in "red
1" is not in the case. In
this regard, Herbert Hochberg has pointed out that "as long as such
a view acknowledges qualities, its instances might just as well be
bare particulars. The use of instances is significant only when used
as a [Moderate] Nominalistic gambit".
17 D. M. Armstrong has
noted that this makes different cases, say a yellow case and a red\n82 UNIVERSALS
case (he calls them Stoutian particulars) indistinguishable from one
another. Says Armstrong,
The question is: is there any reason present in the nature of the
first Stoutian particular, but lacking in the nature of the second
Stoutian particular, why the first particular has this universal
property? If there is no reason, then it seems that the Stoutian
particulars, in abstraction from their universal properties, are
mere bare particulars. This would make the different Stoutian
properties of a thing, in abstraction from their universal
properties, indistinguishable from each other, which seems
absurd.
18
On the other hand, if it is allowed that somehow or other, redness
is in each red case, then if the cases are still simple, no account is
given of their individuation. If the natures of the two red cases are
not bare but are in them, then this nature is a universal in both. But
since cases are simple, their individuation is not grounded.
Wolterstorff believes that he has a solution to the problem of
individuation. He believes that there is a property that every
individual necessarily has that is a distinct property that only that
individual has. This is the property of being identical to itself. For
any entity A, it alone has the property of being identical to A and
this is what individuates it. So red
1 is individuated by the property
"being identical to red1". 19 But this is not a basic entity. As will be
argued in detail in Chapter 7, it is an impure property that already
presupposes the existence of A before it can exist and be character-
ized, so it cannot account for the individuation of A without engag-
ing in a vicious circle. Thus, it does not seem that Wolterstorff has
an adequate account of what grounds the individuation of different
cases of the same kind.
Summary
In summary, it does not seem that Wolterstorff's position is a realist
one. His kinds are not universals, for they are not multiply
exemplifiable entities. They are not identical entities that are
constituents of non-identical instances. Kinds are some sort of col-
lection of cases, but universals are not collections of anything. \nMINIMALIST REALISM 83
Kinds have members but universals have instances. Things don't
belong to universals, they have universals.
Moreover, his view fails to be realist because his ontology
includes cases and cases are simple entities. Their natures are not in
them. In order to embrace cases and stay within a realist frame-
work, Wolterstorff should have paid more attention to his own
criticism of Bergmann. He argues that Bergmann's only reason for
holding on to bare particulars is to safeguard realism and he seems
to imply that this is not a necessary strategy for a realist.
20 But, on
the contrary, bare particulars would halt Wolterstorff's slide to
moderate nominalism. With bare particulars in his ontology, he
could make cases complex entities with universal constituents
grounding their nature and a bare particular grounding their
individuation. But as it stands, John Perry's comment seems fitting:
Wolterstorff describes his views as "something of a rapproche-
ment between classical realism and classical nominalism". I am
inclined to call it an uneasy compromise. We have all the
universals the Realist wants and more, but they explain just
what the Nominalist thinks they explain: nothing.
21
D. M. Armstrong
Armstrong on naturalism and physicalism
Armstrong approaches the problem of universals from within a set
of broader philosophical commitments, two of which are natural-
ism and physicalism.
22 For Armstrong, naturalism entails the
doctrine that the world is all that exists and it is nothing but a single
spatiotemporal system. He also asserts that the world is the total set
of states of affairs such that all existents must be accounted for
within the spatiotemporal world. Nothing can be allowed to exist
outside the space-time system. Moreover, apart from the primitive
varieties of ordinary experience, it is natural science that gives us
detailed knowledge of reality.
Finally, Armstrong accepts what he calls reductive physicalism
according to which the world is completely described in terms of a
completed physics. He further affirms that his version of physicalism
should be called strong physicalism: the only particulars that exist\n84 UNIVERSALS
are those in the space-time system governed by nothing more than
the laws of physics. Moreover, all fundamental universals are those
studied by physics, all other first order universals are structures
involving nothing but these fundamental universals, and all funda-
mental laws are connections holding between these fundamental
universals.
Armstrong is clear that a naturalist must find unacceptable
uninstantiated universals, those classes of universals that are not
the natural properties and relations characterizing the causal,
physical objects of physics, and a priori knowledge. His case for
these claims shall not be examined here. On the other hand, he
believes that all versions of nominalism are unacceptable and that a
robust version of realism about universals can be integrated with
naturalism and physicalism. His own form of "realism" is just such
an attempted integration and his model centres on explicating a
view of: the nature of universals themselves; the predication "rela-
tion"; and individuation consistent with naturalism.
Before we turn to the details of Armstrong's explication of these
three features of his ontology, it is important to reiterate a
constraint that Armstrong accepts for his project of developing an
adequate theory of universals. He takes it that a physicalist version
of naturalism provides the contours within which his theory must
be developed and he clearly understands this to require that there
be no non-spatiotemporally located entities in his ontology.
For Armstrong, all entities in the naturalist ontology must be
spatially located; knowledge of them can be located within physical,
causal processes; and they must be capable of entering into causal
relations and their existence can be given a natural scientific causal
explanation. T o illustrate these points in Armstrong, the following
statement is an example where he uses a naturalist externalist
epistemology to settle issues in ontology: "If any entities outside this
[spatio-temporal] realm are postulated, but it is stipulated further
that they have no manner of causal action upon the particulars in
this realm, then there is no compelling reason to postulate them".
23
In this context, Armstrong is claiming that the only way something
can interact with natural entities - including cognitive processes so
as to be objects of knowledge - is by way of causation.
Elsewhere, Armstrong offers the following as a criterion for an
acceptable naturalist ontology: \nMINIMALIST REALISM 85
I suppose that if the principles involved [in analysing and
explaining the origin of or processes of change in things within
the single all-embracing spatio-temporal system which is real-
ity] were completely different from the current principles of
physics, in particular if they involved appeal to mental entities,
such as purposes, we might then count the analysis as a falsifi-
cation of Naturalism.
24
Finally, as a naturalist, Armstrong explicitly rejects internal rela-
tions on the grounds that they cannot be spatiotemporally
located.
25 This, then, is the backdrop against which Armstrong's
theory of universals should be understood.
Armstrong's universals
Regarding universals, the only way Armstrong can sustain realism
and deny that universals are outside space and time is to reject the
axiom of localization: no entity whatsoever can exist at different
spatial locations at once or at interrupted time intervals. Armstrong
rejects this axiom and claims that universals have multiple location
and exist wherever the particulars having them are located. Thus,
universals are entities that are spatially located at the place of the
particulars that have them and they are fully present at each exem-
plified location.
In one place Armstrong expresses a mild inclination to reject the
literal multiple location of properties in favour of the view that all
universals are "in" states of affairs that are themselves spatio-
temporally located in the cosmos and, in this sense, are part of what
constitutes the cosmos.
26 For three reasons, this theme in
Armstrong will not be discussed further. First, it runs contrary to
almost everything he says about spatiotemporal location as a crite-
rion of ontological commitment; for example, that internal rela-
tions should be rejected because they cannot be located. This may
be why he expresses himself here with the qualification that he is
simply inclined to the view, not that it actually represents his
considered judgment about the matter. Subsequently, he seems to
have reaffirmed the spatiotemporal location of every existent.
27
Secondly, Reinhardt Grossmann has pointed out that when
Armstrong claims that all relations must be located in space and\n86 UNIVERSALS
time except spatiotemporal ones, this concedes what the anti-
naturalist argues, viz. that they are abstract objects, and Armstrong
is clearly against the existence of the latter.
28 Thus, this move by
Armstrong concerning relations turns out to concede more than he
may have realized and, in any case, if Grossmann's claim is correct,
as it seems to be, then the concession is contrary to the entire spirit
and metaphysical character of Armstrong's entire philosophical
programme. Grossmann's point applies equally to a similar move
for non-relational properties.
Finally, one of Armstrong's main concerns with uninstantiated
universals is that if they exist, they exist "in another realm" outside
space and time. Now, if the concern is to avoid such entities, it is
not sufficient to claim that universals must be instantiated, because
the traditional realist will say that properties remain abstract
objects even while they are non-spatiotemporally "in" their
instances. Thus, Armstrong needs to locate properties to avoid
treating them as abstract; it is not sufficient merely to require of
them that they be exemplified. In sum, the most consistent reading
of Armstrong is one that preserves most of his statements about
universals, viz. that they are multiply located entities.
Armstrong on predication and individuation
Armstrong's treatment of predication and individuation are closely
related. Universality and particularity are, he says, inseparable
aspects of all existence, they are neither reducible nor related to
each other and, although distinct, their union is closer than a
relation. The distinction between universality and particularity is
similar to Duns Scotus's formal distinction and, he claims, is like
the way that shape and size are united in a particular.
This leads him to distinguish a thick from a thin particular. A
thick particular is a state of affairs (e. g. A 's being F), and as such it
is a particular along with its properties. The particular "enfolds"
its properties in the sense that they are spatially located where the
thick particular is. In the statement "this is hot", the word "this"
refers to a thick particular and says that hotness is among
its properties. The thin particular is the particular considered
in abstraction from all its properties. It is not a thing per se,
but amounts to bare numerical difference or thisness, the\nMINIMALIST REALISM 87
individuating factor that makes the thick particular more than just
a bundle of universals.
Armstrong's view of individuation needs to be elaborated a bit
more before it can be clear just what he means by it. He rejects
transcendental realism in favour of immanent realism. We will see
shortly that he is confused about the real nature of this distinction,
but as he understands it, transcendental realism has universals
standing entirely apart from their instances and immanent realism
depicts them as being in the being of their instances, in Armstrong's
position, being at the very place of their instances and being
"enfolded" by them. At one time, Armstrong rejected what he calls
relational immanent realism; roughly, the view that a thick particu-
lar is a complex state of affairs composed of a universal, a bare
particular or substratum and a relational tie of predication.
Armstrong's basic argument against relational immanent realism is
the claim that it falls prey to Bradley's famous regress argument
against relations: if a substratum requires a relation to be bound to
a property, then the substratum will require a relation to be bound
to the first relation, and so on. Because of this, Armstrong claims
that what is needed is a non-relational immanent realism. And his
account of thick and thin particulars is just such an account. Says
Armstrong, "this version of Immanent Realism [is one] which
distinguishes the particularity from the properties of a particular,
while denying that the two aspects are related".
29 In sum, particu-
larity and universality differ by a formal distinction, they are
indistinguishable although inseparable, and "they" are too inti-
mately conjoined to be related.
In his more recent thinking, Armstrong has followed Frege and
sought to incorporate exemplication into the universal itself.
30 He
claims that properties are unsaturated entities that are filled by
particulars, rather than being complete entities in their own right
that are exemplified by particulars. According to Armstrong, this
move allows him to avoid a Bradley-type regress that (allegedly)
comes from admitting that exemplification is a relation and it
makes sense of the fact that universals are dependent on states of
affairs and that there are no uninstantiated universals.
Unfortunately, this move seems merely to be a verbal shift, for
now universals must sustain two functions - having an intrinsic
qualitative nature and being had by something - instead of having\n88 UNIVERSALS
two entities each of which sustains one of these functions. It is hard
to see how the former is preferable to the latter. Moreover, being
unsaturated must now be taken as a real feature of universals differ-
ent from their qualitative natures (e. g. since redness and greeness
differ regarding their qualitative natures but agree in being satur-
ateable). If so, it is hard to see how being unsaturated is a spatially
located feature of either the universal or the state of affairs into
which it enters. It is important to remember that for Frege, neither
concepts nor their being unsaturated were spatiotemporally
located.
Third, there are other ways to avoid Bradley-type regresses
without appealing to the notion of saturation and these strategies
are well known. Some will be examined in Chapter 6.
Finally, no gain is made for Armstrong regarding the depend-
ence of universals on states of affairs or in providing a rationale for
rejecting uninstantiated universals. Frege himself believed that
concepts could exist without entering a state of affairs (Arm-
strong's language) or without being saturated. It is just not clear
why something could not exist while unsaturated. Without further
argumentation, which Armstrong fails to provide, a mere appeal to
saturation and a particular's filling a universal provides no justifica-
tion whatever for what Armstrong is after. Indeed, Frege's ontol-
ogy, including his views about saturation, have long been seen as
contrary to the naturalist stance.
31
Evaluation of Armstrong's realism
Is Armstrong's version of realism a viable way to embrace proper-
ties within the constraints of naturalism? The answer seems to be
no, and to see why it is important, first, to focus on certain issues in
Armstrong's view of properties as universals and secondly, on
issues in particularity and individuation. Let us begin with proper-
ties.
First, is it not at all clear that his understanding of properties is,
even if acceptable on other grounds, compatible with naturalism. It
would seem that naturalists should accept the axiom of localization
and most naturalists would agree with this assertion. Paradigm case
naturalist entities would appear to obey the Principle of In toto
Location (PIL): \nMINIMALIST REALISM 89
PIL: If entity e exists in toto at location L, then both (1) if x has
proper parts, they overlap with and only with sub-
regions of L, and (2) neither e nor any of its proper parts
overlap with some other location P such that P is not
identical to L or a sub-region of L.
If a necessary condition for being an entity in a naturalist ontology
is conformity to PIL, then Armstrong's universals are not natural
entities. It is just not clear how entities that are fully, completely
present at each embodiment are relevantly similar to other entities
embraced by naturalism to yield a consistent, economical ontology.
Besides considerations of PIL, most naturalists would find it
difficult to believe that an entity could simultaneously be in motion
and at rest if such a view is even coherent. But Armstrong's proper-
ties are precisely such entities. If stationary particular x has F
and moving particular y has F, then since F itself is at the location of
the particulars, F is both moving and at rest. In my opinion, his
universals are just as unacceptable for naturalism as is their
construal as abstract objects.
It may be objected that only particulars must obey the laws of
motion and properties are under no such constraint. However, to
his credit, Armstrong realizes that a consistent naturalist is most
reasonably taken to require that universals resemble particulars in
having spatiotemporal location. But, then, why not make the same
requirement regarding the prohibition of being simultaneously in
motion and at rest? If Armstrong relaxes the second requirement,
why not relax the first one? At the very least, Armstrong owes us an
account of this problem and, to my knowledge, he has not offered
one.
Secondly, it is not clear that properties are located at the place of
their instances.
32 For one thing, many properties (being even,
triangularity) and relations (the musical relations between sounds
in a music chord, being the father of, various logical relations) are
such that it is just not clear what it would mean to take them as
spatial, natural properties or relations. Armstrong could reject such
entities on the grounds that they do not have causal powers and,
thus, they have no being. But many philosophers would find it
more reasonable to reject causality as the mark of being than to
eschew these entities. \n90 UNIVERSALS
Moreover, if a red ball is on the table and Armstrong claims that
redness is spatially located on the table where the ball is, a reductive
paraphrase is available to a traditional realist who advocates a view
of properties as abstract objects: the ball is on the table and redness
is "in" the ball so the ball is located but the redness is not. The
realist paraphrase allows one to say everything that needs to be said
as far as spatial location is concerned, and the paraphrase includes
a spatial particular (the ball) and two non-spatial entities (redness,
and the way it is "in" the ball). Further, the instance of redness (see
below) may be spatial, but the redness "in" that instance need not
be. Put differently, every spatial predicate relevant to the state of
affairs in our purview can be ascribed to either the ball or the
instance of red (Husserl called it a moment)
33. But redness itself is
not spatial. When one sensuously attends to something spatial, one
is attending to an instance of redness (or the ball itself), and not to
redness. Redness is a colour, it has hue, intensity, saturation, it
resembles orange more than it resembles blue, and so forth. All the
facts we know about red itself are not spatial facts. Spatial predi-
cates are true of instances of redness, not redness itself.
Thirdly, is spite of what Armstrong claims, statements like
(1) Red is a colour.
and
(2) Red resembles orange more than it resembles blue.
express necessary truths whose modality is grounded in the de re
necessity of universals and the relevant relations between or among
them. T raditionally, these have been understood as truths of reason,
synthetic a priori truths that are true throughout possible worlds,
including those with no red particulars. In general, for some
universal F, there is a possible world w
1 such that F exists in w1 but
no objects exemplify F in w1. Propositions like (1) and (2) are true
throughout possible worlds and, according to traditional realists,
they are grounded in a view of universals as necessary beings whose
existence is independent of the existence of particulars exemplify-
ing them, and in genus/species or internal relations among
universals. For example, (1) expresses a genus/species relation
between a determinable (being coloured) and a determinate (being
red). And (2) expresses internal relations that obtain in a quality\nMINIMALIST REALISM 91
order consisting of the various determinates of a higher order,
determinable universal. And arguably, both the truth and modality
of these propositions are knowable a priori.
T wo arguments are central to Armstrong's case against transcen-
dental universals. The first one turns on his causal criterion of being.
However, it would seem that this criterion is question-begging in
this context and, arguably, less intuitively plausible than the reality
of uninstantiated universals. More will be said about this in Chapter
6. The second one represents a serious misunderstanding of what it
means to say that some universal F is a transcendental universal.
Armstrong appears to think that an advocate of transcendental
universals must take such entities as "standing apart" from the
spatiotemporal world; that is, properties stand apart and exist
separated from their instances in a different realm. The properties
do not enter into the being of their instances.
34 This leads Armstrong
to embrace what he calls the Principle of Instantiation: For each
property P, there exists (not necessarily now) a particular, x, such
that Px.
Unfortunately, Armstrong's statements in this regard are
confused. For one thing, the debate between Platonists and
Aristotelians about the relationship between properties and their
instances is not a debate about the "location" of those properties
(e. g. either in Plato's heaven or spatially contained in their
instances), but rather, about the ontological independence of
properties from their instances. Secondly, although this point will be
developed more in Chapter 5, it has already been noted that some-
one who sees universals as transcendental, abstract entities can still
take it to be the case that universals enter into the very being of their
instances. Armstrong seems to think that the reading of Plato which
turns properties into perfect particulars that are merely copied in
their instances, or something of the sort, is the only view available
for the transcendental realist, but this is just mistaken. The issue
here turns on the way a property is "in" its instance.
Thirdly, Armstrong's statement of the principle of instantiation
reveals a further problem with his position. He claims that a prop-
erty can exist at a time when it is not currently being instantiated as
long as it is instantiated at some time or another. Presumably, this
could allow him to embrace properties ontologically (not tempo-
rally) prior to the Big Bang or properties (e. g. certain colours) that\n92 UNIVERSALS
have only recently been exemplified. But how can the current exist-
ence of some entity depend on the fact that in the future (or past) it
will be exemplified in space and time? And how are we to conceive
of the current mode of existence of such an entity? How does it
currently fit into a naturalist ontology? These are difficult ques-
tions to answer and we will revisit this issue in Chapter 6.
Moreover, even if we grant the principle of instantiation, it does
not follow that properties are spatially located at the place of their
instances, but only that their existence depends on that of the
instances themselves. It could still be the case that properties are
abstract entities "in" their instances in a non-spatial way. In sum,
Armstrong's view of transcendental universals is historically inac-
curate and involved in problems in its own right. For these reasons,
it seems that he has not made his case against the existence of tran-
scendental universals.
When we turn from properties to his account of particularity
and individuation, things get no better. Indeed, it is not entirely
clear what his considered opinion of the matter actually is. If he
takes the distinction between universality and particularity to be a
formal distinction between "entities" that do not need to be
related, then, as became apparent in the discussion of Campbell's
tropes, this amounts to the claim that they are identical. If, on the
other hand, he says that the thin particular (entity a) is a constituent
in a thick particular (entity A) that is non-identical to a property/
properties of A, then his view seems to reduce to a form of imma-
nent realism with bare particulars. In this case, a thin particular
turns out to be a bare particular that individuates, and a thick
particular is a particular in virtue of its possession of the thin
particular. This is the victory of particularity. However, the victory
of particularity is paralleled by the victory of spatiality, so on this
latter reading of Armstrong, it is easy to see the universal in A and
the predication relation between that universal and the thin
particular as non-spatiotemporal entities. If this is the most satis-
factory analysis of a thick particular, then given Armstrong's own
statements about what is required of a naturalist analysis of proper-
ties, it counts as a refutation of naturalism.
On the other hand, it could be argued that Armstrong's earlier
views on particularity and individuation collapse into moderate
nominalism, and it is no accident that in some of his later writings, \nMINIMALIST REALISM 93
he has opened up considerably to moderate nominalism compared
to his earlier writings. 35 In one place he says,
So provided you abandon uninstantiated universals (good
riddance, I say), and provided Universals theorists and T rope
theorists coordinate their views on just what properties and
relations the world contains, it is easy to pass back and forth
between the theories.
36
Indeed. Armstrong's claims that universals are spatiotemporally
located at the place of their instances and his inadequate view of
individuation are virtually indistinguishable from the trope nomi-
nalism of Campbell which, as observed in Chapter 3, is riddled
with problems.
However, the various problems with moderate nominalism have
pushed Armstrong towards bare substrata, although a failure to
make a distinction in two senses of "being bare" obscures
Armstrong's views on this subject. As will become clear in Chapter
7, advocates of bare particulars distinguish two different senses of
being bare along with two different ways that something can have
a property. In one sense, an entity is bare if and only if it has no
properties in any sense. Now bare particulars are not bare in this
sense. They do not exist unless they possess properties.
There is another sense of "bare", however, that is true of bare
particulars. T o understand this, consider the way a classic Aristote-
lian substance has a property, say, some dog Fido's being brown.
On this view, Fido is a substance constituted by an essence that con-
tains a diversity of capacities internal to, within the being of Fido as
a substance. These capacities are potentialities to exemplify proper-
ties or to have parts that exemplify properties. The capacities are
grounds for the properties like brownness that Fido comes to have.
When a substance has a property, that property is "seated within"
and, thus, an expression of the "inner nature" of the substance
itself. Thus, Richard Connell is correct to distinguish the way
substances and bare substrata have properties when he claims that
properties are not simply tied to substances, but rather "rooted in. .. and caused by the substance".
37
In contrast, bare particulars are simple and properties are linked
or tied to them. This tie is asymmetrical in that some bare particu-\n94 UNIVERSALS
lar x has a property F and F is had by x. A bare particular is called
"bare", not because it comes without properties, but in order to
distinguish it from other particulars like substances and to distin-
guish the way it has a property (F is tied to x) from the way, say, a
substance has a property (F is rooted within x). Since bare particu-
lars are simples, there is no internal differentiation within them.
When a property is exemplified by a bare particular, it is modified
by being tied to that particular. Thus, bare particulars have a
number of properties (e. g. being red), and they have some proper-
ties necessarily (e. g. particularity), in the sense that a bare particu-
lar can exist only if it has certain properties tied to it. Now, this fact
about bare particulars neither makes them identical to their proper-
ties nor does it entail that properties are constituents within a bare
particular. Just because a man never comes out of his house naked,
it does not follow that he is his clothes or that they compose him as
constituents.
Armstrong's failure to distinguish these two senses of "being
bare" have lead to confusion in attempts to interpret his account of
individuation because he explicitly rejects yet implicitly seems to
accept bare particulars. He rejects bare particulars for the follow-
ing reason: " A particular that existed outside states of affairs would
not be clothed in any properties or relations. It may be called a bare
particular. If the world is to be a world of states of affairs we must
[reject] Bare Particulars".
38 Yet as we have seen earlier, Armstrong
makes a distinction between a thick particular ( a's being F) and a
thin particular ( a). He calls the latter a Lockean substratum and
accepts it as an individuator. For Armstrong, the particularity of a
normal (thick) particular is is an irreducible, unanalysable feature
of normal particulars. For him, particulars qua particulars do not
differ in nature, but in virtue of bare, numerical difference, bare
particularity, and he explicitly identifies this individuator (the thin
particular) with a Lockean substratum.
39 Armstrong rejects bare
particulars in the first sense but not the second, and given the fact
that advocates of bare particulars embrace the second sense, his
view is a bare particular position.
40
There is a lesson to be learned from Armstrong's developing
position. If one accepts a realist construal of properties, then one
must also embrace some type of individuator that is not a normal
property (e. g. an impure property) or is not a property at all, or else\nMINIMALIST REALISM 95
the position collapses into moderate nominalism. In his most
recent treatment of the subject, Armstrong has acknowledged this
point.
41 He continues to embrace universals, he explicitly rejects
the individuative adequacy of spatiotemporal location, tropes and
impure properties and he takes it that "bare numerical difference"
is what grounds the particularity of thick particulars. But on this
reading of Armstrong, it is hard to see how his account is superior
to a traditional realist view of individuation and particularity. In
fact, it is hard to see how his position avoids collapsing into the
traditional realist account.
If this is correct, then, in the absence of a better realist attempt to
coordinate a joint commitment to universals and naturalism, and in
view of the difficulties with both extreme and moderate nominal-
ism, the traditional historical position on the matter seems to be the
correct one: the existence and nature of properties is a serious
problem for naturalism, so serious that naturalism has been one of
the chief motivating factors for advancing extreme nominalism and
nominalism.
Throughout the history of philosophy, many have advanced the
idea that there is a connection between naturalism and different
versions of nominalism. Specifically, many philosophers have
argued that naturalism requires a nominalist rejection of the exist-
ence of properties construed along traditional realist lines as
abstract, multiply exemplifiable entities that non-spatially inhere in
their instances. Thus, in Sophist 246A-C, we read these words
from Plato:
Stranger: What we shall see is something like a battle of gods and
giants going on between them over their quarrel about reality.
Theaetetus: How so?
Stranger: One party is trying to drag everything down to earth out
of heaven and the unseen, literally grasping rocks and trees in
their hands, for they lay hold upon every stock and stone and
strenuously affirm that real existence belongs only to that
which can be handled and offers resistance to the touch. They
define reality as the same thing as body, and as soon as one of
the opposite party asserts that anything without a body is real,
they are utterly contemptuous and will not listen to another
word. \n96 UNIVERSALS
Theaetetus: The people you describe are certainly a formidable
crew. I have met quite a number of them before now.
Stranger: Y es, and accordingly their adversaries are very wary in
defending their position somewhere in the heights of the
unseen, maintaining with all their force that true reality
consists in certain intelligible and bodiless forms. In the clash
of argument they shatter and pulverize those bodies which
their opponents wield, and what those others allege to be true
reality they call, not real being, but a sort of moving process of
becoming. On this issue an interminable battle is always going
on between the two camps.
In the contemporary setting, Howard Robinson remarks that
"materialist theories are incompatible with realist theories of
universals. The tie between nominalism and materialism is an
ancient one".
42 Since most philosophers currently see physicalism
(which for our purposes can be used synonymously with material-
ism) as the best form of naturalism, Robinson's remark applies with
equal force to a widely accepted contemporary version of natural-
ism to be described below. Along similar lines, Reinhardt Gross-
mann has argued that naturalists are at war with what he calls
ontologists.
43 According to Grossmann, the universe is the
spatiotemporal totality of physical entities and the world includes
every existent whatever, including non-spatiotemporal abstract
entities such as properties. Naturalists deny the world and only
believe in the universe; ontologists like Grossmann accept the
world.
Johanna Seibt notes approvingly that extreme nominalist
Wilfrid Sellars argued several decades ago that "since the basic
relation of a Platonist theory of predication, i. e. exemplification,
cannot be defined in naturalist terms, a nominalist theory of predi-
cation proves to be '. .. the very foundation of a naturalist ontol-
ogy'".
44 Accordingly, Sellars claimed that "a naturalist ontology
must be a nominalist ontology". 45 The analysis of Armstrong's view
of universals offered above should help to clarify why Sellars and
others take this to be the case. \nTraditional realism:
5 properties are abstract objects
In Chapters 2 and 3, reasons were given for rejecting extreme
and moderate nominalist analyses of properties and property-
instances. This provided justification for the claim that a
realist analysis is the correct one. However, in Chapter 4 it
became evident that there are different positions that claim to be
realist ones. And two of those positions - Wolterstorff's and
Armstrong's - were found to have serious problems sufficient to
justify the search for a more adequate solution to the problem of
universals. In this chapter, the focus will be two-fold. First, an
analysis of the traditional realist construal of properties and
property-instances will be offered and evaluated. In the process,
it will become clear that an essential component of the traditional
view is an assay of property-instances as complex entities.
However, some philosophers opine that any ontology with
property-instances over and above properties and concrete
particulars is a moderate nominalist ontology. This claim is
sometimes illustrated by proffering a moderate nominalist
interpretation of Edmund Husserl's ontology. The second focus
of the chapter is an analysis and rebuttal of the supposed connec-
tion between nominalism and property-instances in general, and
moderate nominalism and Husserl in particular. \n98 UNIVERSALS
The traditional realist view of predication
Traditional realism, predication, and property-instances
T o elaborate on a traditional realist understanding of properties
and property-instances, recall our round, red spot, Socrates.
According to traditional realism, a universal is a multiply exempli-
fiable entity that is a numerically identical constituent in each of its
instances. Thus, instances are not simples for a traditional realist;
they are complex entities. Now consider the following three
sentences and the states of affairs they describe.
(1) Socrates (a red, round spot) is red.
(2) Red
1 is red.
(3) This (individuator, e. g. a bare particular) is red.
The state of affairs described by (1) is best understood as follows:
Socrates has a property-instance in it, red 1, and red 1 is red. The
relation between red 1 and Socrates is a sort of constituent/whole
relation. Let us call this the "moment/whole" relation, to borrow
Husserl's terminology. Observe that (1) is grounded, at least in
part, in (2). The "is" in (1) is grounded in two different "ways of
being in" - the way a moment is in a whole (Socrates) and the "way
of being in" expressed in (2).
The state of affairs described in (2) contains a second kind of
constituent/whole relation. (2) states that the universal, redness, is a
"part" of the whole, red
1 in the sense that redness is one of the
constituents that is in red1. This is not a spatial sense of in. Let us call
this "way of being in" the relation of "being an essential property-
constituent of". T wo things should be said about this relation as it is
found in (2). First, this is a constituent/whole relation that differs
from the "moment/ whole" relation of (1) in at least one important
way. If b stands to a in such a way that b "is an essential property-
constituent of" a, then the following two principles hold between a
and b that fail to obtain in the moment/whole relation:
• b transcends a in that b is necessary for a's existence but not
vice versa. Moreover, b enters into the being of a but not vice\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 99
versa. Here b is redness and a is red1. Redness can exist without
red1, and not vice versa. Red 1 could be destroyed but redness
would still exist unchanged. Thus, there is a modal distinction
between a universal and its instances. When a universal is
exemplified, the universal is modified and constitutes the
essence of its instances, which, in turn, are complex, depend-
ent particulars. The same could not be said for the "moment/
whole" relation in (1) between Socrates and red
1.
• b is the essence of a; that is, b answers the question "What is a
an instance of? " Redness is the essence of red 1. Red 1 is an
instance of redness in that redness is immanent within red1 as
its informing essence.
Secondly, this last point suggests an implication of (2). Sentence (2)
entails an "is" of classification. It implies that red1 is to be placed in
the class of red instances, where "class" refers to a group of entities
that literally share some entity in common. An "is" of classification
is more clearly expressed in
(2) Red
1 is a red.
This sentence expresses the fact that red 1 is identical to some red
instance in the class of red instances. Moreover, (2) and (2 ) are
grounded in a more basic relation that founds the inclusion of red1
in the class of red instances. This more basic relation is expressed
in (3).
The state of affairs described by (3) contains an "is" of exempli-
fication or predication. The "is" in (1) and (2) are expressions of
predication in a loose and popular sense and not in a strict, philo-
sophical sense. This is because the "is" in (1) and the "is" in (2) are
grounded in a more basic relation. Sentence (1) is grounded (in part)
in (2), and (2) is grounded in (3). The "is" in (3) refers to a basic,
undefined, irreducible nexus of exemplification. Sentence (3)
expresses the fact that the universal, redness, is connected to a bare
particular (or, perhaps, some other individuator) in red
1 by the nexus
of exemplification. This nexus of exemplification is inhomogeneous
in that it relates two entities that differ categorically; a universal and
an individuator. So redness is in an individuator (which is in red
1) in
that redness is predicated of or "tied to" that individuator. \n100 UNIVERSALS
This, then, is a sketch of a traditional realist assay of property-
instances that: maintains true universals; grounds the individuation
of property-instances by making them complex entities with an
individuating constituent in them; and clarifies three important
states of affairs and their associated "ways of being in". For tradi-
tional realists, neither the universal nor the exemplification nexus
are spatiotemporal entities. Moreover, in the case of Socrates and
Plato, the exemplification nexus connects an abstract entity with a
spatio-temporal one.
Four advantages of the traditional realist view
At this juncture, recall Johanna Seibt's assertion that "since the
basic relation of a Platonist theory of predication, i. e. , exemplifica-
tion, cannot be defined in naturalist terms, a nominalist theory of
predication proves to be '. .. the very foundation of a naturalist
ontology'".
1 Among other things, the critiques of Campbell,
Wolterstorff and Armstrong in Chapters 3 and 4 have focused on
their analyses of predication (i. e. exemplification). It may be help-
ful to compare the traditional realist account of properties, predi-
cation and property-instances with the views of Armstrong and
Campbell. For present purposes, Wolterstorff's position may safely
be set aside since it is indistinguishable from Campbell's in the
areas to be mentioned. There are at least four advantages to the
traditional realist assay of a property-instance when it is compared
to views like those of Armstrong or Campbell.
First, a universal F-ness must be brought together with its
instances in such a way that they can be called F. Redness must be
"tied to" its instances so as to make them red and not bare entities
(or green for that matter). The traditional realist assay of property-
instances explains why red
1 is red and not bare (or green). Red1 is
red because the universal, redness, is in it as one of its constituents
and redness is the colour of red
1. Prima facie, Armstrong's view
succeeds on this score, but Campbell's does not.
Secondly, the traditional assay of red 1 clarifies the relation
between redness and red1 in a way that is not found in views that
liken this relationship to a set membership relation (Campbell) or a
"being wholly spatially located at the same place as" relation
(Armstrong). These treatments of this relation leave unclear\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 101
precisely how the "universal" is really related to its instances. Sets
are not in their members. Moreover, given that many philosophers
believe that two entities can be at the same place at the same time
without one being a constituent of the other, Armstrong's
spatialized rendition of exemplification is not sufficient. As it
stands, it provides no account of how the universal is in, and not
merely co-located with its instance.
By contrast, the traditional realist sketch presents the universal
as a constituent in its instances and, thus, treats this relation along
the lines of part/whole relations. This part/whole relation involves
a more deeply grounded relation between redness and the individu-
ator in red
1. Admittedly, this relation is basic and undefined. But it
can be viewed as a tie or a link between two entities. Moreover, the
response to the claim that this version of "immanent relational
realism" falls prey to Bradley's regress argument is one that
Armstrong himself admits is hard to refute: it is a unique feature of
relations (including exemplification) that they can relate relata
without needing other entities to relate them to those relata.
Thirdly, the traditional realist account presents red
1 as a
complex entity with two constituents that serve to ground both the
universality and the particularity of red
1. By contrast, instances for
Campbell and, on an earlier and less charitable reading, for
Armstrong, are simple entities without further entities in them. In a
way that should now be familiar, this move leaves the abstract
particular as a universal (red), a bare particular (1), or some
unclarified entity that somehow sustains both functions without
grounding either. Armstrong's latter, clarified views do, indeed,
analyse the property-instance as a complex state of affairs, al-
though it treats the property and, perhaps, the truth-maker for a
property's potential for being saturated, as spatiotemporal entities
located at the place of the property-instance. This does allow
Armstrong to ground both the universality and individuation of
property-instances, but in a way that is problematic for his natural-
ism and otiose from a traditional realist standpoint.
Finally, the traditional account explains how it is that the univer-
sal transcends its instances. The universal is indifferent to any
particular instance (a Platonist would add all its instances) since the
universal can be a constituent in many instances through the non-
spatiotemporal, inhomogeneous nexus of exemplification. When\n102 UNIVERSALS
redness has red1 as one of its instances, this is due to the fact that
some entity (a bare particular) outside the nature of redness has
entered into an exemplification relation with redness. Something
happens to redness, namely, it is modified and becomes exemplified.
Thus, redness transcends its instances. If a universal is just a set of
tropes (Campbell) then the universal cannot transcend its instances
because the identity conditions for sets are constituted by the
members of those sets. Change the membership and you change the
set. Wolterstorff says that his kinds do, in fact, transcend their cases,
but since he takes kinds to be a some sort of unity of cases as
members of the kind, it is not clear how the kind can exist without
the members that belong to and constitute it. Armstrong's views are
clearer than Campbell's in this regard because he can claim that a
universal transcends a specific instance in that it is wholly present at
the same location as its other instances. However, this solution goes
against the axiom of localization and for those who accept that
axiom, Armstrong's model of transcendence will be problematic.
Realism, moderate nominalism and Husserlian
property-instances (moments)
The traditional realist account presented above includes, as an
essential element, the existence of property-instances. However,
some philosophers, such as Reinhardt Grossmann, claim that if
philosophers accept property-instances in addition to properties
and concrete particulars, they are moderate nominalists.
Grossmann puts the argument this way:
A certain view about the nature of properties has had a grip on
the minds of many philosophers. According to this view, the
whiteness of billiard ball A is not the same thing as the white-
ness of billiard ball B. Each ball has its own whiteness, so that
we must distinguish between whiteness
1 and whiteness2, white-
ness1 being the colour of A and whiteness2 being the colour of
B. 2
Grossmann seems to think that if a philosopher uses definite
descriptions like "the F of A " or "the F of B" to refer to non-
identical entities, then that philosopher is a nominalist. In this\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 103
section, it will become apparent that Grossmann's claim is false.
The mere fact that a philosopher does not accept the identity of the
referent of "the F of A " and "the F of B" does not entail that the
philosopher is a moderate nominalist.
As an application of this argument, Grossmann has attempted to
show that Edmund Husserl was a moderate nominalist. Now,
admittedly, students of Husserl are divided when it comes to stating
his theory of universals. Was Husserl a realist or a moderate nomi-
nalist? On the realist side are philosophers like Dallas Willard who
has argued that "it is obvious that Ideas (universals, 'species', es-
sences) and the viewing and analyzing thereof form the substance
of his entire philosophy".
3 On the moderate nominalist side there
are those who would agree with Gustav Bergmann when he
claimed that "Husserl made two major mistakes. For one, he is a
[moderate] nominalist".
4
The primary purpose of this section is to argue that a philo-
sophical commitment to property-instances does not make one a
moderate nominalist. T o accomplish this goal, the main focus will
be on the debate about Husserl because his views are valuable in
their own right and they provide a test case for assessing the claims
of philosophers such as Grossmann. Regarding Husserl, it will
become apparent that he was realist. There are a number of issues
relevant to proving this point. But the most important issue in the
debate about Husserl's view of universals is his doctrine of
property-instances; that is, moments. By focusing on different ways
of assaying a Husserlian moment, the main issues in the realist/
nominalist debate will become clear and the strength of the realist
case will be enhanced.
From earlier chapters, it has become clear that nominalists treat
property-instances (e. g. tropes) as simples. Moderate nominalism
is a blob theory. When assaying a Husserlian moment, this will be
called the simplicity view.
By contrast, a realist is one who holds that a universal is a
multiply exemplifiable constituent in its instances. The universal is
the essence of those instances and the ground of their resemblance
with other instances of the same universal. Thus, two instances of
redness, red
1 and red 2, are complex entities that have the same
nature, redness, and they stand to that nature in a basic nexus,
which is the tie of predication between the redness and an\n104 UNIVERSALS
individuator in each instance. Realism is a layer-cake ontology.
When assaying a Husserlian moment, we will call this the complex-
ity view.
One preliminary is in order. In what follows, it will be assumed
that Husserl either assayed a red moment, red
1, as a simple entity or
as a complex entity with redness, the nexus of exemplification, and
an individuator in red
1 as constituents. But either view is mistaken
if taken as the whole story of Husserl's treatment of a moment like
red
1. For Husserl, a red moment will have, among other things,
hue, intensity and saturation (and, perhaps, colour and extension)
as constituents.
This fact is irrelevant for our purposes, however, since the
current focus is on the nature of the universal, redness, how it
relates to its moments and the problem of the individuation of red
moments. These same issues could be raised for each of these
constituents (except for colour and extension, which involve prob-
lems about the relationship between higher and lower order
universals). So to simplify our investigation, hue, intensity and the
like will be disregarded.
Would Husserl assay red
1 as a simple entity or as a complex
entity? The debate may best be diagnosed by, first, considering
arguments for the simplicity view.
Arguments for the simplicity view
Argument 1
Reinhardt Grossmann argues for the simplicity view based on a
statement from Logical Investigation II, which can be paraphrased
as follows.
5 We can concentrate our attention on the-green-of-the-
tree before us. Let us assume this can be done in such a way that we
become unaware of all of its individualizing aspects. In this case,
the-green-of-another-tree (of the same shade) could be substituted
for the-green-of-this-tree and we would not notice the difference.
Nevertheless, inattention to the individuality of the-green-of-this-
tree does not remove its particularity. Thus, the-green-of-this-tree
is a particular and not a universal, and it is a simple entity which
exists here and now, a moment of green. \nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 105
Argument 2
Wolfgang Künne appeals to another argument from the second
Logical Investigation to support the simplicity view.
6 The argument
states that each geometrical fragmentation of, say, a green surface
has its own green. Otherwise, we could not talk about the spread of
a colour over a surface. For example, the green of the top half of
the surface is not identical to the green of the bottom half even
when they are the same shade. Thus, each fragmentation has its
own green, green
1, green2, .. . and these are simple particulars, viz.
moments.
Argument 3
James T alvite cites yet another argument from Logical Investigation
II in favour of the simplicity view. 7 The argument states that certain
predicates are true of a species but false and absurd when applied to
the moments of that species (and vice versa). For example, a green
moment is located in space and time, is spread out, arises and
vanishes, and so forth. But none of these things can be truly predi-
cated of the species, green. Thus, green moments are particular
entities which are simple.
Argument 4
The fourth argument is an argument from perception. It comes in
at least two different forms, both of which proceed in two steps. In
the first step it is claimed that moments, like red
1, can be the objects
of normal acts of perception. In such acts, we see something
particular that is located in space and time. The colour we see and
everything about it is spatiotemporal. Indeed, what we see with our
very eyes is always located in space and time. Thus, the colour we
see is not a complex entity with two abstract entities (redness,
exemplification) as constituents. Rather, it is a simple, viz. a
moment. Advocates of both forms of the argument appear to be in
agreement about the first step, but there are different moves made
from here.
Some state the second step in this way.
8 Foes of moments must
counter the argument of the first step by replacing moments with
universals, independent particulars and exemplification. This strat-
egy fails for two reasons: it does not provide an adequate account
of cases where we clearly seem to see moments themselves; and it\n106 UNIVERSALS
often involves the absurd claim that we can see the universal in the
concrete particular that somehow contains it, while maintaining at
the same time that the universal remains outside space and time.
There is an alternative version of the second step.
9 If someone
tries to combine a commitment to universals as abstract objects
with a belief in moments, then the most plausible depiction of our
knowledge of universals entails that moments are simples. Once
this is done, the argument continues, the slide to nominalism is
hard to avoid because "universals" become redundant and, in any
case, they turn out to be mere abstract objects like sets or perfect
particulars and not true universals, because they are no longer
taken as multiply exemplifiable entities in their instances. What is
the most plausible depiction of our knowledge of universals to
which reference was just made? It is the view that upon seeing a red
moment, the mind "turns elsewhere" so to speak and through
rational intuition it "perceives" the universal that remains entirely
outside the moment.
What does the perception argument have to do with Husserl? If
successful, the argument shows that moments are simples. Once
this is granted, universals become otiose and, in fact, they are no
longer multiply exemplifiable entities. Since realism is a layer-cake
ontology, this amounts to an abandonment of realism. Husserl may
not have seen this in the early stages of his thought, but, the argu-
ment continues, he should have and, in any case, his slide towards
nominalism is already underway with his introduction of property-
instances; that is, moments.
There is a similarity in the first three arguments and a general
response can be given to them. Simply put, phrases like "the F of a"
are ambiguous and the mere presence of such phrases does little to
show that their referents are to be taken as simple entities. For
example, phrases like "the F of a", say "the redness of red
1", can be
a way of referring to the universal, redness, in red1 as opposed to
the shape of red1 or in contrast to a different shade of colour.
Secondly, "the F of a" can be taken to refer to a complex entity
- redness, a tie of exemplification and an individuator. When a
universal is exemplified by a particular to form a complex entity,
then this complex entity is itself a particular. This is the victory of
particularity. Similarly, if a universal is exemplified by a spatio-\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 107
temporal entity, the complex whole that is formed is itself spatio-
temporal. The universal is "in" the complex whole, but this
relation is not itself a spatiotemporal one nor is at least one of the
entities it relates. Thus, the complex moment, red
1, can be a spatio-
temporal particular without one of its constituents - the universal,
redness - being a spatiotemporal particular.
So Husserl's arguments regarding moments can be granted with-
out implying that moments like red
1 or green1 are simple. Red1 can
be complex and his arguments could still hold. For example, two
moments on the same surface, green
1 and green2, are both particu-
lar and are not identical to each other even though the greenness in
each is an identical constituent in both. Husserl may have used
phrases like "the F of a" to refer to simples, but he did not have to
use them in that way for arguments 1-3 to be cogent. And the mere
presence of "the F of a" in these arguments cannot decide the issue,
for they are ambiguous.
Regarding argument 1, Husserl could be making the simple
point that a moment does not become a species by ignoring its
particularity. Husserl could still consistently hold that the green-
ness in each green moment is a universal constituent in those
moments, without denying that the moments themselves are
numerically distinct particulars. Arguments 2 and 3 can be handled
in the same sort of way.
However, argument 4 is a somewhat more difficult one for a
realist. If a moment like green
1 is a complex entity, with greenness
as one of the constituents in it, then when one sees green1 it would
be possible to "see" the greenness in green1, at least in the sense of
being directly aware of it in the moment. In other words, the com-
plexity view implies that universals like greenness can be objects of
acts of perception. They can be seen with the eyes, for in seeing
green moments, it is the greenness in them that constitutes their
colour.
Did Husserl hold that one can perceive a universal with the
eyes? It would certainly seem that some statements made by him,
which are often overlooked by advocates of the simplicity view,
suggest a positive answer to that question. In sections 2-5 of part 1,
chapter 1 of Ideas I, Husserl states that the essence of an indi-
viduum (a particular, a this-here) can be "found in the very own
being" of that individuum. In fact, he seems to state clearly that a\n108 UNIVERSALS
universal is in the moment and that it can be seen in the moment as
one of its constituents. 10 The Eidos, the pure essence of an indi-
vidual "can be exemplified for intuition in experiential data - in
data of perception, memory, and so forth".
11
T aken at face value, it is hard to see what these statements mean
if they are not understood along realist lines. As Dallas Willard has
argued, according to Husserl one "can find - immediately recog-
nize - the same element in many different individuals of the same
kind which come before us in intuition".
12 It is true that for Husserl
one may need to see several moments of the same universal before
one can have an eidetic intuition of the universal itself. Neverthe-
less, in such acts of intuition it is the universal that which is seen as
one and the same in each of its moments. Whether or not this view
is absurd, it seems to have been Husserl's considered judgement
about the matter. But because this is such an important topic for a
realist ontology, a more detailed discussion of the "perception" of
universals, including Husserl's position, will be presented in Chap-
ter 6.
In sum, the arguments for the simplicity view listed above are
not compelling and, in fact, an examination of the fourth argument
has lead to some passages in Husserl that directly support the com-
plexity view. Let us now turn to an examination of other arguments
for the complexity view.
Arguments for the complexity view
The first argument has to do with Husserl's view of the genus/
species relations that obtain between higher and lower order
universals. In Ideas I, Husserl explicitly states that higher order
universals are "contained inside" of the more determinate
universals lying below them.
13 Elsewhere, he says that "the univer-
sal, red, is 'inherent' in the different nuances of red. .. , 'colour' is
'inherent' in red or blue".
14 He calls this relation of inherence a
part-whole relation where the higher order universal is contained
in the lower order universal.
In another passage in the Ideas, Husserl sheds more light on this
relation through an example. He says, "Thus, for example, any
tone in and of itself has an essence and, highest of all, the universal
essence tone as such, or rather sound as such - taken purely as the\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 109
moment that can be singled out intuitively in the individual tone". 15
This seems to suggest that when an individual moment has an
essence, it also has the higher order universals contained in that
essence. A higher order universal, tone as such, is "in" the infimae
species, which is the nature of this particular tone by virtue of the
fact that a moment of the higher order universal is contained in the
lower, more determinate, universal.
This interpretation is confirmed by a statement in Logical Inves-
tigation III: "The generic 'moment' of colour, for instance. .. , can
only be realized in, a 'moment' of lowest difference such as red,
blue, etc. "
16
Assume that redness is a first-order universal and that colour is a
second order universal. Disregarding the constituents of hue, inten-
sity and brightness, red
1 still cannot be a simple entity for it has, as
one of the constituents in it, a moment of the second order univer-
sal, colour. Thus, red
1 is a complex entity and the simplicity view is
wrong.
It seems that this argument has some value. At the very least, it
shows that Husserl's view of the genus/species relations among
universals is quite different from the  of set membership used by
Keith Campbell, or the kind/case relation employed by Wolter-
storff. For Husserl, the genus/species relation is a type of part-
whole relation and, thus, red
1 is complex for Husserl in a way that
is not true for Campbell and Wolterstorff.
Unfortunately, this is not the kind of complexity a realist wishes
to attribute to red1. The realist assays the complexity of red1 so as to
include at least one genuine universal which is multiply exempli-
fiable, redness. And many realists would hold that the second order
universal, colour, is a numerically identical constituent in all first
order universals that are colours. But the genus/species relation
held to by Husserl makes no clear reference to a One- in-Many. A
defender of the simplicity view could point out that it is a moment
of colour that is in redness (which, in turn, is tokened by red
1), and
this is not a true second order universal; a One- in-Many. It is, at
best, a species that has many instances. Or a defender of the
simplicity view could hold that Husserl accepted a constituent
ontology in assaying the part-whole relations between higher and
lower order universals, but abandoned that framework in his treat-
ment of the relation between first order universals and their\n110 UNIVERSALS
moments. So this argument fails to establish the kind of complexity
at the level of moments like red1 involved in the complexity view.
On the other hand, the above statements by Husserl do seem to
indicate that he did not reject a constituent ontology when he assayed
the relationship between higher and lower order universals. If
Husserl rejected such an ontology at this level, then greenness would
not have a moment of colour in it; greenness would simply be a
moment of colour. This would be consistent with a simplicity view
analysis of a moment of green
1 wherein green 1 does not have a
moment of greenness in it; rather, green 1 simply is a moment of
greenness. Furthermore, while Husserl may have employed a
constituent ontology for relations between higher and lower order
universals, and abandoned that framework in his analysis of the
relation between an infimae species and its moments, surely the bur-
den of proof is on the simplicity view here. It is more natural and con-
sistent to treat Husserl's view as a constituent ontology throughout.
There is a second argument for the complexity view based on
Husserl's notion of foundation.
17 According to Husserl, colour and
extension stand in a relation of foundation. That is, one cannot
have a moment of some colour without there also being a moment
of some extension. Instances of colour are necessarily associated
with and require supplementation by an instance of extension.
Consider the red, round spot, Socrates. Socrates is a whole with
two dependent parts or moments, red
1 and round1. These moments
stand to each other in a relation of foundation. This relation is an a
priori law of the essences or species of these moments, redness and
extension. Husserl states the following: "Our discussions so far
have shown that there is always an a priori law governing what is
non-independent, having its conceptual roots in what is universal
in the whole and part in question" (emphasis added).
18
So the relationship between red 1 and extension 1 (which are
dependent parts of the whole, Socrates) is determined by an a
priori law of essence, which is grounded in the universals in those
moments. Thus, a defender of the complexity view could argue
that these relations between moments like red
1 and extension1 are
only true of these moments because they are laws relating to the
universal essences that are constituents in them.
On the simplicity view, it is hard to see how the kind or species
is brought together with or in the moment in such a way that the\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 111
former genuinely determines the nature of the latter. How does
redness make red, , red, if not by being the redness in red1? Simi-
larly, how can a priori laws governing the relationships that obtain
between moments have anything to do with those moments unless
they are laws pertaining to the essences of those moments, and
unless these essences are constituents in those moments?
A defender of the simplicity view could respond by asserting that
the species is instanced by its moments and this relation is just a
basic, primitive relation. But this appears to be a mere assertion,
and it simply leaves unclear how the essence of a moment makes
that moment what it is. Since Husserl makes such important use of
the a priori relations between moments and since he grounds these
in laws having to do with the essences of those moments, then his
view would be clarified and more consistent if he held that those
essences were constituents in their moments. For then it is the
essences themselves in their moments that are related by a priori
laws, and not essences that are so related and then, somehow,
instanced by those moments.
A third, and final, argument for the complexity view centres on
some of Husserl's comments about individuation and ultimate
substrates. Recall that on the simplicity view, a moment does not
need to be individuated because its particularity is primitive. Its
particularity and intrinsic nature differ by a distinction of reason
and, given a denial of universal entities in the moment, no ground-
ing of particularity is required. The same cannot be said for the
complexity position. On this view, a moment has at least two
constituents that are universals (e. g. redness and exemplification),
so some account must be offered of what makes the moment a
particular. Thus, the very act of providing such an account entails
the complexity view.
In sections 11-15 of book I, part I, chapter I of the Ideas I,
Husserl discusses genus/species relations and different hierarchies
of being. In terms similar to those used by Aristotle, Husserl argues
that as one ascends to higher and higher levels of universals, one
eventually reaches summa genera. In descending, one finally
reaches ultimate, formless substrates. These substrates are "pure,
syntactically formless, individual single particulars".
19 He also says
that these substrates are basic entities that cannot be broken down
further, they are uncombined individuals, that is not composed of\n112 UNIVERSALS
properties or parts, and they cannot be derived by applying predi-
cates to other entities. This seems to mean that they do not have
properties contained within them, although for Husserl, these
substrates will always have properties connected to them because
on his view, they not self-sufficient and they are always found with
properties.
20
On a few occasions, Husserl describes these ultimate substrates
by using the Aristotelian notion of tode ti, which for Aristotle has as
its primary meaning something indivisible and one in number (Cat.
3b 10-114). Aristotle used tode ti to refer to forms, primary
substances or prime matter. Husserl's main use of tode ti is to refer
to an ultimate subject of predication that is itself formless and
particular. His description of a tode ti reminds one of a bare
particular for Gustav Bergmann, which, he said, was Aristotelian
prime matter splintered.
In one very interesting passage, Husserl compares an ultimate
substrate with a moment. He points out that an ultimate substrate
is an "uncombined individuum"; something particular. Then he
says this: "The quality-moment in itself 'has no individuality. ' Is it
accordingly an essence? " The passage is difficult to understand. But
Husserl seems to be saying that a moment needs to have an ultimate
substrate in it that is its ultimate subject of predication and that
grounds its individuation. By "quality-moment in itself " Husserl
seems to mean the quality-moment as quality. Thus, red
1 in so far as
it is red is not particular. No account of individuation is given if we
simply consider red
1 qua red.
Unfortunately Husserl's views here are unclear in just the same
way that Aristotle was unclear. Aristotle was unclear about the
form-instance relation. For example, in the category of substance,
statements like "Socrates is a man" may contain an ungrounded
"is" of classification that places a primary substance (Socrates) in a
class, the secondary substance. Or Aristotle may ground this "is" in
a more basic relation involving the predication of the form, human-
ity, of the matter in Socrates. The former represents a reading of
Aristotle that is compatible with the simplicity view since, on this
reading, Socrates is a simple, particular entity (disregarding acci-
dents) and the universal, humanity, is like one of Wolterstorff 's
kinds. The latter is more in keeping with the complexity view since,
on this reading, Socrates is a complex entity with these constituents\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: PROPERTIES & ABSTRACT OBJECTS 113
(disregarding accidents): the universal, humanity, the individuating
matter in Socrates and the tie of exemplification.
It appears that Husserl is somewhat unclear in the same way. But
his comments about individuation and ultimate substrates do seem
to imply the complexity view, even if Husserl's explicit statements
are not clear. For on the simplicity view, moments come individu-
ated in and of themselves. The simplicity view rejects the part-
whole framework in its treatment of a moment as a simple. Thus,
the problem of individuation does not even arise. Only the
complexity view requires some sort of ultimate substrate to ground
the individuation of moments, and the fact that Husserl links
individuation with such substrates implies that he accepts the part-
whole framework for moments. And this is nothing other than the
complexity view.
In sum, in this section the arguments for the simplicity view have
been analysed and found to be inadequate. In addition, several
arguments have been presented to show that Husserlian moments
are complex entities. Husserl was a realist and his ontology
included true universals, those multiply exemplifiable entities that
are constituents in their instances. \nTraditional realism: issues
6 and objections
In Chapters 2 and 3, reasons were given for preferring realism over
both schools of nominalism. In Chapters 4 and 5, different versions
of realism were analysed, and traditional realism was clarified and
defended. Still, there are objections to realism - traditional or oth-
erwise - yet to be considered. Moreover, intriguing topics surface
in developing a mature realist position on properties and their
instances. It is impossible to cover all the relevant topics in one
short chapter or, indeed, in one book. So the discussion to follow
will be limited to subjects that regularly arise in the literature and
that are interesting in their own right. The first section contains an
examination of three arguments against realism and the second
presents two issues that are part of a developed realist ontology, viz.
the existence of uninstantiated universals and the relationship
between properties and existence.
Three objections to realism
Three objections to realism surface frequently: realist vicious
regresses, problems with identity conditions for properties and dif-
ficulties reconciling naturalism with knowledge of abstract objects.
The realist vicious infinite regresses
Three regress arguments have been raised against realists: the third
man argument; an argument focusing on an ascending hierarchy of
exemplificational properties; and an exemplification relational\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 115
regress argument. The third man argument was discussed in Chap-
ter 1 and will not be examined here.
The hierarchy of exemplificational properties argument goes
like this. According to realists, when some object a has a property
being F, then this is to be explained as a exemplifying F-ness. Thus,
(1) a is F.
is analysed as
(1) a exemplifies F-ness.
But if several objects, including a, have in common that they exem-
plify F-ness, then sentences like (1) should be analysed as
(1) a exemplifies the exemplification of F-ness.
Now the regress generated is a vicious infinite one, the argument
goes, and, thus, a realist analysis of universals and their exemplifi-
cation should be rejected.
Realists have responded to this argument by noting that while
the linguistic expressions in (1) and (1 ) are different ("is F" and
"exemplifies F-ness"), they involve the same states of affairs. And
the same point can be made for the expressions "exemplifies
F-ness" and "exemplifies the exemplification of F-ness" in (1) and
(1). When a number of objects agree in being F, that is, indeed,
explained by those objects exemplifying F-ness. But nothing
further is involved in noting that several objects exemplify F-ness.
When several objects exemplify F-ness, it is not because they all
exemplify the exemplification of F-ness, but rather, because they all
exemplify F-ness, they all stand in the nexus of exemplification to
F-ness. And, claim realists, that ends the regress.
The next regress argument also involves exemplification and is
similar to one raised against the existence of relations by F. H.
Bradley. According to Bradley, before relata a and b can be related,
they must enter into relation R with each other. But before a or b
can be related to R, each must stand to R in some relation R  and
R, respectively, and on to infinity.
Similarly, when a is F, then the realist will say that this is because
a stands in the exemplification relation with F-ness. Thus, a univer-\n116 UNIVERSALS
sal can be possessed by a particular only by entering the exemplifi-
cation relation with that particular. But, now, on a realist view the
exemplification relation is itself a universal and in order for it to
relate a to F-ness, exemplification must itself be exemplified. How-
ever, this means that exemplification itself must stand to a and F-
ness in some other exemplification relation to ensure that exempli-
fication itself can function to relate a to F-ness. Call the relation
between a and F-ness "exemplification
1". Before exemplification1
can do its job of relating a to F, exemplification1 must be exempli-
fied and, given the nature of exemplification, this means that exem-
plification
2 must exist. The function of exemplification 2 is to
ensure that a and F enter into the exemplification relation (exem-
plification1).
In the case of Bradley's famous argument against relations,
philosophers have responded by claiming that, just as one does not
need superglue to connect two objects to normal glue in order to tie
them together with normal glue, so relations are the sort of things
that do not need to be related to their relata before they can relate
those relata to each other. In the same way, realists point out their
account of exemplification (when a is F it is because a is related to
F-ness by way of another entity, exemplification) does not apply to
exemplification itself. The exemplification relation does not need
to be exemplified by way of another, higher order exemplification
relation before it can connect a to F-ness. As a primitive metaphysi-
cal fact, exemplification is an unmediated linker of properties to
other properties or to particulars. In order to capture this feature of
exemplification, realists sometimes call it the nexus of exemplifica-
tion rather than the relation of exemplification.
Identity conditions for properties
Some philosophers argue that compared to sets, the identity condi-
tions for properties are obscure and, therefore, properties, includ-
ing realist depictions of them, should be rejected. There are clear,
extensionalist identity conditions for sets: sets A and B are identical
just in case they have exactly the same members. But, the argument
continues, no such identity conditions exist for properties. Some-
times this argument is associated with the slogan "No entity with-
out identity! "\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 117
Unfortunately, the argument and the slogan it specifies is
ambiguous and can be interpreted in either an ontological or epis-
temological way. Understood, ontologically, "no entity without
identity" expresses the following:
N
0: Necessarily, for all entities e, e exists if and only if e is
indentical to e.
Understood in this way, N0 seems both clearly correct and hardly a
problem for the realist. The realist can simply apply a modified
version of Leibniz's law of the indiscernibility of identicals to
universals themselves:
LL
U: Given universals U 1 and U2, U1 is identical to U 2 if and
only if for every possible world, W, U1 and U2 have all and
only the same properties in W.
T o be sure, LLU requires that properties themselves have properties,
but this seems to be the case, and those realists who employ argu-
ments from abstract reference for universals would appear to
embrace the fact that, e. g. redness has colourfulness as a property.
Additionally, the argument may be interpreted epistemologically:
N
E: We are not justified in believing in some entity e unless
we have clear identity conditions, stated in terms of nec-
essary and sufficient conditions, for judging whether or
not e is present or, given e and some other entity f,
whether e is identical to f.
So understood, N
E appears to be an expression of epistemological
methodism according to which one cannot know (or be justified in
believing) that P, unless one knows (justifiably believes): some crite-
rion Q that expresses how it is that one knows (justifiably believes)
that P; and that P satisfies Q.
1 According to methodism, one must
know how one knows before one can know and if one cannot answer
the sceptical question of how one knows, then one is defeated by the
sceptic. By way of application, unless identity conditions can be
given that satisfy N
E, we are not justified in believing in properties
and no such conditions have been forthcoming. \n118 UNIVERSALS
What is the realist to say in response to this argument? The best
strategy is for the realist to adopt epistemological particularism
according to which there are some particular items of knowledge
(or justifiable belief) that one can know (justifiably believe) with-
out knowing how one knows them, without the need for criteria
for knowledge. According to the particularist, the sceptical ques-
tion of how people know what they know is a heuristic guide for
insight, for extending knowledge from clear paradigm cases to
borderline cases. This is done by surfacing from clear cases certain
criteria for knowledge (which are justifed from prior knowledge
of the clear cases and not vice versa), and employing these criteria
to borderline cases in order to extend knowledge. On this view,
the realist could admit that in some cases (e. g. heat and mean
kenetic energy) we may not have clear identity conditions that
satisfy N
E. But it does not follow from this that we do not have
knowledge of properties. For example, we know what redness is
and we know directly that it is different from sourness, blueness
or being even.
Even if this response is adequate to rebut the critic, N
E does
surface the need for the realist to develop criteria for property
identity as a part of a mature realist ontology. Realists have
responded to this need and the following have been suggested as
adequate. Properties P and Q are identical just in case:
(a) The course grain criterion: P and Q are, or perhaps, are neces-
sarily coextensive.
2
(b) The causal criterion: P and Q confer the same causal or nomo-
logical powers on their spatiotemporal instances. 3
(c) The semantic criterion:
• "P" and "Q" are names of properties and they are either
synomymous or were used to fix the reference for the same
property at the initial baptism of the two terms; or
• "P" is a property name and "Q" is a definite description for a
property (or vice versa) and "P" names the only property that
has the property of satisfying the description of the property
expressed by "Q"; or
• if "P" and "Q" are descriptions of properties, "P" refers to the
property R (the property of satisfying the description
expressed by "P"), "Q" refers to property S (the property of\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 119
satisfying the description expressed by "Q"), and the only
property that has R has S and conversely. 4
(d) The intentional inclusion criterion: P and Q include and
involve each other. 5
Most realists have not accepted (a) or (b), although philosophical
naturalists have been especially favourable towards them. Several
arguments have been raised against the course grain criterion. It
wrongly identifies distinct, contingently co-exemplified or unexem-
plified properties (e. g. being red and being wavelength alpha, being
a Martian and being a Vulcan), it similarly fails to distinguish neces-
sarily co-exemplified properties (being triangular, being trilateral),
and it confuses a property with the set of things that have the
property. Criticisms of the causal criterion have included the fact
that it wrongly rules out the existence of contingently uninstanti-
ated properties (being a Vulcan) and necessarily uninstantiated
properties (being square and round), it wrongly denies the existence
of causally impotent properties (being even, being a prime number),
it renders epiphenomenalism not merely false, but necessarily false,
and it rules out what is clearly possible and may, in fact, be actual,
viz. distinct properties that satisfy the criterion (being red, being
wavelength alpha; being a pain, being C fibre ).
The semantic criterion needs a bit more elaboration. As
expressed above, it presupposes that names are rigid designators
that refer to the same entity in all possible worlds in which it exists
and that definite descriptions are non-rigid designators that refer to
whatever contingently satisfies the description. With this in mind,
examples of "P" and "Q" for the three disjuncts, respectively, are
"blue"/"bleu, " "blue"/"the colour of the sky, " and "the colour of
the sky"/"Aunt Sally's favourite colour. " Many realists have taken
the semantic criterion to express a sufficient condition for property
identity. For example, if "blue" names the only property that has
the property of satisfying the description of being the colour of the
sky, then identity of property obtains. However, it is not at all clear
that the criterion is necessary and some philosophers have been
dissatisfied with the idea that an appeal to linguistic reference or
meaning is required to make sense of property identity.
The intentional inclusion criterion is somewhat complicated,
but to gain a basic grasp of the criterion, the notions of inclusion\n120 UNIVERSALS
and involvement must be explained. These are different relations
that properties may sustain to each other:
• Inclusion: Property P includes property Q = Df. P is necessar-
ily such that whatever exemplifies it exemplifies Q.
• Involvement: Property P involves property Q = Df. P is neces-
sarily such that whoever conceived it conceives Q.
Inclusion requires it to be the case that the very same entity that
exemplifies a property must also exemplify the property it includes.
Determinates (being red) include their determinables (being
colourful). Regarding involvement, these four properties involve
(but do not include) the property of being red:
• being either red or round
• being nonred
• being possibly red
• wanting something to be red.
None of these four include being red - something could be red or
round without being red. But they all involve being red. For
example, someone who conceives of the property of being red or
round also conceives of the property of being red. Now on the
intentional inclusion criterion, inclusion and involvement are
individually necessary and jointly sufficient for property identity.
Inclusion is clearly a necessary condition for property identify
and, as such, it is uncontroversial. The adequacy of involvement
as a second condition is more in dispute. Evaluating this condition
would require us to investigate the nature of conceiving and other
mental states and many philosophers today eschew intentional
criteria for ontological commitments. Still, the intentional inclu-
sion criterion does an adequate job of getting the right answer for
most properties and the reader is invited to try to generate a
counterexample to it. In any case, this, along with the other three
criteria are the central realist attempts to develop their ontology
of universals. \nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 121
Naturalism and knowledge of abstract objects
Suppose we take naturalism to be the view that the spatiotemporal
physical universe of entities studied by science, especially the hard
sciences, is all there is. Everything that exists is located in space and
time and is part of the efficient causal system known as the cosmos.
On this view, human persons are material objects and various
epistemically relevant states (e. g. perceptual states) are to be under-
stood in terms of human persons (i. e. certain physical objects)
standing in scientifically describable efficient causal relations with
the "objects" of those states. Since knowledge or justified belief
entails a causal connection between the subject and object, for two
closely related reasons, abstract objects must be rejected. First, the
causal relata must be in space and time. Since properties taken as
abstract objects are both causally inert and not in space and time,
they cannot be construed as entering into such causal relations and,
thus, cannot be objects of knowledge or justified belief. Secondly,
any attempt to account for knowledge of abstract objects will have
to be given in terms of some mysterious, even mystical, aphysical
"grasping connection" and such an entity and the sort of subject
required to have the capacity to employ it cannot be part of an
appropriate naturalist ontology.
6
In response, it is open to a realist to say that if naturalism is
inconsistent with traditional universals and knowledge thereof,
then so much the worst for naturalism. It often happens in philoso-
phy that one person's modus ponens is another's modus tollens.
Many, though not all philosophers have agreed that traditional
realism and naturalism are incompatible. We have seen a number of
reasons for this in earlier chapters, but here is a summary of the rea-
sons most frequently cited:
1. T raditional properties and spatiotemporal location: Some have
offered a sort of "argument from queerness" against tradi-
tional realist properties to the effect that they are entities of a
very strange sort, utterly different from anything else in the
universe as depicted by the contemporary naturalist. Some
have developed this argument by focusing on a special class of
universals (e. g. propositions, axiological properties); others
have claimed that no physicalist or naturalist non-reductive
account of deep, metaphysical modality is possible and, thus, \n122 UNIVERSALS
traditional realist properties and their relations to each other
are utterly different from the rest of the naturalist ontology.
2. T raditional properties and being: Some argue that traditional
realist properties violate the causal criterion of existence since
they are non-spatiotemporal entities and remain that way even
when exemplified. Moreover, given the non-spatiotemporal
nature of properties, it becomes hard to see why their existence
is dependent on being exemplified. Thus, it is argued, unin-
stantiated universals exist and they clearly violate the causal
criterion of being.
3. T raditional properties and exemplification: T raditional realism is
a classic example of a "two world" ontology and, as such, it
becomes difficult to explain in naturalist terms how there could
be any kind of connection between abstract objects on the one
hand and the spatiotemporal world of particulars and events on
the other. Moreover, because the exemplification relation nexus
is non-spatiotemporal and connects entities from different
"worlds", it is hard to see how the nexus itself bears a relevant
similarity to strictly physical entities. In this regard, the exempli-
fication nexus presents the same sorts of problems to naturalists
that Cartesian interaction and emergent/supervenient relations
do to weak naturalists (e. g. where does Cartesian interaction
take place and where is the predication relation exemplified? ).
The so-called explanatory gap between physical and mental
events/properties has a parallel between spatiotemporal entities
and those completely outside space and time. Finally, since at
least in some sense, property-instances are ontologically
dependent on their properties (they are modally distinct from
each other), and since those properties are not themselves
physical, if we take events as temporal states of affairs, the
dependence of everything that exists or occurs on physical
factors in the physical domain becomes hard to maintain.
4. T raditional properties and the naturalist epistemology: As noted
above, it is hard to accommodate traditional realist properties to
physicalist depictions of human cognizers and of the causal
interactions that constitute cognitive processes such as percep-
tion. Given this depiction of humans and their various epistemic
relations to things outside them, it is hard to see how we could
have cognitive access to traditional realist properties. \nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 123
Given that 1-3 provide reasons for thinking that traditional
realism is inconsistent with naturalism, the realist should not be
troubled by argument 4. Still, realists need to give some account of
the knowledge of universals and their connections to each other.
Many such accounts have been forthcoming. It may be useful to
present two of them offered by Laurence Bonjour
7 and Edmund
Husserl8 to illustrate, respectively, non-perceptual and perceptual
realist attempts to respond to this need.
Bonjour queries why we think that some relation of influence
isn't there, just because there is no efficient causal relation between
a subject and an abstract object such as a traditional universal. Why
think that the only way to enter a relation of influence is like
individual physical particulars do? Why think that redness and
greenness must be concretely involved in causal chains like physical
particulars before one can know what they are and that, necessarily,
nothing can be red and green all over at the same time? It would be
enough if the causal chain contained objects that instantiated the
relevant properties. By analogy, claims Bonjour, abstractive theo-
ries of concept formation (e. g. Aristotle's) fit in here. This may not
be causal influence but it is influence none the less, so it suffices.
However, at this point a possible problem arises. If one construes
"causal influence" as being closely analogous to sense perception
(e. g. a direct grasping properties and relations themselves and on this
basis judging the relevant propositions to be true) and, even if one
admits that this account is in some sense metaphorical, it does
require a quasi-perceptual account of rational insight. The problem
is that cases of ordinary sensory perception of physical particulars do
have as a necessary condition a causal relation between perceiver and
perceived, but no such relation obtains in the case of knowedge of
abstract objects. Thus, says Bonjour, the analogy with perception
should be broken. But if this move is made, if one wishes to retain a
rationalist defense of a priori knowledge of abstract objects, one
must offer an account of rational apprehension that avoids the
analogy with sense perception.
According to Bonjour, to have a rational apprehension of an
object is just to think about or represent that object. The way one
grasps/apprehends in rational insight is just to think about/repre-
sent an entity. By way of exposition, Bonjour invites us to consider
one type of mental state: contemplating an object (i. e. having it in\n124 UNIVERSALS
the mind). In these cases, a subject is aware of the object of thought,
of what it is they are thinking about. Now the question arises, how
is one able to think about an object? In virtue of what is a mental
state about (e. g. triangularity)? What it is to be aware of the content
of one's own thought, to grasp what one is thinking about? In
essence, Bonjour's answer is that it is to have an intelligible concep-
tion of the object of one's thought. For this to be the case, some
element of thought must be intrinsically meaningful and this is
relevant to the defense of moderate rationalism in several ways,
one of which is this: the idea of intrinsic thought content suggests
how the abstract object involved in a priori justification can be
accessible to the mind without appealing to a perceptual or quasi-
perceptual view that raises anew the causal objection.
By way of elaboration, Bonjour starts with three initial aspects
of such an account:
• It will be hardcore metaphysics unpopular to post positivists.
We need an account of properties/relations as traditional
universals and as objects of thought and of the intrinsic fea-
tures of thoughts such that the latter are directly accessible.
• We should not limit ourselves to materialism/naturalism in our
approach and, in fact, the account can be used in a reductio
against them.
• Such an account will need contents that represent properties
(and not just particulars).
How does a thought simply by virtue of its intrinsic meaning come
to be about or have as an element of its content a specific universal?
According to Bonjour, only one answer seems available: the prop-
erty itself is somehow metaphysically "involved" in the intrinsic
character of the thought. But we can't just say the thought instanti-
ates the property as Aristotle/Aquinas did. Admittedly, says
Bonjour, Aristotle and Aquinas did say that thought and object have
the property in two different ways and that notion is in the right
direction. Focusing on Aquinas, there are two different interpreta-
tions of his view:
• The mind and object exemplify the same property but the
exemplification relation is different in each case. Bonjour\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 125
rejects this as a plausible position on the grounds that there
seems to be only one exemplification relation, not two.
• The relevant intentional universal and the universal in the
object are different and not identical, even though they are
intimately related entities.
Bonjour believes that this second interpretation is on the right
track. On Bonjour's account, the realist should make the property
of the object a component or ingredient or constituent of the
thought without saying it is instantiated in the thought. For exam-
ple, is it by virtue of a thought instantiating a complex universal
that "involves" the universal, triangularity, in the appropriate way,
viz. as an "ingredient" of the thought without being instantiated in
the thought, that the thought is about triangular things. In this way,
claims Bonjour, we can give an account of knowledge of universals
without depicting the apprehension of universals as a perceptual
relation analogous to visual perception that somehow reaches out
into the Platonic realm.
The purpose here is to present Bonjour's view and not to offer a
detailed critique of it. Still, four problems may be briefly
mentioned. First, it is not clear that the essence of the comparison
between visual perception and rational intuition involves a causal
relation, or even some weaker causal-type influence, between the
subject and the object. As a contingent empirical fact, this may be a
physically necessary condition for normal acts of visual perception
of embodied persons, but there needs to be some argument that
rational intuition requires something of the sort and Bonjour gives
none. Below, Husserl's account will be described according to
which the parallel between sensory and rational intuition is made
with no reference whatever to causal connections.
Secondly, Bonjour appears to conflate grasping an object and
being aware of the content of the thought directed on the object.
The various constituents of a mental act, along with the other
mental entities that are associated with it and that direct the act
towards an object are not the same thing as the object of the act.
Put differently, it is plausible to think that neither objects of
mental acts nor the constituents (properties, parts) of those
objects are constituents of the acts directed on those objects. Nor
does it seem necessary to make a constituent of the object be a\n126 UNIVERSALS
constituent of a mental act to explain how an act can be directed
on an object.
Thirdly, Bonjour never explains how it is that the relevant
property of the object gets into the mental act in the first place.
Perceptual models of rational intuition, such as Husserl's described
below, do just that and Bonjour's non-perceptual account is the
weaker for failing on this score.
Finally, it is entirely unclear how a property can be a constituent
of a particular (e. g. a concrete particular, a moment, or an event)
without doing so by way of exemplification. Throughout history,
the overwhelming majority of realists have agreed that qua univer-
sals, properties are the sorts of things that enter other things by way
of the nexus of exemplification, even though they have differences
about the precise nature of exemplification itself. It would be desir-
able to find a plausible account of knowledge of universals that
avoids the introduction of a entirely new and unclear notion of
how universals are in things. Such an account was proffered by
Edmund Husserl.
Husserl's account of knowledge of universals is a perceptual one
and he believed that people could "see universals with their very
eyes". This phrase is ambiguous, but it seems to mean that while
focusing one's attention on a moment (a Husserlian property-
instance), one can directly perceive the universal in the moment. The
direct perception of a universal is, on this view, a different mental act
from an ordinary perception of a moment, but it in no way involves
attending to something outside the moment itself. Indeed, it is while
the eyes are on the moment that the universal is originarily given as
a constituent of the moment in what Husserl called eidetic intuition,
the direct grasp in intuition of a universal itself.
Given this interpretation of "seeing universals with one's very
eyes", it seems that Husserl did, in fact, believe one could see a
visual universal like redness with one's very eyes. There are five
aspects of eidetic intuition and its relationship to ordinary sensuous
perception of a particular relevant to our discussion:
• The universal itself is "in" - although not spatiotemporally in -
the moment.
9
• We directly preceive the universal via eidetic intuition. Eidetic
intuition is precisely parallel to ordinary perception in that\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 127
through an eidetic intuition the universal is directly perceived,
it is placed immediately before the subject. 10
• Compared to the ordinary perception of a particular, eidetic
intuition is a new mode of apprehension. While founded on
ordinary perception (i. e. a necesssary condition for the obtain-
ing of a mental act of eidetic intuition is the obtaining of the
relevant mental act of ordinary sensory perception), eidetic
intuition has its own unique act character, and as it is directed
to the moment itself (or, perhaps, the concrete particular),
though in an essentially different manner than in ordinary
perception, the universal is placed before the subject.
11
• The visual universal is perceived with the eyes while looking at
the moment itself (or, perhaps, the concrete particular). 12
• The universal is not only in the moment, it is also perceived in
the moment and perceived to be in the moment. 13
This is a précis of Husserl's account of knowledge of universals.
Some philosophers argue that perceptual accounts such as
Husserl's involve the absurd claim that people can see the universal
in the concrete particular or property-instance that somehow
contains it, while maintaining at the same time that the universal
remains outside space and time. Perhaps this is a sort of argument
from queerness to the effect that even if Husserl held to this
position, he should not have done so because of the highly counter-
intuitive nature of the position itself. What should be made of the
absurdity claim?
 A defender of Husserl could offer two responses, one phenom-
enological, one ontological, to weaken the alleged counter-
intuitiveness of Husserl's position.
Phenomenologically, if a philosopher claims to have a direct
awareness of some entity, another philosopher can always claim
not to have that awareness. When G. E. Moore claimed to have a
direct intuition of goodness, his rivals simply denied they had the
same intuition. A defender of Moore could respond in this way.
Goodness is a second order property like being coloured or being
shaped, not a first order property like pleasure, being red, or being
triangular. Now intuitions of first order properties such as these
have a certain texture or vivacity that is absent in the case of
intuitions of the corresponding second order properties. Those\n128 UNIVERSALS
who failed to have the relevant intuition of goodness were looking
for the sort of intuitive texture appropriate to intuition of a first
order property and they never found it. Unfortunately, they were
looking for the wrong sort of phenomenology. Once an intuition of
goodness is compared to the intuition of other second order prop-
erties, it becomes more plausible to think that the relevant intuition
is real.
Now the same sort of thing may be going on regarding eidetic
intuition. Husserl himself warned against depicting eidetic intui-
tion as a feeling of conviction, tainted with a certain affective
colouring.
14 The reason some philosophers may find absurd the
claim that in eidetic intuition one has an intuition of an abstract
object non-spatiotemporally "in" a moment while looking at that
moment is that they fail to find the relevant affective colouring. But
if eidetic intuition is real it is wrong to look for such colouring and
it is also wrong to compare the phenomenology of eidetic intuition
with the more vivid nature of a sensory perception of a moment.
If the charge of absurdity is ontological, then it probably
amounts to the claim that it just seems absurd to think that one can
see an abstract object while looking at a moment in space and time.
By way of response, recall the modal distinction introduced by
Francis Suárez. Suárez says the modal distinction intervenes
between an entity and its mode. He illustrates this by saying that
the modal distinction obtains between the property known as
quantity and the-inherence-of-quantity-in-a-specific-substance. A
mode is a dependent, inseparable, genuinely distinct entity from
what it is a mode of. If a modal distinction obtains between two
entities A and B (where B is a mode), there is non-identity between
A and B and inseparability in this sense: A can exist without B but
not vice versa.
Given Suárez's description, it is easy to see a modal distinction
between a property and its property-instance taken as a complex
moment. Now when one attends to a moment, one attends to
something precisely as a spatiotemporal particular. But when one
attends to the universal in the moment, one attends to a property
simpliciter. When a perceiver is inclined to describe his experience
with language appropriate to a particular (e. g. by noting the loca-
tion of the object) then the relevant object is the moment. But when
the perceived describes the object in terms of property talk (e. g. this\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 129
object is bright red, it is darker than orange, it is a colour) then no
reference is being made at all to space, time, or particularity. More-
over, it is because the universal is directly present that one is able to
describe it with the relevant property-talk. When one is tempted to
say that the universal is also located right here and now, he is now
attending to the universal's mode, the moment, whether or not he
realizes it.
Two issues: uninstantiated universals and the nature of
existence
Besides objections, there are two topics of importance in develop-
ing an adequate realist ontology: the existence of uninstantiated
universals and the relationship between properties and existence.
Platonism vs. Aristotelianism
While Plato and Aristotle were realists, they disagreed about an
issue of central concern to realists. As a question of historical
accuracy, scholars differ about the precise nature of the clash
between these great figures, but in the schools of thought that arose
after them, three different interpretations have been given to the
disparity between Platonists and Aristotelians regarding universals:
1. Are there uninstantiated universals - universals not exempli-
fied by a particular - or does the existence of a universal
depend on at least one particular instantiating it?
2. Do universals remain outside or are they in the being of the
things that have them?
3. Do universals remain outside the things that have them in some
spatial location, a Platonic heaven, or are they spatially in the
being of the things that have them?
Platonism and Aristotelianism may be identified as the view which
embraces, respectively, the first and second options in each ques-
tion.
It is important not to conflate these three questions. The rela-
tionship between 2 and 3 is pretty clear. An answer to 2 is a neces-
sary condition for an answer to 3 since a position on 3 is one way to\n130 UNIVERSALS
spell out a commitment to a view on 2. If a philosopher holds that
universals are in the things that have them, then they may or may
not believe the former are spatially in the latter.
The relationship between 1 and 2 is not so clear. It has seemed
obvious to most philosophers that if universals remain outside the
things that have them, then universals are "indifferent", as it were,
to the existence of things exemplifying them and, thus, there are
uninstantiated universals. But from there, the issues are pretty
obscure. It is possible to hold that universals are in things and also
affirm either that there are or are not uninstantiated universals.
D. M. Armstrong is one philosopher who conflates 1 and 2, and
as a result, draws an egregious conclusion. Says Armstrong,
Once you have uninstantiated universals you need somewhere
special to put them, a "Platonic heaven, " as philosophers often
say. They are not to be found in the ordinary world of space
and time. .. [I]t seems that Platonic theories of universals have
to treat particulars as bloblike rather than layer caked. I think
this is an argument against Platonic theories. "
15
Armstrong argues that a Platonist answer to 1 entails a Platonist
answer to 2 and 3 and this, in turn, implies a blob theory of the
things that "have" properties. But this is simply false. In itself, belief
in uninstantiated universals says nothing about the way instantiated
universals relate to the entities that instantiate them and a commit-
ment to uninstantiated universals is consistent with a layer-cake
analysis of those entities. Many philosophers, myself included,
combine a form of Aristotelian immanent realism regarding 2 with
a Platonic realism regarding 1.
Since topics central to the analysis of 2 and 3 were discussed
throughout Chapters 4 and 5, the rest of this section will examine
the debate about 1. Are there or are there not uninstantiated
universals? Before we look at arguments on both sides, a further
clarification about 1 needs to be mentioned. Assume, with most
realists, that there are higher order universals that are properties of
lower order properties (e. g. colourfulness). Now, does colourful-
ness obey Platonic or Aristotelian constraints? Can colourfulness
exist unexemplified? The answer depends, at least in part, on what
is meant by "unexemplified" in this context. If "unexemplified"\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 131
means "unexemplified simpliciter", then, arguably, colourfulness is
Aristotelian because there is no possible world where colourfulness
is not instantiated by being red, being green and so forth. However,
if "unexemplified" means "unexemplified by a particular" - it
could exist even if no particular exemplifies colourfulness or any
determinate under it - then, arguably, it should be understood in
Platonist terms. Historically, the second interpretation has been the
one central to the debate and, accordingly, 1 is framed in terms of
instantiation by particulars.
There are four main arguments for Platonism. The first one
draws attention to what appear to be certain necessary truths
regarding universals; for example, redness is necessarily such that it
is a colour, it resembles orange more than it does blue, and so on.
These truths are employed by realists in the argument for universals
from abstract reference. If we ask whether or not for some univer-
sal, U, there is a possible world, w
1, such that U exists in w1 but no
particular exemplifies U in w1, these necessary truths seem to imply
an affirmative answer. These truths, the argument goes, have truth-
makers in worlds where there are no relevant particulars, and the
truth-makers are the properties that exist in those worlds. "Redness
is a colour" is true in a world without red objects, and this is
because redness exists and is a colour in such a world.
Aristotelians may respond to this argument by denying that there
is a truth-maker for these truths, or at least for the modality attached
to them, they may interpret necessary truths as functions of language
or as expressions of the "ungiveupableness" of certain beliefs in
certain linguistic groups, and so forth, rather than as expressions of
the way the world is. Or they may simply deny that these truths are
necessary. We cannot pursue the details of the ensuing dialectic here,
except to make two brief points. First, the relevant propositions do,
indeed, seem to be necessary truths, not contingent ones. Secondly,
in their response, the Aristotelian must be careful not to employ
arguments that they have rejected when arguing for realism in the
first place; that is, in rejecting the idea that truths don't need truth-
makers or in resisting the tendency to reduce properties and
exemplification to mere linguistic phenomena.
The second Platonist argument claims that in a number of ways,
the knowledge we have of paradigm case universals provided
sufficient insight into their nature to know that their existence does\n132 UNIVERSALS
not depend on being instantiated by a particular. Appeal is often
made to two specific sorts of knowledge about universals. For one
thing, if we pay attention to the intrinsic nature of redness and
compare it to the coming-to-be and parishing or altering of red
particulars, we learn that redness, and universals in general, are
ingenerable, incorruptible, timeless and unchangeable (except in
there relational features). Red particulars come-to-be and so forth,
but it is a mistake - indeed, a category fallacy - to apply these
notions to the universal itself. For any propositions that asserts of a
universal that it comes-to-be, parishes or alters, there is a true
reductive paraphrase that applies these notions to the relevant
particular(s). These different notions are a central part of what
realists take themselves to know in the very contrast between
universals and particulars.
For another thing, if we pay attention to redness and its relation-
ship to the particulars that exemplify it, we learn that the existence
of concrete particulars depends on their having properties, but not
vice versa. That is why we know that if a red object is annihilated,
we do not need to look at the stop sign on the corner to be sure it
hasn't lost its colour. We know that redness still exists and is instan-
tiated by all the other red particulars in spite of the demise of the
particular red object within our purview. We also know there is
nothing special about this very red object in this regard. Redness
could continue to characterize all the other red objects no matter
which particular one went out of existence. For this reason, we
know that the existence of redness is independent of any specific
particular and there is no reason to think that its existence depends
on any particular whatever. The claim is not merely that just
because some entity P can exist without the existence of any
particular member of some group, x
i-xn, one can infer that P can
exist without some member of the group existing. Rather, the claim
is that by attending to properties and the particulars that have
them, we learn that the existence of the former is not dependent on
the existence of the latter, and that is the justification for the confi-
dence we have that some other particular can continue to possess
that property even if a specific particular goes out of existence.
Aristotelians may respond that these claims are simply false and
question-begging. Or they may offer a view of universals that runs
contrary to the alledged knowledge claims of the Platonist. For\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 133
example, D. M Armstrong likens properties to Fregean concepts:
properties are unsaturated entities "hungry" for particulars and, in
fact, are constituents of states of affairs along with particulars (e. g.
for universal F and particular a, F is a constituent of the state of
affairs of a's being F) such that properties cannot exist without the
existence of the relevant states of affairs. Again, space considera-
tions forbid a detailed analysis of this dispute. Suffice it to say that
for Frege, even though concepts are unsaturated and "hungry" to
be filled with particulars, they could exist unsaturated, and, in
general, when some state of affairs contains constituents (e. g. sepa-
rable parts), those constituents can, and often do exist without
those states of affairs existing.
A third Platonist argument points out that most universals have
not been exemplified at all times. In general, if some universal U is
exemplified by some particular at time t
1, then there were times
ti-tj prior to t1 such that there were no objects that exemplified U.
Surely, there are some colours that have only recently come to be
exemplified. But then, it seems more reasonable, argues the
Platonist, to hold that at t
1, U came to be exemplified than to
believe that U came into existence. Thus, during ti-tj, U existed
unexemplified.
In response, D. M. Armstrong has advanced what he calls the
principle of instantiation: for each property P, there exists (not
necessarily now) some particular x such that x tenselessly has P.
16
According to Armstrong, the principle should be understood as
ranging over all times and in connection with a rejection of
Presentism (the view that only the present moment exists) and of an
A series view of time in favour of both a B series position and a view
of concrete particulars as perduring entities. Thus, it is enough for
a property to exist that there is at least some time at which it is
instantiated.
A Platonist could respond that the principle of instantiation
does, indeed, depend on a rejection of Presentism and, thus, its
appeal is limited accordingly. If Presentism is true, it is very hard to
see how the existence of some colour unexemplified up to the
present moment (and the fact that it is necessarily true that it is a
colour) depends on its being exemplified at some time in the future
that does not currently exist. Moreover, it is hard to conceive of the
mode of existence of that colour prior to its exemplification with-\n134 UNIVERSALS
out rendering it an abstract object. Of course, this point will not be
a strong one for those, like Armstrong, who reject Presentism.
Finally, a Platonist can argue that, given a certain view of exist-
ence itself, it can be shown relative to that view that uninstantiated
universals continue to satisfy the conditions for existence. The rela-
tionship between universals and existence will be briefly analysed
below. But for now, if one supposes for the sake of argument that an
entity exists just in case there is at least one property such that the
entity has that property, then the Platonist can argue that, say,
redness still has the property of colourfulness, and thus, it exists,
even if no red particulars exist. Clearly, the appeal of this argument
depends on the adequacy of the relevant theory of existence and, it
could be argued, given the widespread disagreement about the
nature of existence itself, this argument is weak indeed.
Arguments in favour of Aristotelianism, at least as they appear in
the contemporary literature, may be adequately presented in précis
form. Most of them turn on epistemological commitments, espe-
cially some form empiricism, and on naturalist commitments.
Aristotelians argue that universals need to be anchored to the
space-time world and Platonic universals are free floaters that
violate this constraint. If universals are not so anchored, then they
fail to satisfy a causal criterion of being, there can be no cognitive
access to them because no causal interaction with them is possible,
and they require an unparsimonious two-world ontology. More-
over, we are far more certain that exemplified universals exist, as
opposed to unexemplified ones, and, thus, the burden of proof is
on the Platonist and that burden has not been met. In response, the
Platonist can reject the epistemological or naturalist commitments
that underlie these arguments and they can either reject the claim
that the Platonist owns a burden of proof or reply that the Platonist
arguments meet that burden.
Properties and the nature of existence
In closing out the chapter, it may be instructive briefly to look at one
philosophical topic where the employment of properties has been
illuminating: the relationship between existence and properties.
17
The study of the history of the philosophical discussion of the
nature of existence itself surfaces three important lessons: \nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 135
• There is a difference between existing and not existing.
• That difference is not the same thing as a thing's essence
(assuming for the purposes of illustration that there are
essences).
• That difference is not to be identified as an ordinary property
of some sort.
There are five different traits that a good theory of existence ought
to have. For one thing, it needs to be consistent with and explain
what actually does and does not exist. Secondly, it needs to be
consistent with and explain what could have existed but either does
not exist or is not believed to exist (perhaps falsely) by the person
advocating a given view of existence. For example, even though
unicorns do not, in fact, exist they could have existed and a theory
of existence needs to account for this fact.
Thirdly, a theory of existence must allow for the fact that exist-
ence itself exists. As an implication, a theory of existence must not
be self-refuting. For example, if someone claims that to exist is the
same thing as being inside space and time (existence itself is being
spatiotemporally located), then on certain views of space and time,
they would not themselves exist since they are not inside space and
time. Whatever existence amounts to, one thing is clear; it makes a
real difference in the world and it must itself exist to make such a
difference. If existence itself does not exist, then nothing else could
exist in virtue of having existence.
Fourthly, a theory of existence must not violate the fundamental
laws of logic - the laws of identity (P is identical to P), non-
contradiction (P cannot be both true and false at the same time in
the same sense) and excluded middle (P must be either true or
false). Contradictory states of affairs, e. g. a square circle or it is
now raining in Grandview and not raining in Grandview, do not
exist. Moreover, something must either exist or not exist and
nothing can exist and not exist at the same time.
Fifthly, a theory of existence must allow for the existence of acts
of knowing. Since a theory of existence is a theory, it will depend for
its rational acceptability on knowledge that people have. Now an act
of knowing something is, among other things, a conscious act of a
person. Thus, any theory of existence that denies that conscious per-
sons who know things can exist will be a false theory of existence. \n136 UNIVERSALS
Several theories of existence have been offered: T o exist is to be:
• located in space and time
• physical
• causally efficacious (i. e. capable of being an efficient cause or
of being acted on by an efficient cause)
• an event or a bundle of events
• perceived or a perceiver
• a property
• a property of properties (e. g. a second order property of first
order properties).
The point here is to illustrate and not criticize various theories of
existence that have been proffered in the history of philosophy.
Throughout the history of philosophy, one theory of existence has
been prominent. In my view, this theory is false but a near miss and
it is instructive to consider it in more detail. Many thinkers (e. g.
Plato and Descartes) have held that existence is a property in the
same sense that redness or being square is a property. For a ball to
be red is for it to have the property of redness; for it to exist is for
it to have the property of existence. Now at first glance, something
seems right about this proposal. We do say, quite appropriately, that
the ball has redness and that it has reality as well. In some sense,
then, things can be said to have or not have existence.
However, something seems wrong with this proposal too. Exist-
ence is simply not a normal property like redness. This point was
made by Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) in Critique of Pure Reason
(A 600/B 628):
By whatever and by however many predicates [properties] we
may think a thing - even if we completely determine it - we do
not make the least addition to the thing when we further
declare the thing is. Otherwise, it would not be exactly the
same thing that exists, but something more than we had
thought in the concept; and we could not, therefore, say that
the exact object of my concept exists.
18
Kant's point can be understood in this way. When you think of a
ball, it adds to your conception of the thing to be told that it is red. \nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 137
But it does not add to your conception of the ball to be told that it
exists. Put differently, saying that a ball is red tells us something
about the character of the ball. But saying that it is real says that the
ball, with all of its properties, does in fact exist. Thus, existence
does not relate to the ball like being red does.
Kant seems right here; nevertheless, saying that the ball is real
does add something because there is, in fact, a real difference
between existence and non-existence. Can we shed more light on
what this difference is? Perhaps so. Consider the statement "Tigers
exist". This would appear to assert the following: (i) the property
of being a tiger (ii) belongs to something (an individual tiger, say
T ony). It seems clear that the "belonging" is the nexus of exempli-
fication. The claim that tigers exist is the claim that the essence of
being a tiger (the what of being a tiger) is actually exemplified by or
belongs to something (the that of an individual tiger).
Note that when "tigers exist" is broken down into the two
aspects above, (i) refers to the essence or nature of being a tiger and
(ii) expresses reality or existence. From this we learn two things.
First, there is a difference between a thing's essence and its exist-
ence. Knowledge of what a tiger is does not tell us that tigers exist.
There is a fundamental difference between essence (whatness) and
existence (thatness).
Secondly, existence is not a property which belongs, but is the
belonging of a property. Existence is the entering into the exempli-
fication nexus and, in general, the following characterization of
existence seems to fit the five features of a theory of existence:
existence is either the belonging of some property or the being
belonged to by a property. In the case of T ony the tiger, the fact the
property of being a tiger belongs to something and that something
has this property belonging to it is what confers existence.
How does this view square with the five features of a theory of
existence? It would seem to account for everything that does or
could exist and that does not exist. Things that exist have proper-
ties, things that do not exist don't have a property. Since unicorns
could have existed, this means that the property of being a unicorn
could have belonged to something. It would also account for exist-
ence itself existing because the belonging-to (exemplification,
predication) relation is itself exemplified (T ony and the property of
being a tiger both enter into this belonging relation) and the\n138 UNIVERSALS
belonging-to relation exemplifies other features (e. g. it has the
properties of being a relation and being abstract). Finally, this view
of existence does not violate the fundamental laws of logic nor does
it rule out the existence of acts of knowing.
In sum, we have learned three things so far from our brief dis-
cussion of existence:
• There is a genuine difference between existing and not exist-
ing.
• This difference is not a normal property like the property of
being red.
• Existence is not part of the essence or whatness of ordinary
entities, i. e. for ordinary entities there is a difference between
essence and existence.
There are two further remarks to be made about existence. First,
our characterization of existence above will allow us to specify
some other notions: coming-to-be and perishing. Since we already
have an idea of what existence itself is, and since coming-to-be and
perishing involve gaining and loosing existence, then these latter
notions can be understood in terms of our general theory of exist-
ence itself.
• E comes into being =Df. There is at least one property which is
such that E has that property and there is no property which is
such that E had that property.
• E perishes = Df. There was at least one property which was
such that E had it and there is no longer any property which is
such that E has it.
When something comes into existence, there must be at least
one property that belongs to that thing. For example, when a
human being comes-to-be, then the property of being human
belongs to that individual at that moment. When something ceases-
to-be, it no longer has any properties whatever. Coming-to-be and
perishing should be kept distinct from what philosophers call
alteration. An example of an alteration is when an apple goes from
sweet to sour. Alterations are types of change. Before change is
possible, two things must be true: the thing that is changing must\nTRADITIONAL REALISM: ISSUES AND OBJECTIONS 139
exist; and the thing that changes must exist at the beginning, during
the process, and at the end of change. In the example above, the
apple exists and continues to exist while it is sweet, during the time
it changes to being sour, and while it is sour. An alteration is a case
where a thing changes in the properties it has; it is not a case where
something changes with respect to existence itself. Alterations
presuppose and, therefore, cannot be the same thing as a change in
existence itself.
A second remark about existence is this: nothingness is just that
- nothing. Nothingness has no properties whatever. Things that do
not exist have no properties. For example, the unicorn Pegasus has
no properties and that is why he does not exist. It may be thought
that he has the property of being a one-horned horse. But that is
not true. Our concept of Pegasus (which is in our minds when we
are thinking of Pegasus) is a concept of something that would have
the property of being a one-horned horse if it existed. The property
of being a unicorn may well exist, but Pegasus the particular does
not exist and he, along with all other cases of nothing, have no
properties.
In this chapter we have looked at some objections to realist
views of properties, examined the debate between Platonists and
Aristotelians regarding the existence of uninstantiated universals,
and glanced at the usefulness of an ontology of properties for a
theory of existence. The focus of Chapters 1-6 has been squarely
on properties. In Chapter 7, particulars will be investigated,
specifically the problem of the individuation of particulars in light
of a realist construal of properties. \nThe individuation of
7 particulars
In recent years, a growing number of philosophers have appealed
to various individuative entities (e. g. tropes or Leibnizian essences)
to solve a specific philosophical problem. Moreover, the problem
of individuation is an essential aspect of the problem of universals.
For these reasons, it is important to be clear on issues and options
in the problem of individuation. In this chapter, the problem of
individuation will be clarified, two solutions will be analysed and
bare particulars will be defended as the best answer.
The problem of individuation
The notion of a problem of individuation has come to be used for
a wide variety of different, and not altogether related matters in
philosophy ranging from linguistic, conceptual or epistemological
issues of singling something out at or through time to more distinc-
tively metaphysical concerns. T o clarify the specific sense used
here, recall Socrates and Plato, two red, round spots that share all
their pure properties in common. The problem of individuation is
the problem of offering an ontological assay of the situation so as to
specify what it is that makes the two spots two particular, indi-
vidual entities instead of one. So understood, this problem of
individuation requires an answer to two different but intimately
related questions:
• How are we to characterize individuality ontologically? T o what
ontological category or logical type does individuality belong? \nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 141
• What sort of distinction is there between the individuality and
nature of an individual like Socrates or Plato: a real distinction,
a modal distinction, a distinction of reason, or some other
distinction?
One's answer to the second question will depend on the solution
given to the first.
It seems obvious that external relations (e. g. spatiotemporal
location on relational accounts of space-time), cannot solve the
problem of individuation since by their very nature, external rela-
tions presuppose and, therefore, cannot constitute their relata.
Some philosophers have taken an absolutist view of space and
time and offered coordinate qualities as individuators. For two
reasons, this solution will not be investigated. First, if successful,
it implies that the spots cannot move and endure and that there is
no possible world in which they could have been located at differ-
ent locations. This is highly counter-intuitive because location
seems to be something external to the being of the spots. Second,
coordinate qualities themselves share properties in common and
the need to individuate them is not solved by the coordinate
quality position.
Those who do try to solve this problem do so in terms of one of
the other theories of individuation to be discussed below. The best
way to get at those solutions is by means of the following four
propositions:
(1) The only constituents of objects are their properties.
(2) Pure properties are numerically identical in their
instances.
(3) ( x)(y)[(z)(z is a constituent of x 
z is a constituent of y) x = y].
(4) Necessarily, ( x)(y) [(z) (z is a pure property of x 
z is a pure property of y)  x = y].
Propositions (1)-(4) pose a problem because (1)-(3) entail (4) and
(4)is the assertion that the identity of indiscernibles is a necessary\n142 UNIVERSALS
truth when construed as a statement about pure properties. And
most philosophers think that the identity of indiscernibles is false.
Proposition (3) (the principle of constituent identity) is fairly
uncontroversial once we get clear on what a constituent is. Virtu-
ally all philosophers accept it.
1 Proposition (3) employs a notion of
"constituent" that ranges over parts, separable and inseparable
(e. g. Husserlian moments), properties, internal relations within
some whole, and, indeed, all entities whatsoever that enter into the
being of some whole. It is hard to see how two entities could share
literally all their constituents in common and still be two. Those
who reject (3) reject the entire project of giving ontological assays
of complex entities and they would owe their critics an account of
what it is for something to be a constituent of something else.
Moreover, even if someone holds that the world consists entirely of
simples, this would not be a solution to the problem of individu-
ation; it would amount to a rejection of the problem itself.
Different solutions to the problem of individuation will focus on
propositions (1), (2) and (4). Proposition (1) entails a bundle
theory of substance. So understood, it is meant to exclude bare
particulars. Advocates of bare particulars as the proper solution to
the problem of individuation, such as Gustav Bergmann and E. B.
Allaire, reject it. Proposition (2) expresses a realist construal of
properties as multiply exemplifiable entities that are identical in all
their instances. Moderate nominalists reject (2) and try to solve the
problem of individuation by embracing a view of qualities as
abstract particulars. In Chapter 3, reasons were given for rejecting
moderate nominalism, including its view of individuation. A
further solution to the dilemma of individuation is to accept (1)-(3)
and reject (4) on the grounds that impure properties or Leibnizian
essences (e. g. the property of being identical to Socrates) are among
the constituents of Socrates and Plato expressed in (3). Thus,
Socrates and Plato each has its own impure property as an individu-
ator. Alvin Plantinga is the chief advocate of this position.
2
In sum, advocates of bare particulars reject (1), nominalists
reject (2), virtually everyone accepts (3) and proponents of
Leibnizian essences accept (1)-(3) but deny that (4) follows because
they reject the notion that pure properties exhaust the sorts of
properties a particular has; impure properties are the proper
individuators. Since moderate nominalism has already been\nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 143
evaluated, the remainder of the chapter shall focus on Leibnizian
essences and bare particulars in that order.
Analysis of different views of individuation
Leibnizian essences
Statement of the view
The first main contemporary solution to the problem of
individuation is the view that Leibnizian essences (e. g. the property
of being identical to Socrates for the human being, Socrates) are
what individuate. Alvin Plantinga has been the chief advocate of
this position.
3 Because Plantinga uses "Socrates" as a term for refer-
ring to the man Socrates and not to a spot, the discussion will
follow Plantinga's convention while his views are in focus.
Since Plantinga's views on possible worlds are well known,
space considerations make it prudent to mention here only three of
his more specific statements relevant to individuation. The first is
Plantinga's characterization of an individual essence or nature: E is
an individual essence if and only if there is a world W in which
there exists an object x that: has E essentially; and is such that there
is no world W* in which there exists an object distinct from x that
has E.
4 Plantinga uses the following locutions for the essence of
Socrates: "the property of being Socrates", "the property of being
identical to Socrates", "the property of being identical to that very
person, Socrates, in the actual world", "Socrateity". This property
is something Socrates must have to exist and that nothing else
could have had. So understood, the property of being identical to
Socrates is what individuates Socrates.
Secondly, the relationship between Socrates and his individual
essence is predication: Socrateity is something Socrates has, exem-
plifies, instantiates. Plantinga also says that individual natures are
the thisnesses of individual objects. An unexemplified essence
becomes a thisness when it is exemplified. An unexemplified
essence essentially has the property of being a thisness if exempli-
fied. How does an unexemplified essence become a thisness when it
is exemplified? It does so because it stands in the "is the thisness of"
relation with the object exemplifying it; for example, Socrateity\n144 UNIVERSALS
stands in the "is the thisness of" relation to Socrates very much like
one's brother-in-law stands in the "is the brother-in-law of" rela-
tion to one.
5 Moreover, while there are no merely possible objects
that exist simpliciter (for Plantinga, to say that an object x exists in
W is to say that if W had been actual, x would have existed), indi-
vidual natures can and many do exist unexemplified.
Finally, how does Plantinga see the relationship between the
identity relation and an individual essence? He begins his answer to
this question by inviting us to consider the following proposition:
6
(5) Everything is identical with itself.
Plantinga claims that (5) predicates of each object the property of
self-identity and this property is a common one. Next Plantinga
considers what he takes to be an instance of (5):
(6) Socrates is identical with Socrates.
This proposition predicates two things of Socrates - the property
of self-identity and the property of being identical with the thing
that actually is Socrates. These properties do not characterize all
and only the same objects and are, therefore, distinct. But they do
"coincide on" Socrates; Socrates cannot have one without the
other.
Evaluation
What should one make of this theory of individuation? For three
reasons, it does not seem to be adequate. First, Michael Loux and
Kit Fine have raised different variants of the following objection
against Leibnizian essences.
7 Loux and Fine claim that Leibnizian
essences are circular and they presuppose the very entities they are
meant to individuate. Let us focus on Loux's argument. Loux
claims that a property, P, is impure just in case there is some rela-
tion, R, and some substance, s, such that necessarily, for any object,
x, x exemplifies P if and only if x enters into R with s. Loux's
definition should be amended so as to replace "some substance, s"
with "some particular, s" because he means something very specific
by a substance and one need not assume his notion of substance to
characterize an impure property. Now Loux claims that since\nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 145
impure properties "incorporate" determinate particulars, then
those properties cannot be used to individuate those particulars.
Rather, those particulars are constituents of impure properties.
Loux's argument may be clarified by defining the notion of
ontological constituent-dependence as follows: x stands in an onto-
logical constituent-dependence relation to y just in case both the
existence of x entails in the broadly logical sense the existence of y
and y is a constituent of x. Now the problem is that Leibnizian
essences are ontologically constituent-dependent on the entities
they are suppose to individuate and this cannot be because if the
former are to serve as individuators of the latter, then, for example,
Socrates should be ontologically constituent-dependent of
Socrateity and not vice versa. However, if one does a constituent
assay of the entities that compose being identical to Socrates, one
will have to include the individual Socrates in that assay. And if that
is the case, something must already individuate Socrates onto-
logically prior to his being a constituent of Socrateity. Why? The
problem of individuation involves giving an account of the
constituents of an entity (including the entity itself for those like
Campbell who reject the constituent-whole framework) that serve
to individuate it. Thus, those constituents are not ontologically
constituent-dependent on the entities they individuate.
A second and closely related point is this: whenever P is predi-
cated of x, then P and x exist independently of each other in the
sense that each is what it is and can be characterized as such with-
out reference to the other. But this is not the case with Socrates and
the property of being identical to Socrates, so Leibnizian essences
violate what is true of predication in general. And unless there is
strong justification for embracing a subclass of properties that
neither are multiply-exemplifiable nor fit the general pattern of
predication, one should stick with what we know to be true of
properties in general. It is question-begging to claim that Leibniz -
ian properties are such a special sub-class of properties if there is a
reasonable alternative theory of individuation available that does
not require this move.
8
But what about case of essential predication, for example where
an infimae species is predicated of an individual substance? Is this
not a counter-example to the claim above about predication since
Socrates cannot exist and be characterized without reference to\n146 UNIVERSALS
humanness? There is an effective response to this counter-example
that employs the existence of bare particulars. For the sake of argu-
ment, let us grant the existence of such entities. Later, their reality
will be defended in some detail. Consider the following two sen-
tences:
(7) Socrates is human.
(8) This (bare particular) is human.
Sentence (7) should not be taken to assert a strict and philosophical
notion of predication, but only a loose and popular one. It says that
humanness is an essential constituent of Socrates where humanness
is that entity that grounds Socrates's membership in the natural
kind being human. But (7) is grounded in (8) and (8) asserts a strict
sense of predication: humanness is predicated of a bare particular
to form a this-such, Socrates. Humanness grounds Socrates's
suchness and a bare particular individuates him. And neither
humanness nor the bare particular in Socrates requires reference to
the other entity to be characterized.
Finally, Plantinga's account of individuation amounts to a
simple assertion of particularity and it does not offer a metaphysi-
cal ground for it. On Plantinga's account, just exactly what is it that
has Socrateity? More specifically, what is it that stands in the "is the
thisness of" relation to Socrateity that transforms an unexempli-
fied essence into a thisness? The answer cannot simply be Socrates
as a whole substance because this explains neither the particularity
of Socrates nor that to which Socrateity is tied to form Socrates.
Plantinga admits that the individual Socrates is not identical to the
Socrateity he exemplifies. Ontologically, what is it that grounds the
difference? Plantinga faces the same difficulty here that confronts
philosophers such as Wolterstorff who claim that individual
members of natural kinds just come individuated. Such a position
does not ground but merely asserts individuation and this assertion
is especially egregious in light of the fact that neither infimae
species nor Liebnizian essences are identical to the individuals that
possess them and the latter contain the former as constituents.
Plantinga has responded to arguments similar to these, although
they are not precisely the points just made. For example, Kit Fine\nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 147
raises a similar, but importantly different objection against
Plantinga. Roughly, his point is that an actualist ontology contain-
ing unexemplified essences but no existent possible objects is
incoherent because in such a view, the task of characterizing those
unexemplified essences involves reference to the non-existent and
a non-existent entity cannot stand in a relation to an existent one or
be used to characterize it. Plantinga responds by offering a condi-
tional characterization of an unexemplified essence in terms of a
non-existent object: an unexemplified essence essentially has the
property of being a thisness if exemplified. Even if Plantinga's
response works against Fine's objection, it fails as a response to the
one's just raised against Plantinga's theory of individuation for
reasons already noted. It is one thing to characterize an unexempli-
fied essence in terms of a feature it has that is relevant to what
would be the case were it to be exemplified. Such a conditional is
perfectly intelligible. But it is another thing to appeal to the very
entity (e. g. Socrates) that being identical to Socrates is supposed to
individuate. Such an appeal suffers from circularity and the other
problems already mentioned.
Moreover, in his response to Fine, Plantinga considers the prob-
lem of whether or not haecceities are ontologically dependent on
the objects whose haecceities they are.
9 The only point he makes
relevant to criticisms about individuation is this: those who claim
that haecceities are ontologically dependent on the objects they
involve seem to take it that contingent objects like Socrates are
constituents of properties that are somehow "plugged into" those
properties. But this is false since properties are abstract objects.
However, Plantinga's response fails to deal with the real issue. The
issue is not that abstract entities like properties have contingent
beings as constituents. On this, Plantinga is surely correct. The
problem is how Plantinga's own account of haecceities can avoid
this conclusion. All he does is assert that this picture of properties is
absurd and, by implication, that his view does not entail this
picture. But in light of the arguments raised above about the nature
of impure properties, predication, and the grounding of thisness
for exemplified essences, it is not clear that Plantinga can get off the
hook that easily. Until these problems are solved, one should look
for a better theory of individuation. \n148 UNIVERSALS
Bare particulars as individuators
Statement of the view
What exactly is a bare particular? According to Gustav Bergmann's
classical definition,
Bare particulars neither are nor have natures. Any two of them
are not intrinsically but only numerically different. That is
their bareness. It is impossible for a bare particular to be "in"
more than one ordinary thing. .. A bare particular is a mere
individuator. .. It does nothing else.
10
Bergmann's statement implies three things about a bare particular:
1. It is not a property or a relation, but rather, a numerically
primitive individual of logical type zero in Bertrand Russell's
sense.
2. It does not "have" a nature nor does it "have" any properties at
all.
3. Its only role it to be an individuator.
Proposition 1 is fairly straightforward and clear. Socrates and Plato
are two individual spots that differ from each other because each
has its own bare particular that individuates it and that differs from
the properties in Socrates and Plato by more than a mere distinc-
tion of reason. Bare particulars constitute the "this" and the "that"
of Socrates and Plato and are called "bare" to distinguish them
from other particulars (e. g. events, primary substances, quality-in-
stances, or in this case, the spots themselves). As it stands, proposi-
tion 2 is ambiguous because, as will become evident shortly when
objections to bare particulars are examined, there is a sense in
which they do have properties and a sense in which they do not.
Three qualifications need to be made about proposition 3. For
one thing, bare particulars have been called on to serve a number of
metaphysical roles in addition to individuation: the unifier and
possessor of all a primary substance's properties (e. g. Locke's view
of substance), the ground for the concreteness of an ordinary thing
if properties are taken as abstract entities, that which accounts for
the endurance of a substance through intrinsic qualitative change. \nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 149
This chapter follows Bergmann and is concerned with bare particu-
lars only as individuators. Thus, arguments against the adequacy of
bare particulars in the other roles are irrelevant to the question of
individuation.
Secondly, it is important to point out that bare particulars are
ultimate individuators and are not directly responsible for all cases
of the individuation of particulars. T o take a simple example, if we
assume that mereological wholes such as artifacts are individuated
by their physical stuffs or parts, then we get a hierarchy of
individuation. This very table is individuated by this very wood,
this very wood is individuated by these specific atoms and
molecules, and so on until we reach bare particulars as ultimate
individuators. The fact that bare particulars can occasionally serve
as indirect and not direct individuators is due to the victory of
particularity: assuming a realist construal of properties as
universals, when some particular a exemplifies a property F, the
resulting state of affairs - a's being F - is itself a particular. This
point will not be developed further and the chapter will continue to
talk simply of bare particulars as individuators, but it is important
to recall that an overall theory of individuation can appeal to a
number of other particulars (e. g. states of affairs) as long as it is
kept in mind that bare particulars are crucial entities in any
adequate overall theory of individuation.
Thirdly, there is a difference between theories of individuation
for particulars like events, quality-instances, or primary substances
and theories of individuation for, say, the various properties (e. g.
redness, blueness) constituted by the same second order universal
to form a quality order. Various theories of individuation have been
offered for determinables under a determinate, including bare
particulars. But it is possible to hold a bare particular theory of
individuation for particulars and not for universals because, it
could be argued, whatever individuates blue from red, given that
they both have being coloured as their determinable, must leave the
resultant state of affairs (e. g. blueness is this colour) as either an
abstract state of affairs or a universal, and when bare particulars
individuate, they turn their individuated states of affairs into
concrete particulars. Again, this topic will not be pursued further.
The present concern is the relevance of bare particulars as
individuators of particulars. \n150 UNIVERSALS
Objections against bare particulars as individuators of particulars.
The main criticisms against bare particulars as individuators have
been summarized and advocated by Michael Loux 11 and, more
recently, by Joshua Hoffman and Gary S. Rosenkrantz. 12 These
criticisms are variants of four main objections. The first is clearly
the weakest and it comes from empiricist constraints on analytic
ontology: bare particulars are ontological posits that go beyond
what is empirically sensible or testable. This objection was a force-
ful one in the days of Bergmann and his disciples because they lived
in a time when forms of positivism were still alive and, in fact, they
themselves subscribed to a version of empiricist epistemology. E. B.
Allaire's response to this objection involved making a familiar
distinction between knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by
recognition. He went on to argue:
Consider once more the two discs. When presented together,
they are presented as numerically different. That difference is
presented as is their sameness with respect to space, (shade of)
colour, and so on. What accounts for that difference are the
numerically different individuals. No character nor group of
characters can do that. Thus, to say that they are individuals is
to say that things may be merely numerically different. No
matter what description one proposes, the numerical differ-
ence of two things which are alike in all (non relational)
respects must be accounted for. .. T o claim that both discs are
collections of literally the same universals does not account for
the thisness and thatness which are implicitly referred to in
speaking of them as two collections. That is, the two collec-
tions of characters - if one persists in speaking that way - are,
as presented, numerically different. Clearly, therefore, some-
thing other than a character must also be presented. That
something is what proponents of the realistic analysis call a
bare particular.
13
Allaire's response is to claim that we do have empirical knowledge
of bare particulars by acquaintance even if we do not have the abil-
ity to recognize those bare particulars at a later time. Does Allaire's
response work? It would seem not and the reason has to do with the
victory of particularity. It is clear that in looking at Socrates and Plato\nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 151
one is acquainted with two particulars and not just with universals.
But it may be that the particularity with which one is acquainted is
just the two particular states of affairs themselves, namely, Socrates
and Plato, and not with the bare particular in each that grounds their
particularity. So from the fact that one is presented with numerically
different spots along with their differentness, it does not follow that
we are presented with the constituent that accounts for the thisness
and thatness of each. An argument from acquaintance should not be
as ambiguous as this when it comes to stating just what it is with
which we are acquainted.
Does it matter that Allaire's argument is not clearly successful?
Probably not. T oday, most philosophers would not place the type of
empiricist constraints on analytic ontology that was present in
Bergmann's day. The real issue for bare particulars is whether or
not the arguments for and against them are sufficient to justify
their adoption as a solution to individuation, not whether they are
sense perceptible. Probably more than anyone else today, D. M.
Armstrong allows empiricism to shape his work in analytic
ontology, but in Chapter 4, it was seen that on the most likely inter-
pretation, he adopts bare particulars as individuators.
The second objection against bare particulars is the claim that
the notion itself "is incoherent and self-contradictory".
14 At least
four reasons have been given for this claim:
1. It is a necessary truth that any entity exemplifies properties yet
bare particulars exemplify no properties. Why think that this is
a necessary truth? T wo reasons suggest themselves. Either it
follows from one's overall theory of existence itself or else
from a generalization of the second argument to be given
momentarily. The issue of existence will be addressed in the
fourth major objection against bare particulars below (and in
Chapter 6. ) Thus, the response to this first point will be made
in connection with reason 2.
2. Bare particulars are suppose to have no properties, certainly no
properties necessarily, yet there are many properties they have
and have necessarily: being concrete, being particular, tran-
scendental properties like being coloured if green, being the
constituent of at most one entity, having the property of lack-
ing properties. \n152 UNIVERSALS
3. One cannot grasp or apprehend or conceive something that
doesn't exemplify properties so bare particulars fail in this
respect.
4. It is a necessary truth that if a property P inheres in x, then x
exemplifies P. Thus, given the fact that bare particulars must
have properties that inhere in them (e. g. the properties listed
above or the property of being such that properties can subsist
or inhere in a bare particular) the notion of a particular being
bare is incoherent.
These objections fail because they either express gross misunder-
standings of bare particulars or else they beg a serious question.
Before arguing this directly, it is worth noting that some of the
properties listed above are suspect to say the least. Arguably, what
grounds the truthfulness of the proposition " x is coloured if x is
green" is not a property, but a state of affairs constituted by a deter-
minable (being coloured), a determinate (being green), and a genus/
species relation. Nor, arguably, are there negative properties. The
fact that a bare particular lacks some property F is not grounded in
the fact that it possesses the negative property of not-F. As a
primitive fact, it simply lacks F itself.
More importantly, advocates of bare particulars distinguish two
different senses of being bare along with two different ways in
which something can have a property. First, an entity is bare if and
only if it has no properties in any sense. Bare particulars do not
exist unless they possess properties, so they are not bare in this
sense. Why this is so is a problem that will be addressed in the
fourth objection below. There is another sense of bare, however,
that is true of bare particulars. It can be clarified by considering the
way a classic Aristotelian substance has a property, say, some dog
Fido's being brown. On this view, Fido is a substance constituted by
an essence which contains a diversity of capacities internal to,
within the being of Fido as a substance. These capacities are poten-
tialities to exemplify properties or to have parts that exemplify
properties. The capacities are grounds for the properties like
brownness that Fido comes to have. When a substance has a prop-
erty, that property is "seated within" and, thus, an expression of the
"inner nature" of the substance itself. Recognizing this, Richard
Connell correctly distinguished the way substances and bare\nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 153
substrata have properties by noting that properties are not simply
tied to substances, but rather "rooted in. .. and caused by the
substance".
15
By contrast, bare particulars are simple and properties are linked
or tied to them. This tie is asymmetrical in that some bare particu-
lar x has a property F and F is had by x. A bare particular is called
"bare", not because it comes without properties, but in order to
distinguish it from other particulars like substances and to distin-
guish the way it has a property (F is tied to x) from the way, say, a
substance has a property (F is rooted within x). Since bare particu-
lars are simples, there is no internal differentiation within them.
When a property is exemplified by a bare particular, it is modified
by being tied to that particular. Thus, bare particulars have a
number of properties (e. g. being red) and they have some proper-
ties necessarily (e. g. particularity) in the sense that a bare particular
can exist only if it has certain properties tied to it. Now, this fact
about bare particulars neither makes them identical to their proper-
ties nor does it entail that properties are constituents within a bare
particular.
So advocates of bare particular agree that they have or exemplify
properties. This means that reasons 1, 2 and 4 fail to show that bare
particulars are "incoherent and self-contradictory". These objec-
tions trade on the confusion just mentioned. But perhaps my claim
is premature because there is another argument against bare
particulars contained in these objections: when a bare particular
has a property, this is grounded in a capacity for that property
contained within the inner nature of the bare particular. For exam-
ple, when a bare particular has a property that is "inhering in" it,
this fact must be grounded in the further fact that the bare particu-
lar has the property of being such that properties can inhere in
them.
It should be clear that this objection is question begging. It is
open to an advocate of bare particulars to claim that it is a primitive
fact that properties are tied to them and this does not need to be
grounded in some further capacity or property within them. In
analytic ontology, one eventually comes to primitives and, on the
bare particular view, qua simples, bare particulars and the role they
play as individuators are primitives. Thus, there is no need to
ground the inherence of properties in a bare particular by way of\n154 UNIVERSALS
some further entity within it when we recognize that "inhere in" is
taken as "tied to".
This leaves reason 3. One cannot grasp, apprehend, or conceive
of something that doesn't exemplify properties. First, one should
distinguish apprehending, which amounts to being acquainted with
something by means of a sense perception, from conceiving, which
does not involve imaging or sensing, but merely conceptually
grasping something. Now it may be the case that one cannot appre-
hend a bare particular that has no properties. But one can easily
conceive of a bare particular in itself as a pure, primitive individu-
ator without having to conceive of the properties tied to it, once
one recognizes the distinction between the bare particular, consid-
ered in itself as a simple, and the properties accidentally or neces-
sarily tied to it. But more importantly, even if it is granted that such
conceivings are impossible, it only follows that one can conceive of
bare particulars only by grasping them through their properties. It
does not follow that they are identical to those properties or that
bare particulars cannot be bare in the sense we are using.
So much, then, for objection two. Here is a third argument
against bare particulars. According to Hoffman and Rosenkrantz,
if ordinary objects require substrata as individuators, why
don't substrata themselves require some entity in order to
individuate them? Properties can't individuate them, for they
have none. Whatever else might serve to individuate substrata
(i. e. something other than further substrata, e. g. location)
would serve to individuate ordinary objects without having to
invoke substrata. Thus, consistency seems to imply either that
substrata require further substrata as individuators (an absurd-
ity), or else that substrata are not required in order to individu-
ate ordinary objects.
16
Michael Loux adds to this objection the further point that since
bare particulars have a number of properties essentially (being
coloured if green, being incapable of being in more than one
ordinary object at a given time, being self-identical), then two bare
particulars a and b could share all these properties in common and
we would need to postulate further bare particulars to individuate
a and b, and so on to infinity.
17 This is a vicious infinite regress\nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 155
according to Loux and, most likely, some sort of argument like this
is behind Hoffman's and Rosenkrantz's claim that there is an
absurdity in requiring further substrata to individuate substrata.
How strong are these points? They don't seem to succeed.
Hoffman and Rosenkrantz are correct in their claim that properties
(neither pure nor impure) cannot individuate, although the reason
they give (that substrata do not have properties) is incorrect. They
are also correct to say that if some other entity like location is
needed to individuate substrata, then the latter are rendered super-
fluous. But why should one think that bare particulars need further
entities to individuate them and so on to infinity? The argument
explicit in Loux and implicit in Hoffman and Rosenkrantz can be
clarified by the following consideration. Consider the spots Socra-
tes and Plato. Now each is a state of affairs with the following
constituents included in their assay: spothood, being round, being
red, the tie of predication, and the bare particular a for Socrates
and b for Plato. According to the argument under consideration,
one can also take bare particular a and b to be states of affairs with
these constituents in them: particularity, being self-identical, etc. ,
and bare particular a
1 in a and b1 in b, and on to infinity.
The problem with this argument is that it treats bare particulars
as wholes, namely, states of affairs with properties as constituents
within them. But this is wrong. Bare particulars are simples with
properties tied to them. The reason Socrates and Plato need
individuators is that they share all their pure properties in com-
mon, pure properties are universals, and neither impure properties
nor spatial locations or external relations can do the job required of
individuators. But the bare particulars a and b in Socrates and Plato
are simples and, as a matter of primitive fact, they simply come
individuated, even if properties are necessarily tied to them in that
they could not exist without properties. Thus, the regress does not
get going and this objection fails.
One final objection remains. There is no evidence to suggest that
bare particulars can exist without any properties at all, nor does it
seem coherent to think that this is possible given some of the points
mentioned in the past few pages. Yet on the current characteriza-
tion of bare particulars as primitive individuative simples with
properties tied to them in a primitive way ungrounded in capacities
or properties within those bare particulars, it seems that it is\n156 UNIVERSALS
inexplicable as to why bare particulars always come tied to certain
properties (e. g. particularity). What is to keep them from simply
splintering off on their own, as it were? And if this is, in fact, a
possibility, doesn't this show that, after all, bare particulars involve
an incoherence in this respect?
It is doubtful that there is an adequate answer to this question if
one just thinks of bare particulars as simples and leave it at that. For
if that were all there were to the matter, then it would be hard to see
why any simple couldn't just exist on its own. For it could be
argued that what is meant by saying that a simple could "just exist
on its own" is that a simple does not depend for its existence on
internal constituents because a simple has no constituents. A
constituent/whole framework is inapplicable for simples and since
bare particulars are simples, they are not dependent but, rather,
independent entities.
However, there are two more promising lines of response to this
problem open to the defender of bare particulars. The first one
rests on the claim that there does not seem to be a possible world in
which a bare particular exists but does not have certain things true
of it. Now, a certain distrust is warranted for certain candidates for
transcendental properties truly predicable of all entities whatso-
ever, for example being coloured if green, disjunctive properties
like being a horse or not being a horse or negative properties. But if
there are, in fact, genuine transcendental properties, such as being
one, goodness and so on, then these would be true of bare particu-
lars in all possible worlds. The issue here is not to identify a list of
those transcendental properties because one suspects that philoso-
phers will be more willing to agree that there are such properties
than they will about the precise list of properties that qualify to be
on the list. My point is that if there are such properties, then bare
particulars cannot exist without them. Besides transcendental
properties, it would also seem necessarily the case that bare
particulars have the properties of particularity and simplicity as
well.
A second line of response involves identifying a general theory
of existence that requires entities to have properties in order to
exist. If some sort of theory of this type is defensible, then it would
entail that nothing could exist without properties, bare particulars
included. A detailed defence of such a theory cannot be undertaken\nTHE INDIVIDUATION OF PARTICULARS 157
here, although more is said about it in Chapter 6. But it is worth
pointing out that many philosophers have recognized that if some-
thing exists, then it has properties and that non-existent entities
have no properties at all. Now, it is a mistake to go on to identify
existence as a property simpliciter. Kant's well known critique of
this position is widely recognized as successful. A closely related,
although better theory of existence is this: existence is the having of
a property or the being had by a property.
18 On this view, one can
define what it is for some entity x to come to be as follows: there is
at least one property P which is such that x has P and there is no
property Q which is such that x had Q. 19
So much for this gloss on what existence is. If this view or some
relevantly similar cousin is correct, then it would entail that bare
particulars cannot exist without properties. In order to avoid the
appearance of being ad hoc or begging the question, it is important
to say that the type of theory of existence being suggested should be
formulated in light of broad, general ontological issues and then
applied to the question of bare particulars. \nNotes
Chapter 1 - The problem(s) of universals
1. The term "property" is used in two different senses. It may be used to refer both
to monadic properties and relations or it may be used as a synonym for monadic
properties in contrast to relations. I shall adopt the second usage. The problem
of universals is about both properties and relations, but this work shall focus on
properties and bring in issues involving relations only as they are relevant to the
former.
2. Due to certain paradoxes (e. g. the set of all sets that are not members of them-
selves), it is important in some contexts to distinguish sets from classes. How-
ever, for historical reasons, we will use the two synonymously.
3. An impure property (e. g. being identical to Socrates, being to the left of the desk)
is one whose description requires reference to a particular, and a pure property
(e. g. being red) is one whose description requires no such reference.
4. I shall use "property", "attribute" and "quality" interchangeably.
5. There are, of course, several shades of redness. For ease of exposition I shall use
"red" and similar locutions to stand for an infimae species of redness (and like-
wise for other property terms) unless otherwise indicated. An infimae species of
a property is the lowest level determinate under a broad property below which
no further differentiation can be made. In this context, it would be a specific
shade of redness.
6. D. M. Armstrong has surveyed several varieties of extreme nominalism in
Universals and Scientific Realism Vol. 1: Nominalism and Realism, (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1978), 10-57. He uses the term "nominalism" for
what I am calling extreme nominalism.
7. D. C. Williams, "On the Elements of Being: I", The Review of Metaphysics 7
(September 1953), 3-18; K. Campbell, Metaphysics: An Introduction (Encino,
Calif. : Dickenson Publishing Company, 1976), 206-19.
8. C. Landesman, " Abstract Particulars", Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 33 (March 1976), 323-37.
9. G. Bergmann, Realism: A Critique of Brentano and Meinong (Madison, Wis. :
University of Wisconsin Press, 1964), 25.
10. N. Wolterstorff, On Universals (Chicago, Ill. : University of Chicago Press,
1970), 130-39. \nNOTES 159
11. Ibid. , 133-4.
12. G. B. Matthews & S. M. Cohen, "The One and the Many", Review of Meta-
physics 21 (June 1968), 630-55.
13. J. R. Jones, "What Do We Mean by an 'Instance'? " Analysis 11 (October 1950),
1-9.
14. E. Husserl, Logical Investigations [2 vols] (trans. J. N. Findlay), (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1970), especially vol. I, 408-10, vol. II, 427, 436,
440, 453, 467-8.
15. Nicholas Wolterstorff takes predication to be the most important of the three.
See On Universals. Panayot Butchvarov claims that resemblance is primary in
Resemblance and Identity (Bloomington, Ind. : Indiana University Press, 1966).
Michael Loux chooses abstract reference to be fundamental in Substance and
Attribute (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing Company, 1978). I see no
reason to choose any as most important.
16. Cf. Jones, "What Do We Mean by an 'Instance'? "; J. R. Jones, "Characters and
Resemblances", Philosophical Review 60 (October 1951), 551-62; J. R. Jones,
" Are the Qualities of Particular Things Universal or Particular? " Philosophical
Review 58 (March 1949), 152-70.
17. Wolterstorff, On Universals, 235-60. I emphasize that I will draw on
Wolterstorff's views in On Universals because in the decade between his article
"Qualities", Philosophical Review 69 (1960), 183-200, and On Universals, his
views changed significantly. In the 1960 article, he held that a quality could be
identical with what he called a quality class. A quality class differs from a kind
for Wolterstorff in that the former can be treated as a set and it has concrete and
abstract particulars as its members. For a criticism of Wolterstroff 's earlier
views, see D. Brownstein, Aspects of the Problem of Universals (Lawrence,
Kans. : University of Kansas Press, 1973), 5-15 and D. Casper, "On
Wolterstorff's Nominalistic Theory of Qualities", Philosophical Studies 30
(1976), 115-19. Wolterstorff responds to Casper's article by admitting that
while his former views were wrong, his notion of the universal as a kind is more
adequate. See N. Wolterstorff, "Response to Dennis Casper", Philosophical
Studies 30 (1976), 121-4.
18. Cf. Loux, Substance and Attribute; M. J. Loux, "Kinds and the Dilemma of
Individuation", The Review of Metaphysics 27 (June 1974), 773-84; M. J.
Loux, "The Concept of a Kind", Philosophical Studies 29 (1976), 53-61.
19. I have excluded Aristotle from the list because I am not certain what his view is.
There is a major debate over whether instanced forms for Aristotle are particu-
lars or universals. The issue has been debated in both the category of substance
and the category of quality. For some of the relevant literature in this debate, see
D. K. Modrak, "Forms, T ypes, and Tokens in Aristotle's Metaphysics", Journal
of the History of Philosophy 17 (October 1979), 371-81; G. E. L. Owen,
"Inherence", Phronesis 10 (1955), 97-105; R. E. Allen, "Individual Properties
in Aristotle's Categories", Phronesis 14 (1969), 31-9; J. Duerlinger, "Predica-
tion and Inherence in Aristotle's Categories", Phronesis 15 (1970), 179-203;
M. J. Loux, "Form, Species and Predication",
Metaphysics Z, H, and ", Mind
88 (January 1979), 1-23.
20. Cf. W. Künne, "Criteria of Abstractness: The Ontologies of Husserl, Frege, and
Strawson Against the Background of Classical Metaphysics", in Parts and
Moments: Studies in Logic and Formal Ontology, B. Smith (ed. ) (Munich:
Philosophia Verlag, 1982), 419-32. \n160 UNIVERSALS
21. Wolterstorff, On Universals, 239-41.
22. Loux, "The Concept of a Kind, " 54.
23. See Bergmann, Realism, 3-21.
24. R. Grossmann, The Existence of the World: An Introduction to Ontology (Lon-
don: Routledge, 1992), 1-45; The Categorical Structure of the World
(Bloomington, Ind. : Indiana University Press, 1983), 102-54.
25. Loux, Substance and Attribute, Chs 2-5; M. J. Loux, Metaphysics: A
Contemporary Introduction (London: Routledge, 1998), Chs 1-2.
26. There has been a debate over whether or not Plato would be a realist in the
sense just defined. For at times, Plato takes a form as something transcendent
from and copied by its instances. For more on this, see Brownstein, Aspects of
the Problem of Universals, 49-61; R. E. Allen, "Participation and Predication in
Plato's Middle Dialogues", in Studies in Plato's Metaphysics, R. E. Allen (ed. )
(New York: The Humanities Press, 1965), 43-60; L. Spellman, "Patterns and
Copies: The Second Version of the Third Man", Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
64 (1983), 165-75.
27. Cf. Armstrong, Nominalism and Realism; D. M. Armstrong Universals and
Scientific Realism Vol. 2: A Theory of Universals (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1978); D. M. Armstrong, Universals: An Opinionated
Introduction (Boulder, Colo. : Westview Press, 1989); D. M. Armstrong, A
World of States of Affairs (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
28. G. F. Stout, "Are the Characteristics of Particular Things Universal or
Particular? " Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 3 (1923), 114-
22; G. F. Stout, "The Nature of Universals and Propositions", in The Problem of
Universals, C. Landesman (ed. ) (New York: Basic Books, 1971), 153-66; G. F.
Stout, "Universals Again", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 15
(1936), 1-15.
29. See D. J. O'Connor, "Stout's Theory of Universals, " Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 27 (1949), 46-69.
30. Stout uses "class" or "kind" interchangeably, but both words are what I mean by
set/class and not kind.
31. Williams, "Elements of Being, I"; D. C. Williams, "On the Elements of Being:
II", The Review of Metaphysics 7 (December 1953), 171-92; D. C. Williams
"Necessary Facts", The Review of Metaphysics 16 (June 1963), 601-26.
32. Cf. K. Campbell, "Abstract Particulars and the Philosophy of Mind", Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 61 (June 1983), 129-41; K. Campbell, "The Metaphysics
of Abstract Particulars", in Midwest Studies in Philosophy Volume 6: The Founda-
tions of Analytic Philosophy, P. A. French, T. E. Uehling, H. K. Wettstein (eds)
(Minneapolis, Minn. : University of Minnesota Press, 1981), 477-88; Campbell,
Metaphysics: An Introduction, 206-19; K. Campbell, Abstract Particulars
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990).
33. I have been using "relation" and a number of philosophers would rather use
"nexus" to avoid problems like Bradley's regress. More on this later.
34. Bergmann,
Realism, 89.
35. Ibid. , 54.
36. Armstrong, A Theory of Universals, 172.
37. Armstrong, Universals, 43-4, 55, 100.
38. Grossmann, The Existence of the World, 30. Cf. 30-41.
39. Jones, "Characters and Resemblance".
40. Wolterstorff, On Universals, 235-60. \nNOTES 161
41. Campbell, " Abstract Particulars", 129.
42. Howard Robinson, Matter and Sense (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1982), 50.
43. See Grossmann, The Existence of the World, 1-45; cf. J. P. Moreland, "Review
of The Existence of the World: An Introduction to Ontology by Reinhardt
Grossmann", Mind 102 (July 1993), 407-10.
Chapter 2 - Extreme nominalism and properties
1. R. Chisholm, A Realistic Theory of the Categories (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996), 53.
2. Armstrong, Nominalism & Realism, 19-21.
3. Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica I, Q. 46, Art. 2, Reply Obj. 7; cf. Summa
Contra Gentiles I, Chapter xiii.
4. Armstrong, Universals, 88-9.
5. Armstrong, Universals and Scientific Realism, 18-21. Subsequently, Armstrong
has rejected the force of certain regress arguments, specifically, those that
involve supervenient entities that are entailed by subvenient entities in every
possible world in which the latter exist. Cf. Universals, 36, 53-7, 108-9. Unfor-
tunately, Armstrong's view of supervenient entities is not clearly correct and,
indeed, seems false. It is not clear why some entity, e. g. being colourful, is not a
self-identical, real entity even if it is entailed by being red in every world in
which the latter is exemplified.
6. D. Hume, A T reatise of Human Nature, 2nd edn, P. H. Nidditch (ed. ) (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1976), 20.
7. The only criticism that may not be applicable to concept EN is the claim that
properties outnumber concepts. It is possible to hold that while predicates are
human inventions, concepts are not and, thus, there is a plenteous supply to go
around. Still, an advocate of EN must be careful not to characterize concepts as
universals and, indeed, many realists take then to be such, specifically, inten-
tional properties.
8. Although this is seldom recognized, to be consistent, EN would seem to require
a further reduction of exact similarity relations to some other entity that is
consistent with one of the other forms of EN, since if taken at face value, exact
similarity is a relational property and EN eschews properties. This issue shall
not be probed further. In Chapter 3 we shall see that moderate nominalists
should take exact similarity as an internal relation but they are not consistent on
this point. For a more exotic view of resemblance, see David Lewis, "New Work
for a Theory of Universals? " Australasian Journal of Philosophy 61 (December
1983), 347-8. Cf. Butchvarov, Resemblance and Identity, 101-34; P. K.
Butchkarov, Being Qua Being (Bloomington, Ind. : Indiana University Press,
1979), 196-206.
9. B. Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1959), 96-7; Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. I, 410-11.
10. Armstrong claims that the object regress fails here. See Universals & Scientific
Realism, 53-4. The realist could argue that saying a is F iff a resembles a para-
digm requires either the paradigm to be F simpliciter (which commits one either
to accepting a property or to reducing resemblance EN to another version) or it
requires the introduction of a second paradigm for the first one, and on to infin-\n162 UNIVERSALS
ity. Armstrong says this argument won't work because EN could loop things
back into a circle, e. g. the first set of paradigms are F in virtue of the second set
and vice versa. But this response won't work for the following reason. While a
normal treatment of exact similarity treats it as symmetrical, the work exact
similarity is required to do in resemblance EN requires it to be asymmetrical in
an important sense. Other particulars are F "in virtue of" or as "determined by"
(Armstrong's terms) the paradigm. Now this expresses a metaphysical depend-
ence and, thus, generates a per se regress, which is, in fact vicious. One way to
see this is to note that such a metaphysical dependence is transitive, so that if a
is F in virtue of standing in R to b and b is F in virtue of standing in R to a, then
a is F in virtue of standing in R to itself. This amount to treating a being F as
either a sort of "self-causation", which is impossible, or else as a primitive fact
about a, which is contrary to resemblance EN.
11. Loux, Substance and Attribute, 45-7; Butchvarov, Being Qua Being, 196-9. Cf.
R. I. Aaron, The Theory of Universals (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967), 156.
12. Butchvarov also analyses the regress as an ontological one, but he simply asserts
that, so understood, the regress is not vicious since it is a potential infinite (he
explicitly likes it to the "infinite divisibility of space", which is a potential infi-
nite). See Being Qua Being, 196-7. Not only does he fail to justify this claim but,
so understood, it may be assimilated for our purposes to the epistemic regress.
13. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. II, ch. 1, sections 1-4.
14. W. Sellars, " Abstract Entities, " Review of Metaphysics XVI (1963), 627-71. My
discussion of Sellars is heavily indebted to Loux, Substance and Attribute, 77-
87. Cf. Loux, Metaphysics, 69-79.
Chapter 3 - Moderate nominalism and properties
1. Stout, " Are the Characteristics of Particular Things Universal or Particular? ";
Stout, "The Nature of Universals"; Stout, "Universals Again".
2. See O'Connor, "Stout's Theory of Universals".
3. Stout uses "class" or "kind" interchangeably, but both words are what I mean by
set/class and not kind.
4. Cf. Jones, "Characters and Resemblance", 552.
5. Armstong, Nominalism and Realism, 84.
6. Cf. Campbell, Abstract Particulars.
7. Cf. Campbell, "Abstract Particulars"; Campbell, "The Metaphysics of Abstract
Particulars"; Campbell, Metaphysics: An Introduction, 206-19.
8. Campbell, Metaphysics: An Introduction, 213.
9. Campbell, " Abstract Particulars", 141.
10. Ibid. , 130.
11. For a detailed critique of Campbell's notion of exact similarity, see J. P.
Moreland, Universals, Qualities, and Quality-Instances (Lanham, Md. : Univer-
sity Press of America, 1985), 8-11, 41-5, 109-33. It is possible to identify exact
similarity as identical to the entire set of exactly resembling tropes, or to iden-
tify different "kinds" of exact similarity relations with different sets of exactly
resembling tropes (e. g. red tropes, sweet tropes), or to view exact similarity as a
genuinely relational entity that is either a dyadic or an n-adic relation holding
among n tropes. I will only consider the dyadic view because it is the most likely
one to ascribe to Campbell and, in any case, it is the most plausible. \nNOTES 163
12. Bergmann, Realism, 54.
13. Armstrong, Universals and Scientific Realism, vol. 2, 172.
14. Armstrong, Universals, 43-4, 55, 100.
15. See Williams, "Elements of Being: I"; Williams "Elements of Being: II";
Williams "Necessary Facts".
16. Campbell, Metaphysics: An Introduction, 216-17.
17. Campbell, "The Metaphysics of Abstract Particulars", 484.
18. D. M. Armstrong is one of the few naturalists to see and note this point. See,
"Can A Naturalist Believe in Universals? ", in Science in Reflection, E. Ullmann-
Margalit (ed. ) (Boston, Mass. : Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1988), 111-12;
Armstrong, A Theory of Universals (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1978), 84-8. There are two main reasons why naturalists must eliminate or re-
duce internal relations. First, such relations presuppose entities (e. g. essences,
non-spatiotemporal quality orders like the colours, logical syllogisms taken as
abstract objects) or a type of wholism (e. g. living things are Aristotelian sub-
stances and not structured systems of separable parts standing in external rela-
tions) hard to harmonize with naturalism. Secondly, it is difficult to locate them
spatially and temporally.
19. Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 37, 38, 59-60.
20. Cf. Moreland, Universals, Qualities, and Quality-Instances, 71-4; J. P.
Moreland, "Keith Campbell and the Trope View of Predication", Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 67 (December 1989): 379-93. For Campbell's admission
of the force of these puzzles, see Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 65-6.
21. It is important to note that the problems revealed by these puzzles have nothing
essentially to do with the fact that Campbell held to a bundle theory of
substance. If one held a trope version of a traditional, Aristotelian-type view of
substance, with minor adjustments, these same puzzles would apply. Dogs as
much as reds exactly resemble each other and are individuated. And on
Campbell's earlier view, a dog's nature would differ from its location by a
distinction of reason. Elsewhere, I have criticized what amounts to a trope
ontology combined with a traditional substance view. See J. P. Moreland, "How
to be a Realist in Nominalist Clothing", Grazer Philosophische Studien 39 (Sum-
mer 1991), 75-101.
22. The primary place where Campbell has expressed his new position is Abstract
Particulars.
23. Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 56-8; 89-90.
24. F. Suárez, Disputationes Metaphysicae: Disputation VII: On the Various Kinds of
Distinctions, 1: 13-15 (trans. C. Vollert) (Milwaukee: Marquette University
Press, 1947), 24-7.
25. Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 68-9
26. Ibid. , 37, 59-60
27. Ibid. , 31, 37-40.
28. Ibid. , 67, 150-51, 172.
29. Jaegwon Kim, "Mental Causation and T wo Conceptions of Mental Properties",
unpublished paper delivered at the American Philosophical Association Eastern
Division Meeting, Atlanta, Georgia, December 27-30, 1993, 22-3.
30. Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 37. See Armstrong, Universals, 56, 100. For
Armstrong, the supervenience relation is the "nothing over and above" relation
such that supervenient entities do not add any real, new entites to one's
ontology. \n164 UNIVERSALS
31. G. Dawes-Hicks, " Are the Characteristics of Particular things Universal or Par-
ticular? ", (in symposium with G. E. Moore and G. F. Stout), Aristotelian Society
Supplementary Volume 3 (1923), 172.
32. Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 135-55.
33. Campbell says that if an entity is conventional, then it isn't real or natural, yet
he also says that manifest tropes are not figments even though their identity
conditions are arbitrary and conventional. These and other confusions perme-
ate Campbell's discussion of these issues. See Abstract Particulars, 137, 152.
34. Ibid. , 146.
35. Ibid. , 37, 100-101, 103, 110, 121-2.
36. Ibid. , 67, 150-51, 172.
37. Ibid. , 98, 100, 101, 103-4, 110, 121-2.
38. Ibid. , 125, 132, 145, 148, 150, 152-5.
39. See J. P. Moreland, "Was Husserl a Nominalist? " Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 49 (June 1989), 661-74.
40. Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 20, 22, 27, 56, 60.
41. Ibid. , 27, 89.
42. Ibid. , 37-8, 59-60.
43. Ibid. , 9-10, 68-71.
44. Ibid. , 70.
45. Ibid. , 43-5.
46. Elsewhere, I have raised other arguments against Campbell's earlier views and
some of my points are equally relevant to his current position. Cf. Moreland,
"Was Husserl a Nominalist? ; Moreland, "Keith Campbell"; J. P. Moreland,
"Nominalism and Abstract Reference", American Philosophical Quarterly 27
(October 1990), 325-34; J. P. Moreland, "Issues and Options in Exemplifica-
tion", American Philosophical Quarterly 33 (April 1996), 133-47.
Chapter 4 - Minimalist realism: Wolterstorff's kinds and
Armstrong's properties
1. I will focus on the mature expression of Wolterstorff 's views expressed in On
Universals. In the decade between his article "Qualities" and On Universals his
views changed significantly. In the 1960 article, he held that a property could be
identical with what he called a quality-class. A quality-class differs from a kind
for Wolterstorff in that the former can be treated as a set and it has concrete and
abstract particulars as its members. For a critique of Woltersdorff 's earlier
views, see Brownstein, Aspects of the Problem of Universals, 5-15 and Casper,
"On Wolterstorff 's Nominalistic Theory of Qualities". Wolterstorff acknowl-
edges the force of Casper's critique of his earlier view in "Response to Dennis
Casper". Further, I will not be treating Wolterstorff 's positive arguments for the
existence of cases in addition to kinds. His arguments are among those treated
in the discussion of puzzles raised against Campbell's tropes in Chapter 3. For
an further refutation of Wolterstorff 's positive arguments, see J. Levinson, "The
Particularization of Attributes", Australasian Journal of Philosophy 58 (June
1980), 104-6.
2. Wolterstorff, On Universals, 7.
3. Ibid. , 239-41; cf. 253-6. \nNOTES 165
4. Ibid. , 235.
5. N. Wolterstorff, "Bergmann's Constituent Ontology", Nous 4 (May 1970),
125.
6. This can be seen by comparing Loux, Substance and Attribute, 5, 133, 157-8
and 178.
7. Woltersdorff, On Universals, 138-41.
8. Ibid. , 255-6.
9. Ibid. , 252-3.
10. Ibid. , 133.
11. Wolterstorff equivocates on what counts as an instance. In On Universals, a case
(like Socrates's wisdom) is an instance of a universal (p. 91) and a concrete par-
ticular (Socrates) is an instance of a universal (p. 174). However, the former
usage is his usual one. He explicitly states that "if x is a case of y, I shall say that
x instantiates y" (p. 89). I am following him in this use of "instance".
12. Ibid. , 252-6.
13. Ibid. , 240.
14. Wolterstorff, "Bergmann's Constituent Ontology", 115-26.
15. An exception to this would be Wolterstorff 's use of the property of "being iden-
tical to A " for some entity A. I assume Wolterstorff means for this property to be
an essential constituent in A. See below for more on his use of this property.
16. There is an immanent realist view that I am not considering here. T wo of its
main advocates have been W. E. Johnson, Logic: Part I (New Y ork: Dovers Pub-
lications, 1964), 173-85; J. Cook Wilson, Statement and Inference: Volume I
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1926), 333-53. See also, R. L. Beck, "John Cook
Wilson's Doctrine of the Universal", The Monist 41 (October 1931): 552-82.
Perhaps the clearest statement of this view appears in two articles by J. R. Jones:
"What Do We Mean by an 'Instance'? " and " Are the Qualities of Things Univer-
sal or Particular? " This view extends the genus/species or determinable/deter-
minate relation to the way a first order universal is related to its cases. Thus, this
view represents an immanent realist attempt to explain how the determinable is
"in" the determinate and, therefore, to give an account of the "is a case of "
relation. There are two main features of this view relevant to the discussion of
Wolterstorff. First, the property-instance (i. e. case) is a simple. The universal is
the essence or nature of the instance but the universal is not construed as one
entity in the instance among others. In particular, there is nothing outside the
nature of the universal (say, an individuator) that is "in" the instance. The uni-
versal "covers the nature of " the instance. Secondly, the instance does not have
its universal, it is the universal. Panayot Butchvarov says that the relationship
between the universal and its case (he addresses the genus/species relation as it
obtains between second and first order universals, but it is clearly this same
relation held by Jones and Cook Wilson to obtain between a first order univer-
sal and a case) is a "kind of identity"; see Butchvarov, Resemblance and Identity,
147-53. This "kind of identity" is illustrated by Butchvarov by saying that if F
is a generic universal and m and n are two of F's species universals, then F is in
some sense identical to m and n, and in another sense F is different from m and
n. This same statement could be made where F is a first order universal and m
and n are two cases. There are three reasons I have not considered this position
as a possible way of understanding Wolterstorff. First, it suffers from the same
problems that are being explicitly raised against Wolterstorff since it depicts an\n166 UNIVERSALS
instance as a simple entity. Secondly, it is unclear what a "sort of identity" could
mean here. This understanding of the genus/species relationship does little to
clarify what Wolterstorff means by "is a case of ". Thirdly, and most impor-
tantly, Wolterstorff explicitly states on pages 147-8 of On Universals that the
universal can have many instances but it cannot be individualized. Since Jones
and Cook Wilson hold that the instance is identical to the universal individual-
ized, this cannot be Wolterstorff 's view of "is a case of ".
17. H. Hochberg, "Things and Qualities", in Metaphysics and Explanation, W. H.
Capitan and D. D. Merrill (eds) (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1964), 95. Cf. H. Hochberg, "Universals, Particulars, and Predication", The
Review of Metaphysics 19 (September 1965), 100.
18. Armstrong, Nominalism and Realism, 87.
19. Wolterstorff, "Bergmann's Constituent Ontology", 118-21.
20. Ibid. , 134.
21. J. Perry, "Review of On Universals, by Nicholas Wolterstorff ", The Journal of
Philosophy 71 (May 1974), 254.
22. See Armstrong, Nominalism & Realism; Armstrong, A Theory of Universals; D.
M. Armstrong, "Naturalism, Materialism, and First Philosophy", Philosophia 8
(1978), 261-76; Armstrong, "Can A Naturalist Believe in Universals? ";
Armstrong, Universals; D. M. Armstrong, A World of States of Affairs (Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
23. Armstrong, Nominalism & Realism, 130.
24. Armstrong, "Naturalism: Materialism and First Philosophy", 262.
25. Armstrong, "Can A Naturalist Believe in Universals? ", 111-12; Armstrong, A
Theory of Universals, 84-8.
26. See Armstrong, Universals, 75-7, 81-2, 98-9.
27. Ibid. , 8, 39-41.
28. See Grossmann, The Existence of the World, 27-8.
29. Armstrong, Nominalism and Realism, 109.
30. See Armstrong, A World of States of Affairs, 28-31.
31. For an excellent analysis of Frege's ontology, see E. D. Klemke (ed. ), Essays on
Frege (Urbana, Ill. : University of Illinois Press, 1968).
32. Reinhardt Grossmann has shown that Armstrong's view of relations as spatial is
even more problematic than is his position on properties. See Grossmann, The
Existence of the World, 26-8; cf. 51-7.
33. See Moreland, "Was Husserl a Nominalist? ".
34. Armstrong, Nominalism & Realism, 64-6, 68-9, 102; Armstrong, A Theory of
Universals, 3, 76.
35. See Armstrong, Universals, 113-33.
36. Ibid. , 122.
37. R. Connell, Substance and Modern Science (Notre Dame: University of Notre
Dame Press, 1988), 90.
38. Armstrong, Universals, 94.
39. Armstrong, A World of States of Affairs, 124; cf. 95-112; 123-7. Armstrong's
only problem with Locke's view of a substratum, is that it was an unknown
postulate and Armstrong insists that the particularity of a thick particular is
presented in acts of perception. Unfortunately, he is not as clear on this as one
might wish because he seems to go back and forth between identifying what is
so presented as: the fact that thick or propertied particulars are not exhausted\nNOTES 167
by their properties and relations; and the thin particular itself. But the victory of
particularity (which Armstrong accepts) does not clearly allow one to assert the
latter, just because one is acquainted in acts of perception with the thick particu-
lar qua particular.
40. For Armstrong's rejection of bare particulars in sense one, see A World of States
of Affairs, 86, 153, 267-8. For a defence of bare particulars as individuators, see
J. P. Moreland, "Theories of Individuation: A Reconsideration of Bare Particu-
lars", Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 79 (September 1998), 251-63.
41. Armstrong, A World of States of Affairs, 107-11, 123-6.
42. Robinson, Matter and Sense, 50.
43. See Grossmann, The Existence of the World, 1-45; cf. Moreland, "Review of
The Existence of the World", 407-10.
44. J. Seibt, Properties as Processes: A Synoptic Study of Wilfrid Sellars' Nominalism
(Atascadero, Calif. : Ridgeview, 1990), 184.
45. W. Sellars, Naturalism and Ontology (Atascadero, Calif. : Ridgeview, 1979),
109.
Chapter 5 - Traditional realism: properties are abstract
objects
1. Seibt, Properties as Processes, 184.
2. Grossmann, The Existence of the World, 30; cf. 30-41.
3. Dallas Willard, Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge (Athens, Ohio: Ohio
University Press, 1984), 187.
4. G. Bergmann, Logic and Reality (Madison, Wis. : The University of Wisconsin
Press, 1964), 194.
5. Grossmann, The Categorial Structure of the World, 107-8; cf. Husserl, Logical
Investigations, vol. 1, 376-7.
6. Künne, "Criteria of Abstractness", 413; cf. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol.
1, 377.
7. James Alan T alvite, "Properties and Things", PhD dissertation, Vanderbilt
University, 1977, 196-201; cf. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. 1, 377.
8. Cf. K. Mulligan, P. Simons and B. Smith, "T ruth-Makers", Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 44 (1984), 304-8.
9. Cf. Grossmann, The Existence of the World, 33-5.
10. Edmund Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a
Phenomonological Philosophy. First Book: General Introduction to a Pure
Phenomenology (trans. F. Kersten) (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers,
1982), 7.
11. Husserl, Ideas I, 11.
12. Willard, Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge, 192.
13. Husserl, Ideas I, 25.
14. Ibid. , 27.
15. Ibid. , 8.
16. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. 2, 467.
17. The entire third investigation of the Logical Investigations discusses Husserl's
views on parts and wholes, including his notion of foundation.
18. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. 2, 453. \n168 UNIVERSALS
19. Husserl, Ideas I, 28.
20. For more on the difference between containing properties intrinsically vs. having
them tied to a bare particular, see Moreland, "Theories of Individuation".
Chapter 6 - Traditional realism: issues and objections
1. Cf. R. Chisholm, The Problem of the Criterion (Milwaukee, Wis. : Marquette
University Press, 1973).
2. David Lewis holds a specific version of this criterion. See his On the Plurality of
Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), 50-69.
3. This is advocated by D. M. Armstrong. See Armstrong, A Theory of Universals,
43-52.
4. Richard Swinburne advances this criterion in The Evolution of the Soul
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1986), 46-51.
5. See Roderick Chisholm, On Metaphysics (Minneapolis, Minn. : University of
Minnesota Press, 1989), 143-5; cf. Chisholm, A Realist Theory of Categories,
11-21.
6. See Jarrold J. Katz, Realistic Rationalism (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1998),
25-83; Laurence Bonjour, In Defense of Pure Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1998), 186.
7. See Bonjour, In Defense of Pure Reason, 153-86.
8. See especially, Husserl, Logical Investigations; Husserl, Ideas 1.
9. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. I, 332, 337, 340; ibid. , vol. II, 441, 446-7,
453; Husserl, Ideas I, 7-8; cf. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. II, 773-815.
10. Ibid. , vol. I, 340, 357, 361, 379; Husserl, Ideas I, xxi.
11. Husserl, Logical Investigations, vol. I, 337, 340, 357, 389, 390-91.
12. Ibid. , vol. I, 337, 357, 383.
13. Ibid. , vol. I, 337, 339-40, 357, 377, 379; ibid. , vol. II, 482; Husserl, Ideas I, 8,
25.
14. Ibid. , 39-40.
15. D. M. Armstrong, Universals, 76-7; cf. 75-82.
16. Ibid. , 75, 81, 84, 92, 94, 96.
17. Given that both moderate nominalists and realists embrace the existence of
properties, the discussion to follow could, with adjustments, be equally appro-
priated by either camp.
18. I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, N. K. Smith (trans. ) (New York: St Martin's
Press, 1965), 505.
Chapter 7 - The individuation of particulars
1. Cf. Hochberg, "Universals, Particulars, and Predication", 89-91.
2. Cf. Alvin Plantinga, The Nature of Necessity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974),
Chs 4-6.
3. See note 2. Sometimes Leibnizian essences are called haecceities. I will not fol-
low this custom for the following reason. The notion of an haecceity originated
in the metaphysics of John Duns Scotus and it has had at least two different
meanings in the history of philosophy: primitive thisness, the fundamental ac-
tuality of an existent entity that is irreducible to any other category of being, a\nNOTES 169
positive individuating entity that is formally distinct from a thing's common
nature (e. g. humanness); and a Leibnizian essence. In my view, Scotus's notion
was the former and the term "haecceity" should be reserved to this usage. I will
not consider Scotus's notion because I believe it is either unintelligible if left as
a genuine alternative to the other views I am surveying or else it reduces to one
of them (e. g. bare particularity). Further, the aim of this chapter is to address
major contemporary views and in Chapters 3 and 4, I have already mentioned
the way Campbell and Armstrong have appropriated Scotus, or at least their in-
terpretation of Scotus, into their theories of individuation.
4. Plantinga, The Nature of Necessity, 72.
5. Cf. A. Plantinga, "Replies to My Colleagues", in Alvin Plantinga, J. E.
Tomberlin & P. van Inwagen (eds) (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985), 335.
6. Plantinga, The Nature of Necessity, 111.
7. Loux, Substance and Attribute, 132-4, 175-8; K. Fine, "Plantinga on the
Reduction of Possibilist Discourse", in Alvin Plantinga, J. E. T omberlin & P. van
Inwagen (eds) (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985), 148-55. Unfortunately, both Loux
and Fine tend to confuse the metaphysical and epistemological aspects of this
problem with the result that most of their complaints boil down to problems of
identifying individuals in possible worlds. I agree with Plantinga that this is not
a serious problem and that the real difficulty here is metaphysical.
8. It also seems strained to say that proposition 6 asserts two things (Socrates is
self-identical and has the property of Socrateity) whereas 5 only asserts one
thing. It is simpler to say that both assert that each entity, including Socrates,
stand in the relation of identity with itself.
9. Plantinga, "Replies to My Colleagues", 336-40. Plantinga's notion of
ontological dependence is the same as my notion of ontological constituent-
dependence without the second conjunct.
10. Bergmann, Realism, 24, 25.
11. Loux, Substance and Attribute, 140-52.
12. J. Hoffman & G. S. Rosenkrantz, Substance and Other Categories (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1994), 46-52.
13. E. B. Allaire, "Bare Particulars", reprinted in Universals and Particulars, M. J.
Loux (ed. ) (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1970), 288.
14. Hoffman and Rosenkrantz, Substance and Other Categories, 48-9.
15. Connell, Substance and Modern Science, 90.
16. Hoffman and Rosenkrantz, Substance and Other Categories, 51.
17. Loux, Substance and Attribute, 149-52.
18. See J. P. Moreland, "Review of The Existence of the World: An Introduction to
Ontology by Reinhardt Grossmann", Mind 102 (July, 1993), 407-10.
19. Cf. R. Chisholm, "Coming into Being and Passing Away: Can the Metaphysi-
cian Help? " in On Metaphysics, 49-61, especially p. 56. \nBibliography
Historical sources
Plato (427-347BC)
Plato. Parmenides.
Plato. Phaedo.
Plato. Republic.
Allen, R. E. Participation and Predication in Plato's Middle Dialogues. In Studies in
Plato's Metaphysics, R. E. Allen (ed. ) (New York: The Humanities Press, 1965)
(originally published in Philosophical Review 69, 1960, 147-64).
Aristotle (384-322BC)
Aristotle. Categories.
Aristotle. Metaphysics.
Aristotle. Physics.
Cresswell, M. J. What is Aristotle's Theory of Universals? Australasian Journal of
Philosophy 53, 1975, 238-47.
Anicius Manlius Severinus Boethius (480-524)
Boethius, A. M. S. The Theological T ractates and The Consolation of Philosophy, H.
F. Stewart & E. K. Rand (eds, trans. ) (Cambridge, Mass. , Harvard University
Press, 1918).
St. Thomas Aquinas (1225-74)
Aquinas, St. T. Summa Contra Gentiles.
Aquinas, St. T. Summa Theologica, 3 vols, trans. by the Dominican Fathers, Benziger
Brothers, 1947-48.
Clarke, F. P. St. Thomas on "Universals". The Journal of Philosophy 59, 1962, 720-
24. \nBIBLIOGRAPHY 171
John Duns Scotus (1266-1308)
Scotus, D. Opera Omnia, vol. VIII, Vives edition, 26 vols (Paris, 1891-95).
Wolter, A. B. The Realism of Scotus. Journal of Philosophy 59, 1962, 725-35.
Francisco Suárez (1548-1617)
Suárez, F. Disputationes Metaphysicae: Disputation VII: On the Various Kinds of
Distinctions, (trans. C. Vollert) (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1947).
John Locke (1632-1704)
Locke, J. Essay Concerning Human Understanding.
Aaron, R. I. Locke's Theory of Universals. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 33,
1932-33, 173-202.
George Berkeley (1685-1753)
Berkeley, G. A T reatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge.
Berkeley, G. Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous.
Husserl, E. Abstraction and Representation. In Logical Investigations Vol. I, 2nd
edn, E. Husserl (trans. J. N. Findlay) (London: Routledge, 1970), 387-401.
David Hume (1711-76)
Hume, D. A T reatise of Human Nature.
Hume, D. A T reatise of Human Nature, 2nd edn, H. Nidditch (ed. ) (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1976).
Aaron, R. I. Hume's Theory of Universals. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 42,
1941-42, 117-40.
Gottlob Frege (1848-1925)
Frege, G. On Concept and Object. T ranslations from the Philosophical Writings of
Gottlob Frege, 3rd edn, P. T. Geach and M. Black (eds) (Oxford: Blackwell,
1980).
Klemke, E. D. (ed. ) Essays on Frege (Urbana, Ill. : University of Illinois Press, 1968).
Edmund Husserl (1859-1938)
Husserl, E. Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to Phenomological Phi-
losophy, First Book: General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology (trans. F.
Kersten) (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1983).
Husserl, E. Logical Investigations, 2nd edn (trans. J. N. Findlay) (London:
Routledge, 1970).
Moreland, J. P. Was Husserl a Nominalist? Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search 49, June 1989, 661-74.
Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889-1951)
Wittgenstein, L. Philosophical Investigations, 2nd edn (trans. G. E. M. Anscombe)
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1958).
Wittgenstein, L. The Blue and Brown Books (New Y ork: Harper and Row, 1958). \n172 UNIVERSALS
Bibliography
Aaron, R. I. T wo Senses of "Universal". Mind 48, 1939, 168-85.
Aaron, R. I. The Theory of Universals (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967).
Acton, H. B. The Theory of Concrete Universals, part 1, Mind 45, 1936, 417-31.
Acton, H. B. The Theory of Concrete Universals, part 2, Mind 46, 1937, 1-13.
Albritton, R. Forms of Particular Substances in Aristotle's Metaphysics. The Journal
of Philosophy 54, October 1957, 699-707.
Aldrich, V. C. Colors and Universals. Philosophical Review 41, 1952, 377-81.
Allaire, E. B. Existence, Independence, and Universals. In Iowa Publications in Phi-
losophy Vol. I: Essays in Ontology, E. B. Allaire (ed. ) (The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff, 1963), 1-13.
Allaire, E. B. Bare Particulars. Reprinted in Universals and Particulars: Readings in
Ontology, M. Loux (ed. ) (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 1970),
281-90.
Allen, R. E. Individual Properties in Aristotle's Categories. Phronesis 14, 1969, 31-
9.
Armstrong, D. M. Nominalism and Realism [vol. 1 of Universals and Scientific Real-
ism] (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
Armstrong, D. M. A Theory of Universals [vol. 2 of Universals and Scientific Real-
ism] (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
Armstrong, D. M. What is a Law of Nature? (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1983).
Armstrong, D. M. Can a Naturalist Believe in Universals? In Science in Reflection, E.
Ullmann-Margalit, Norwell (ed. ) (Boston, Mass. : Kluwer Academic Publishers,
1988), 103-15.
Armstrong, D. M. Universals: An Opinionated Introduction (Boulder, Colo. :
Westview Press, 1989).
Armstrong, D. M. A World of States of Affairs (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1997).
Armstrong, D. M. Infinite Regress Arguments and the Problem of Universals. Aus-
tralasian Journal of Philosophy 52, 1974, 191-201.
Armstrong, D. M. Naturalism, Materialism and First Philosophy. Philosophia 8,
1978, 261-76.
Armstrong, D. M. Against "Ostrich Nominalism": A Reply to Michael Devitt. Pa-
cific Philosophical Quarterly 61, 1980, 440-49.
Armstrong, D. M. A Naturalist Program: Epistemology and Ontology. Proceedings
and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association 73, 1999, 77-89.
Ayer, A. J. Universals and Particulars. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 34,
1933-34, 51-62.
Ayer, A. J. On What There Is. Aristotelian Society Supplementary 25, 1951 pp. 137-
48.
Bacon, J. Universals and Property Instances (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995).
Bacon, J. , K. Campbell, L. Reinhardt. Ontology, Causality, and Mind: Essays in
Honour of D. M. Armstrong (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993).
Baylis, C. A. Meanings and Their Exemplifications. Journal of Philosophy 47, 1930,
169-74.
Baylis, C. A. Logical Subjects and Physical Objects. Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 17, 1957, 483-7.
Bealer, G. Quality and Concept (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1982).
Bealer, G. Universals. The Journal of Philosophy 90, Jan. 1993 pp. 5-32.
Beck, R. L. John Cook Wilson's Doctrine of the Universal. The Monist 41, October
1931, 552-82. \nBIBLIOGRAPHY 173
Bennett, J. Substance, Reality and Primary Qualities. American Philosophical Quar-
terly 2, 1965, 1-17.
Bergmann, G. Logic and Reality (Madison, Wis. : University of Wisconsin Press,
1964).
Bergmann, G. Realism: A Critique of Brentano and Meinong (Madison, Wis. : Univer-
sity of Wisconsin Press, 1967).
Bergmann, G. Particularity and the New Nominalism. Methodos 6, 1954, 131-47.
Bergmann, G. Strawson's Ontology. Journal of Philosophy 58, 1961, 601-22.
Black, M. The Identity of Indiscernibles. Mind 61, 1952, 153-64, reprinted with
additional notes in M. Black. Problems of Analysis (London: Routledge, 1954).
Black, M. The Elusiveness of Sets. The Review of Metaphysics 24, 1971, 614-36.
Blanshard, B. The Nature of Thought [2 vols] (London: Allen & Unwin, 1939).
Blanshard, B. Reason and Analysis (LaSalle, Ill. : Open Court, 1962).
Bochenski, I. M. , A. Church, N. Goodman. The Problem of Universals (Notre Dame,
Ind. : Notre Dame University Press, 1956).
Bonjour, L. In Defense of Pure Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998).
Braithwaite, R. B. Universals and the "Method of Analysis". Aristotelian Society
Supplementary Volume 6, 1926, 27-38.
Brandt, R. B. The Languages of Realism and Nominalism. Philosophy and Phenom-
enological Research 17, 1957, 516-35.
Brody, R. B. Natural Kinds and Real Essences. Journal of Philosophy 64, 1967, 431-46.
Brown, L. Loux on Individuation. Philosophical Studies 28, 1975, 223-5.
Brown, P. Infinite Causal Regression. In The Philosophical Review, 75, 1966, 510-
25; reprinted in Aquinas: A Collection of Critical Essays, A. Kenny (ed. ) (Notre
Dame, Ind. : University of Notre Dame Press, 1976), 214-36.
Brownstein, D. Aspects of the Problem of Universals (Lawrence, Kans. : University of
Kansas Press, 1973).
Butchvarov, P. Resemblance and Identity (Bloomington, Ind. : Indiana University
Press, 1966).
Butchvarov, P. Being Qua Being (Bloomington, Ind. : Indiana University Press, 1979).
Butchkarov, P. Concrete Entities and Concrete Relations. The Review of Metaphysics
10, 1957, 412-22.
Butler, R. J. Distinctiones Rationis, or the Cheshire Cat Which Left Its Smile Behind.
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 76, 1976, 165-76.
Butts, R. Husserl's Critique of Hume's Notion of Distinctions of Reason. Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 20, 1959, 213-21.
Campbell, K. Metaphysics: An Introduction. (Encino, Calif. : Dickenson Publishing
Company, 1976).
Campbell, K. AbstractParticulars (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1990).
Cambell, K. Family Resemblance Predicates. American Philosophical Quarterly 2,
1965, 238-44.
Campbell, K. The Metaphysics of Abstract Particulars. In Midwest Studies in Phi-
losophy Volume 6: The Foundations of Analytic Philosophy, A. French, T. E.
Uehling, H. K. Wettstein (eds) (Minneapolis, Minn. : University of Minnesota
Press, 1981), 477-88.
Cambell, K. Abstract Particulars and the Philosophy of Mind. Australasian Journal
of Philosophy 61, 1983, 129-41.
Carmichael, Derivation of Universals. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
8, 1948, 700-5.
Carnap, R. The Logical Structure of the World (trans. R. A. George) (London:
Routledge, 1967). \n174 UNIVERSALS
Carnap, R. The Methodological Character of Theoretical Concepts. Minnesota
Studies in the Philosophy of Science 1, 1956, 38-76.
Casper, D. On Wolterstorff's Nominalistic Theory of Qualities. Philosophical Stud-
ies 30, 1976, 115-19.
Castañeda, H-N. Individuation and Non-Identity: A New Look. American Philo-
sophical Quarterly 12, 1975, 131-40.
Chisholm, R. The Problem of the Criterion (Milwaukee, Wis. : Marquette University
Press, 1973).
Chisholm, R. On Metaphysics (Minneapolis, Minn. : University of Minnesota Press,
1989).
Chisholm, R. A Realist Theory of Categories (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1996).
Church, R. An Analysis of Resemblance (London: Allen & Unwin, 1952).
Clark, R. The Bundle Theory of Substance. The New Scholasticism 50, 1976, 490-
503.
Clement, W. C. Quality Orders. Mind 65, 1956, 184-99.
Cohen, L. J. The Diversity of Meaning. (London: Methuen, 1962).
Connell, R. Substance and Modern Science (Notre Dame, Ind. : University of Notre
Dame Press, 1988).
Cook, W. J. Statement and Inference [2 vols] (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1926).
Cornman, J. W. Language and Ontology. Australasian Journal of Psychology and
Philosophy 41, 1963, 291-305.
Dawes-Hicks, G. Are the Characteristics of Particular Things Universal or Particu-
lar? " Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 3, 1923, 171-4.
Devitt, M. "Ostrich Nominalism" or "Mirage Realism? " Pacific Philosophical Quar-
terly 61, 1980, 433-9.
Donagan, A. Universals and Metaphysical Realism. The Monist 47, 1963, 211-46.
Ducasse, C. J. Some Critical Comments on a Nominalistic Analysis of Resemblance.
Philosophical Review 49, 1940, 641-7.
Duerlinger, J. Predication and Inherence in Aristotle's Categories. Phronesis 15,
1970, 179-203.
Dummett, M. Frege: Philosophy of Language, 2nd edn (London: Duckworth, 1981),
Chapters 7-8.
Dummett, M. Nominalism. Philosophical Review 49, 1940, 491-505.
Duncan-Jones, A. E. Universals and Particulars. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Soci-
ety 34, 1933-34, 63-86.
Durrant, M. Feature Universals and Sortal Universals. Analysis 139, 1970, 49-52.
Emmett, E. R. Philosophy of Resemblances. Philosophy 39, 1954, 146-51.
Ewing, A. C. The Problem of Universals. Philosophical Quarterly 21(84), 1971,
207-16.
Fales, E. Generic Universals. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 60, 1982, 29-39.
Fine, K. "Plantinga on the Reduction of Possibilist Discourse", in Alvin Plantinga, J.
E. T omberlin & P. van Inwagen (eds) (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985).
Fox, J. F. T ruthmaker. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 65, 1987, 188-207.
Furlong, E. J. , C. A. Mace, D. J. O'Connor. Abstract Ideas and Images. Aristotelian
Society Supplementary Volume 27, 1953, 121-36.
Gasking, D. Clusters. Australasian Journal of Psychology and Philosophy 38, 1960,
1-36.
Geach, P. T. Mental Acts (London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957).
Geach, P. T. Reference and Generality (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press,
1964). \nBIBLIOGRAPHY 175
Geach, P. T. On What There Is. Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 25,
1951, 125-36.
Geach, P. T. On What Actually Exists. Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume
42, 1968, 7-16.
Geels, D. E. On Bergmann's Principium Individuationis. Philosophical Studies 24,
1973, 275-9.
Ginascol, F. H. The Question of Universals and the Problem of Faith and Reason.
Philosophical Quarterly 9, 1959, 319-29.
Goddard, L. Predicates, Relations and Categories. Australasian Journal of Psychol-
ogy and Philosophy 44, 1966, 139-71.
Goodman, N. The Structure of Appearance, 2nd edn (Indianapolis and New York:
Bobbs-Merrill, 1966).
Goodman, N. Seven Strictures on Similarity. In Experience and Theory, L. Foster &
J. W. Swanson (eds) (London: Duckworth, 1970), 19-30.
Goodman, N. A World of Universals. In Problems and Projects (Indianapolis and
New York: Bobbs-Merrill, 1972), 155-73.
Goodman, N. On Relations That Generate. Philosophical Studies 6, 1958, 65-6.
Goodman, N. & W. V. Quine. Steps Toward a Constructive Nominalism. Journal of
Symbolic Logic 12, 1947, 105-22.
Grossman, R. Common Names. In Iowa Publications in Philosophy Volume 1: Es-
says in Ontology, E. B. Allaire (ed. ) (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1963).
Grossman, R. The Categorical Structure of the World (Bloomington, Ind. : Indiana
University Press, 1983).
Grossman, R. The Existence of the World: An Introduction to Ontology (London:
Routledge, 1992).
Haack, R. J. Natural and Arbitrary Classes. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 47,
1969, 307-21.
Hacking, L. A Language Without Particulars. Mind 77, 1968, 168-85.
Hale, B. Abstract Objects (Oxford: Blackwell, 1988).
Hartshorne, C. Are There Absolutely Specific Universals? " Journal of Philosophy 68,
1971, 76-7.
Hochberg, H. Things and Qualities. In Metaphysics and Explanation, W. H. Capitan
& D. D. Merrill (eds) (Pittsburgh, Penn. : University of Pittsburgh Press, 1964),
82-97.
Hochberg, H. Universals, Particulars and Predication. The Review of Metaphysics
19, 1965, 87-102.
Hochberg, H. Things and Descriptions. American Philosophical Quarterly 3, 1966,
39-47.
Hoffman, J. & G. S. Rosenkrantz. Substance and Other Categories
 (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1994).
Jackson, F. Statements about Universals. Mind 76, 1977, 427-9.
Johnson, W. E. Logic: Part I (New Y ork: Dovers Publications, 1964).
Jones, J. R. Are the Qualities of Particular Things Universal or Particular? " Philo-
sophical Review 58, 1949, 152-70.
Jones, J. R. What Do We Mean by an "Instance"? Analysis 11, 1950, 11-18.
Jones, J. R. Characters and Resemblance. Philosophical Review 60, 1951, 551-62.
Joseph, H. W. Universals and the "Method of Analysis". Aristotelian Society Supple-
mentary Volume 6, 1926, 1-16.
Jubien, M. On Properties and Property Theory. In Properties, Types and Meaning,
Volume 1, G. Chierchia et al. (eds) (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989).
Kant Critique of Pure Reason, N. K. Smith (trans. ) (New York: St Martin's Press,
1965)\n176 UNIVERSALS
Katz, J. J. Realistic Rationalism (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1998).
Kearns, J. T. Sameness and Similarity: Discussion with B. Blanshard, Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 29, 1969, 105-15.
Khatchadourian, H. Natural Objects and Common Names. Methodos 13, 1961, 51-62.
Kim, J. "Mental Causation and T wo Conceptions of Mental Properties",
unpublished paper delivered at the American Philosophical Association Eastern
Division Meeting, Atlanta, Georgia, December 27-30, 1993, 22-3.
Klemke, E. A. Universals and Particulars in a Phenomenalist Ontology. Philosophy of
Science 27, 1960, 254-61.
Knight, H. A Note on the "Problem of Universals". Analysis 1, 1933, 7-9.
Knight, T. A. Questions and Universals. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
27, 1966, 564-76.
Korner, S. On Determinables and Resemblances. Aristotelian Society Supplementary
Volume 33, 1959, 125-40.
Kovesi, J. Moral Notions (London and New York: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1967).
Kultgen, J. H. Universals, Particulars, and Change. The Review of Metaphysics 9,
1956, 548-64.
Kung, G. Ontology and the Logistic Analysis of Language (New York: Humanities
Press, 1967).
Künne, W. Criteria of Abstractness: The Ontologies of Husserl, Frege, and Strawson
Against the Background of Classical Metaphysics. In Parts and Moments: Studies
in Logic and Formal Ontology, B. Smith (ed. ) (Munich: Philosophia Verlag,
1982), 401-37.
Landesman, C. Abstract Particulars. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 33,
1976, 323-37.
Leonard, H. S. Essences, Attributes and Predicates. Proceedings and Addresses of the
American Philosophical Association 37, 1964, 25-52.
Levinson, J. Properties and Related Entities. Philosophy and Phenomenological Re-
search September 1978, 1-22.
Levinson, J. The Particularization of Attributes. Australasian Journal of Philosophy
58, 1980, 102-15.
Lewis, D. On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986).
Lewis, D. New Work for a Theory of Universals? Australasian Journal of Philosophy
61, 1983, 347-8.
Lewis, D. Against Structural Universals. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 64,
1986, 25-46.
Lloyd, A. C. On Arguments for Real Universals. Analysis 11, 1951, 102-7.
Lomansky, L. Nominalism, Replication and Nelson Goodman. Analysis 29, 1968-
69, 156-61.
Long, D. C. Particulars and Their Qualities. Reprinted in Universals and Particulars,
revised edition, M. Loux (ed. ) (Notre Dame, Ind. : University of Notre Dame
Press, 1976), 310-30.
Long, D. C. Are Predicates and Relational Expressions Incomplete? Philosophical
Review 78, 1969, 90-8.
Loux, M. J. (ed. ) Universals and Particulars: Readings in Ontology (Garden City,
New York: Doubleday, 1970).
Loux, M. J. Substance and Attribute (Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel Publishing
Company, 1978).
Loux, M. J. Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction (London: Routledge,
1998).
Loux, M. J. Kinds and the Dilemma of Individuation. The Review of Metaphysics 27,
1974, 773-84. \nBIBLIOGRAPHY 177
Loux, M. J. The Concept of a Kind. Philosophical Studies 29, 1976, 53-61.
Loux, M. J. Form, Species and Predication in Metaphysics Z, H, and q. Mind 88,
1979, 1-23.
Luschei, E. C. The Logical Systems of Lesniewski (Amsterdam: North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company, 1962).
Lyon, A. Review of Michael Loux's Substance and Attribute, Philosophy 58, 1983,
267-9.
Malinas, G. A. Physical Properties. Philosophia 3, 1973, 17-31.
Manser, A. R. Games and Family Resemblances. Philosophy 42, 1967, 210-25.
Margolis, J. Some Ontological Policies. Monist 53, 1970, 231-45.
Martin, C. B. Substance Substantiated. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 58, 1980,
3-10.
Matthews, G. B. & S. M. Cohen. The One and the Many. The Review of Metaphysics
21, 1968, 630-55.
McCloskey, H. J. The Philosophy of Linguistic Analysis and the Problem of
Universals. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 24, 1964, 329-38.
Mei, T. L. Chinese Grammar and the Linguistic Movement in Philosophy. The
Review of Metaphysics 14(3), 1961, 463-92.
Mei, T. L. Subject and Predicate: A Grammatical Preliminary. Philosophical Review
70, 1961, 153-75.
Mellor, D. H. & A. Oliver (eds) Properties (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1997).
Modrak, D. K. Forms, T ypes, and T okens in Aristotle's Metaphysics. Journal of the
History of Philosophy 17, 1979, 371-81.
Moore, G. E. Are the Characteristics of Particular Things Universal or Particular?
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 3, 1923, 156-66.
Moravscik, J. Strawson on Ontological Priority. In Analytical Philosophy [second
series], R. J. Butler (ed. ) (Oxford and New York: Blackwell, 1965), 106-19.
Moreland, J. P. Universals, Qualities, and Quality-Instances (Lanham, Md. : Univer-
sity Press of America, 1985).
Moreland, J. P. Keith Campbell and the Trope View of Predication. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 67, December 1989, 379-93.
Moreland, J. P. Nominalism And Abstract Reference. American Philosophical Quar-
terly 27, October 1990, 325-34.
Moreland, J. P. How to Be a Nominalist in Realist Clothing. Grazer Philosophische
Studien 39, Summer 1991, 75-101.
Moreland, J. P. "Review of The Existence of the World: An Introduction to Ontology
by Reinhardt Grossmann", Mind 102, July 1993: 407-10.
Moreland, J. P. Issues and Options in Exemplification. American Philosophical
Quarterly 33, April 1996, 133-47.
Moreland, J. P. A Critique of Campbell's Refurbished Nominalism. The Southern
Journal of Philosophy 35, Summer 1997, 225-46.
Moreland, J. P. Theories of Individuation: A Reconsideration of Bare Particulars.
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 79, 1998, 251-63.
Mortensen, C. Arguing for Universals. Revue Internationale de Philosophie 41,
1987, 97-111.
Mulligan, K. , P. Simons, B. Smith, T ruth-Makers. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 44, 1984, 287-321.
Newman, A. The Physical Basis of Predication (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1992).
O'Connor, D. J. On Resemblance. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 46, 1945-
46, 47-76. \n178 UNIVERSALS
O'Connor, D. J. Stout's Theory of Universals. Australasian Journal of Philosophy 27,
1949, 46-69.
O'Connor, D. J. Names and Universals. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 53,
1952-53, 173-88.
O'Shaughnessy, R. J. On Having Something in Common. Mind 79(315), 1970, 436-
40.
Oaklander, L. N. The Bundle Theory of Substance. The New Scholasticism 52,
1982, 91-6.
Owen, G. E. L. Inherence. Phronesis 10, 1955, 97-105.
Pap, A. Nominalism, Empiricism and Universals. Philosophical Quarterly 9, 1959,
330-40; 10, 1960, 44-60.
Parsons, C. Ontology and Mathematics. Philosophical Review 80, 1971, 151-76.
Parsons, J. There is No "T ruthmaker" Argument Against Nominalism. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 77, September 1999, 325-34.
Parsons, T. Existential Theories of Ontological Commitment. Journal of Philosophy
64, 1967, 446-50.
Parsons, T. Criticism of "Are Predicates and Relational Expressions Incomplete? "
Philosophical Review 79, 1970, 240-5.
Pears, D. F. A Critical Study of P. F. Strawson's Individuals. Philosophical Quarterly
11, 1961, 262-77.
Perry, J. Review of On Universals, by Nicholas Wolterstorff, The Journal of Philoso-
phy 71, 1974, 252-7.
Phillips, E. D. On Instances. Analysis 1, 1934, 60-61.
Plantinga, A. The Nature of Necessity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974).
Plantinga, A. "Replies to My Colleagues", in Alvin Plantinga, J. E. Tomberlin & P.
van Inwagen (eds) (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985).
Pompa, L. Family Resemblances. Philosophical Quarterly 17, 1967, 63-9.
Price, H. H. Thinking and Experience (London: Hutchinson House, 1953).
Prior, A. N. Determinables, Determinates, Determinates. Part I, Mind 58, 1949, 1-
20.
Prior, A. N. Determinables, Determinates, Determinates. Part II, Mind 58, 1949,
178-94.
Putnam, H. On Properties. In Philosophical Papers, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1975), 305-22.
Quine, W. V. O. Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1960).
Quine, W. V. O. On What There Is. In From a Logical Point of View, W. V. Quine
(New York: Harper & Row, 1961), 1-19.
Quine, W. V. O. The Ways of Paradox (New York: Random House, 1966).
Quine, W. V. O. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York: Columbia
House Press, 1969).
Quine, W. V. O. On Universals. Journal of Symbolic Logic 12, 1947, 74-85.
Quine, W. V. O. On Carnap's View on Ontology. Philosophical Studies 2, 1951, 65-
72.
Quine, W. V. O. Ontology and Ideology. Philosophical Studies 2, 1951, 11-15.
Quine, W. V. O. Russell's Ontological Development. Journal of Philosophy 63, 1966,
657-67.
Quinton, A. The Nature of Things (London: Routledge, 1973).
Quinton, A. Properties and Classes. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 48, 1958,
33-58.
Ramsey, F. P. Universals and the "Method of Analyses". Aristotelian Society Supple-
mental Volume 6, 1926, 17-26.
Rankin, K. W. The Duplicity of Plato's Third Man. Mind 77, 1969, 178-97. \nBIBLIOGRAPHY 179
Rankin, K. W. Is the Third Man Argument an Inconsistent T rial? Philosophical Quar-
terly 20(81), 1970, 378-80.
Raphael, D. D. Universals, Resemblance and Identity. Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society 55, 1955, 109-32.
Robinson, H. Matter and Sense (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982).
Roma, E. & S. B. Thomas. Nominalism and the Distinguishable is Separable Princi-
ple. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 28, 1967, 230-34.
Russell, B. The Analysis of Matter (London and New Y ork: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
1927).
Russell, B. On the Relations of Universals and Particulars. In Logic and Knowledge,
B. Russell (ed. R. C. Marsh) (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1956), 103-24.
Russell, B. The Problems of Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1959).
Russell, B. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (London: Allen & Unwin,
1970).
Russell, B. Inquiry into Meaning and T ruth (London: Unwin Paperbacks, 1980).
Russell, B. On the Relations of Universals and Particulars. Proceedings of the Aristo-
telian Society 12, 1911, 105-24; reprinted, with an added paragraph, in Logic
and Knowledge, R. C. Marsh (ed. ) (London: Allen & Unwin, 1956).
Schoedinger, A. B. (ed. ) The Problem of Universals (Atlanta Highlands, N. J. : Hu-
manities Press, 1992).
Searle, J. R. On Determinables and Resemblance. Aristotelian Society Supplemen-
tary Volume 33, 1959, 141-58.
Seibt, J. Properties as Processes: A Synoptic Study of Wilfrid Sellars' Nominalism
(Atascadero, Calif. : Ridgeview, 1990).
Seidel, A. Universals and the Coextension of Qualities. The New Scholasticism 50,
1976, 360-65.
Sellars, W. Naturalism and Ontology (Atascadero, Calif. : Ridgeview, 1979).
Sellars, W. Philosophy and the Scientific Image of Man. In Science, Perception and
Reality, W. F. Sellars (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963), 1-40.
Sellars, W. Logical Subjects and Physical Objects. Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 17, 1957, 458-72.
Sellars, W. Grammar and Existence: A Preface to Ontology. Mind 69, 1960, 499-
533.
Sellars, W. Abstact Entities. The Review of Metaphysics 16, 1963, 627-71.
Shwayder, D. S. The Modes of Referring and the Problem of Universals (Berkeley,
Calif. : University of California Press, 1961).
Simon, M. A. When Is a Resemblance a Family Resemblance. Mind 78, 1969, 408-
16.
Sinisi, V. F. Nominalism and Common Names. Philosophical Review 71, 1962, 230-
35.
Smith, B. & Mulligan, K. Pieces of a Theory. In Parts and Moments: Studies in Logic
and Formal Ontology (Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 1982), 15-109.
Smith, N. K. The Nature of Universals. Mind 36, 1927; part I, 137-57; part II, 265-
80; part III, 393-422.
Sommers, F. T ypes and Ontology. Philosophical Review 72, 1963, 327-63.
Spellman, L. Patterns and Copies: The Second Version of the Third Man. Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly 64, 1983, 165-75.
Stenius, E. Sets. Synthese 27, 1974, 161-88.
Stout, G. F. The Nature of Universals and Propositions [British Academy Lecture]
(London: Oxford University Press, 1921).
Stout, G. F. The Nature of Universals and Propositions. In Studies in Philosophy, J.
N. Findley (ed. ) (London: Oxford University Press, 1966), 5-24. \n180 UNIVERSALS
Stout, G. F. The Nature of Universals and Propositions. In The Problem of
Universals, C. Landesman (ed. ) (New York: Basic Books, 1971).
Stout, G. F. Are the Characteristics of Particular Things Universal or Particular? Pro-
ceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 3, 1923, 114-22.
Stout, G. F. Universals Again. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 15,
1936, 1-15.
Stout, G. F. Things, Predicates, and Relations. Australasian Journal of Psychology
and Philosophy 18, 1940, 117-30.
Strawson, P. F. Individuals (London: Methuen, 1959).
Strawson, P. F. Singular T erms and Predication. Journal of Philosophy 58, 1961,
393-411.
Strawson, P. F. The Asymmetry of Subjects and Predicates. In Language, Belief, and
Metaphysics [vol. 1 of Contemporary Philosophical Thought], H. E. Kiefer & M.
K. Munitz (eds) (New York: University of New Y ork Press, 1970), 69-86.
Stroll, A. Meaning, Referring and the Problem of Universals. Inquiry 4, 1961, 107-
22.
Swinburne, R. The Evolution of the Soul (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986).
Swoyer, C. Theories of Properties: From Plenitude to Paucity. In Philosophical Per-
spectives 10: Metaphysics, 1996, J. E. T omberlin (ed. ) (Cambridge, Mass. :
Blackwell, 1996), 243-64.
Talvite, J. A. "Properties and Things", PhD dissertation, V anderbilt University,
1977.
Taylor, C. C. W. Forms as Causes in the Phaedo. Mind 78, 1969, 45-59.
Teichmann, J. Universals and Common Properties. Analysis 29, 1969, 162-5.
Thomas, W. J. Platonism and the Skolem Paradox. Analysis 28, 1968, 193-6.
Thompson, M. H. Abstract Entities. Philosophical Review 69, 1960, 331-50.
Thompson, M. H. Abstract Entities and Universals. Mind 74, 1965, 365-81.
Toms, E. Non-Existence and Universals. Philosophical Quarterly 6, 1956, 136-44.
Vision, G. Searle on the Nature of Universals. Analysis new series no. 137, 1970,
155-60.
Wallace, J. R. Sortal Predicates and Quantification. Journal of Philosophy 62, 1965,
8-13.
Welker, D. D. Linguistic Nominalism. Mind 79(316), 1970, 569-80.
Willard, D. Logic and the Objectivity of Knowledge (Athens, Ohio: Ohio University
Press, 1984).
Willard, D. Why Semantic Ascent Fails. Metaphilosophy 14, 1983, 276-90.
Williams, D. C. On the Elements of Being: I. The Review of Metaphysics 7, 1953, 3-18.
Williams, D. C. On the Elements of Being: II. The Review of Metaphysics 7, 1953,
171-92.
Williams, D. C. Necessary Facts. The Review of Metaphysics 16, 1963, 601-26.
Williams, D. C. Principles of Empirical Realism (Springfield, Ill. : C. C. Thomas,
1966).
Wilson, J. C. Statement and Inference: Volume I (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1926).
Wolterstorff, N. On Universals (Chicago, Ill. : University of Chicago Press, 1970).
Wolterstorff, N. Are Properties Meanings? Journal of Philosophy 57, 1960, 277-80.
Wolterstorff, N. Qualities. Philosophical Review 69, 1960, 183-200.
Wolterstorff, N. Bergmann's Constituent Ontology. Nous 4, 1970, 109-34.
Wolterstorff, N. Response to Dennis Casper. Philosophical Studies 30, 1976, 121-4.
Woodger, J. H. Science Without Properties. British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 2, 1952, 193-216.
Woozley, A. D. Theory of Knowledge (London: Hutchinson, 1976).
Zabech, F. Universals (The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1966). \nIndex
abstract objects 17-18, 97-113, 121-
9
abstract particulars 51, 53, 77
abstract reference 6, 40-9, 71-2
adherent/inherent properties distinc-
tion 72-3
Allaire, E. B. 142, 150-1
alteration 138-9
Aquinas, T. 25, 70, 124-5
Aristotelianism v. Platonism 129-34
Aristotle 48, 91, 93, 111-13
Armstrong, D. M. 4, 9-10, 12, 14,
88-96, 130
bare particulars 151
cases 81-2
distributive unity 52
individuation 86-8
infinite regress 24
internal relations 55-6
naturalism 75, 83-5
physicalism 75, 83-5
predicate extreme realism 29-30
predication 86-8
properties 18, 133
property instances 100, 101, 102
truth-maker principle 26-7
attribute-agreement 3-4
bare particulars 83, 93-4, 112, 148-
57
basic tropes 62-8
being 61, 68, 91, 122
Bergmann, G.
bare particulars 83, 112, 148-57
on Husserl 103
individuation 142
internal relations 55
universals 4, 9, 11-12, 15
Bonjour, L. 123-6
Bradley's regress 87, 88, 101, 115-16
Butchvarov, P. 38
Campbell, K. 4, 11, 15, 50, 53-73,
100-2, 109
Carnap, R. 3
cases 77-8, 81-2
causal criterion, property identity
118, 119
Chisholm, R. 24
class extreme nominalism 30-4, 51
class membership 32-3
class resemblance 51-2
coming-to-be 138-9
companionship difficulty 31, 35
complexity view, moments 104, 108-
13
compresence 61
concept extreme nominalism 29
concrete general terms 43
Connell, R. 93, 152-3
course grain criterion, property
identity 118, 119
Dawes-Hicks, G. 65
Descartes, R. 122, 136
distinctio rationis ratiocinatae 22, 57-
8
distinctions
modal 22, 58, 128
real 22\n182 UNIVERSALS
of reason 22, 57-8
dot quotation 46-7
Duns Scotus, J. 60, 86
eidetic intuition 127-8
EN see extreme nominalism
entities, exact similarity 38
epistemological particularism 118
ES see exact similarity
essence 136, 142, 143-7
exact similarity (ES) 4, 11, 38-40, 55-
7, 61, 69
exemplification 16, 78-81, 87-8,
96
predication 28-49
properties 7-17, 19, 122
unexemplified essence 146-7
existence 38, 129-39, 157
exploded object theory 42-3
extension, basic tropes 65
extreme nominalism (EN)
abstract reference 40-9
arguments for 27-8
attribute-agreement 3
class 30-4, 51
concept extreme nominalism 29
mereological 29-30
philosophical naturalism 27
predicate 29-30
properties 3-4, 23-49
resemblance 34-40
truth-maker principle 26-7
Fine, K. 144-7
Frege, G. 87, 88, 133
fundamentum relationis 51
Goodman, N. 3
Grossmann, R. 4, 9, 12-13, 17, 19,
85-6, 96, 102-3, 104
haecceities 147
Hochberg, H. 81
Hoffman, J. 150, 154, 155
Hume, D. 30, 53
Husserl, E.
genus/species relation 108-12
moments (property instances) 68,
90, 102-13
ontology 97
quality-moment-in-itself 112
resemblance extreme nominalism 37
ultimate substrates 111-13
universals 4, 8, 44-5, 126-8
identity, laws of 21
identity conditions, properties 116-
20, 122
immanent realism 87, 130
imperfect community argument 31,
35-7
individuation
Leibnizian essences 143-7
moderate nominalism 142
naturalism 84
of particulars 70, 92-3, 140-57
predication 86-8
problem of 82, 140-3
individuators, bare particulars as 148-
57
infinite regress 24-5, 29-30, 45-6,
114-16
see also Bradley's regress
inherent/adherent properties distinc-
tion 72-3
instantiation, principle of 91-2,
133
intentional inclusion criterion,
property identity 119-20
internal relations 55-6, 61, 85
intuition, eidetic 127-8
Jones, J. R. 8
Kant, I. 136-7, 157
Kim, J. 61
kinds 75-83, 102, 109
knowledge
of abstract objects 121-9
of universals 126-8
Künne, W. 105
Leibniz, G. W. 21, 117, 142-7
localization 9-10, 18-19, 20, 85-6
location 70, 72, 89-90
Loux, M.
bare particulars 150
cases as simples 77
Leibnizian essences 144-5
resemblance and predication 38
substrata 154-5
universals 4, 8, 9, 14
macro-objects 68\nINDEX 183
manifest tropes 67, 68
Martin, C. B. 4
mereological extreme nominalism 29-
30
minimalist realism 74-96
modal distinction 22, 58, 128
moderate nominalism 3-4, 10-12,
19, 102-13
individuation 142
properties 50-73
moments (property-instances) 68, 90,
102-3, 105-8, 112
complexity view 104, 108-13
simplicity view 103-8, 110, 113
Moore, G. E. 127
naturalism see philosophical naturalism
nature of existence 129-34
nominalism 96
see also extreme nominalism;
moderate nominalism
trope 53-9
non-perceptual realism 123-6
nothingness 139
object regress 29-30, 33
Ockham's (Occam's) Razor 27, 28
painless realism 72-3
particularism, epistemological 118
particularity/individuation 70, 92-3
particulars
abstract 51, 53, 77
bare 83, 93-4, 112, 148-57
individuation of 70, 92-3, 140-57
thick/thin distinction 86-7, 94
per accidens regress 25
per se regress 25
perception, moments 105-6
perishing 138-9
Perry, J. 83
philosophical naturalism 17-19
extreme nominalism 27
individuation 84
knowledge of abstract objects 121-
9
physicalism 75, 83-5
Plantinga, A. 142-4, 146-7
Plato 63, 91, 95-6, 136
Platonism v. Aristotelianism 129-34
predicate extreme nominalism 29-30
predication 86-8
exemplification 28-49
individuation 86-8
realism 5, 28
"relation" 84
resemblance 34-40
traditional realism 98-102
primitives 25-6
properties 16, 20, 83-96, 133
abstract objects 97-113
adherent/inherent distinction 72-3
being 122
class membership 32-3
exemplification 7-17, 19, 122
extreme nominalism 3-4, 23-49
identity conditions 116-20, 122
identity criteria 118, 119
localization 18-19, 20
moderate nominalism 50-73
nature of existence 134-9
ontological status 3-4
philosophical naturalism 95, 121-2
realism 3-4
relevant phenomena 4-6
traditional 121-2
property-instances 98-100, 102-3,
106-8
see also moments
quality-at-a-place 54
quality-instances 12-17
quality-moment-in-itself 112
quasi-tropes 60-1
Quine, W. V. O. 3
Quinton, A. 3
real distinctions 21, 22
realism
abstract reference 6
attribute agreement 3, 4
immanent 87, 130
minimalist 74-96
non-perceptual 123-6
painless 72-3
predicate extreme 29-30
predication 5, 28
predication/exemplification 28
properties 3-4
resemblance 5-6
traditional 97-113, 114-39
reality, representation 28
reason, distinctions of 22, 57-8
reasoned reason 57-8\n184 UNIVERSALS
reasoning reason 57
reductive physicalism 83-4
reference, abstract 6, 40-9, 71-2
regress
Bradley's 87, 88, 101, 115-16
object 29-30, 33
per accidens 15
per se 15
relation 30, 33-4
resemblance 37-40
vicious infinite 24-5, 29-30, 45-6,
114-16
resemblance 5-6, 34-40, 51-2
Robinson, H. 17, 96
Rosenkrantz, G. S. 150, 154, 155
Russell, B. 37
Scotus, J. D. see Duns Scotus, J.
Seibt, J. 96, 100
Sellars, W. 3, 45, 46-9, 96
semantic criterion, for property
identity 118, 119
similarity
exact (ES) 4, 11, 38-40, 55-7, 61,
69
see also resemblance
simples, cases as 77-8
simplicity of tropes 64-5, 69, 70
simplicity view, moments 103-8, 110,
113
spatio-temporality 54, 66-7, 84-5,
121-2
Stout, G. F. 4, 10-11, 15, 50-2, 65,
77
Suárez, F. 22, 60, 128
substance 93, 152-3
Talvite, J. 105
thick particulars 86-7, 94
thin particulars 86-7, 94
tode ti 112
traditional properties 121-2
traditional realism 97-113, 114-39
transcendental universals 91
tropes
-quasi 60-1
abstract particulars 77
abstract reference 71-2
basic 62-8
cases 77, 81
exact similarity 69
extension 65
form and volume 54
location 60-1, 70, 72
manifest 67, 68
quasi-tropes 60-1
simplicity 64-5, 69, 70
space-time 54, 62-3, 66-7
trope nominalism 53-9
truth-maker principle 26-7
ultimate substrates 111-13
unexemplified essence 146-7
universals
in acts 44-5
as kinds 75-83
knowledge of 126-8
nature of 7-12, 64-5, 84
problems of 1-22
transcendental 91
uninstantiated 84
universality of 64-5
unsubstantiated 129-34
vicious infinite regress 24-5, 29-30,
45-6, 114-16
Willard, D. 103, 108
Williams, D. C. 4, 11, 15, 50, 56, 72,
77
Wolterstorff, N. 4, 8-9, 14-15, 75-
83, 100, 102, 109