LIFE OF MARCELLUS -- XTTS MASTER TEXT chapters the first through the tenth chapter the first
Poseidonius tells us that Marcus Claudius, who was five times consul of the Roman people, was the son of Marcus, and was the first of his family to receive the name of Marcellus, which means "warlike. " Indeed, through his experience he became a thorough soldier; for his body was strong and his arm powerful. He was fond of war, and bore himself with a lordly arrogance in battle, though at other times he was of a quiet and amiable disposition, fond of Greek culture and literature, so far as his want of leisure allowed. He admired and respected those who possessed this knowledge, even though he himself could make no great progress in it. Poseidonius tells us that Marcus Claudius, who was five times consul of the Roman people, was the son of Marcus, and was the first of his family to receive the name of Marcellus, which means "warlike. " Indeed, through his experience he became a thorough soldier; for his body was strong and his arm powerful. He was fond of war, and bore himself with a lordly arrogance in battle, though at other times he was of a quiet and amiable disposition, fond of Greek culture and literature, so far as his want of leisure allowed. He admired and respected those who possessed this knowledge, even though he himself could make no great progress in it.
For the Roman chiefs of that period were, if any men ever were, condemned, in the words of Homer, "from youth to age, disastrous wars to wage. " In their youth they fought the Carthaginians on the Sicilian coast; in middle age they fought the Gauls in defence of Italy itself; and when advanced in years they again contended with Hannibal and the Carthaginians, never obtaining any relief from constant service, but ever urged by their courage and nobility of soul to accept new commands. For the Roman chiefs of that period were, if any men ever were, condemned, in the words of Homer, "from youth to age, disastrous wars to wage. " In their youth they fought the Carthaginians on the Sicilian coast; in middle age they fought the Gauls in defence of Italy itself; and when advanced in years they again contended with Hannibal and the Carthaginians, never obtaining any relief from constant service, but ever urged by their courage and nobility of soul to accept new commands.
chapter the second
Marcellus was practised in all forms of battle, but he especially excelled in single combat, so that he never declined a challenge, and slew all who dared to challenge him. In Sicily he saved the life of his brother Otacilius, who had been in great peril, by holding his shield above him and striking down his assailants. For this conduct, though still young, he received crowns and rewards from the generals. As his reputation grew, he was elected curule aedile by the people, and augur by the priests. This was a priestly office to which the law especially assigned the observation of auguries drawn from the flight of birds. Marcellus was practised in all forms of battle, but he especially excelled in single combat, so that he never declined a challenge, and slew all who dared to challenge him. In Sicily he saved the life of his brother Otacilius, who had been in great peril, by holding his shield above him and striking down his assailants. For this conduct, though still young, he received crowns and rewards from the generals. As his reputation grew, he was elected curule aedile by the people, and augur by the priests. This was a priestly office to which the law especially assigned the observation of auguries drawn from the flight of birds.
During his tenure of the aedileship he was forced, much against his will, to begin a legal action. He had a son of his own name, a youth of great beauty and modesty, admired by all. Capitolinus, his colleague, a licentious and reckless man, made disgraceful proposals to the lad. The youth repelled him, and upon a second attempt told his father. Marcellus, greatly enraged, summoned the man before the Senate. Capitolinus attempted many quibbles and appealed to the tribunes, but they refused to protect him. As there were no witnesses, the Senate sent for the boy; and when they saw him blush and weep with modest anger, they required no further proof, but found Capitolinus guilty and condemned him to pay a fine. With this fine Marcellus made silver libation vessels and consecrated them to the gods. During his tenure of the aedileship he was forced, much against his will, to begin a legal action. He had a son of his own name, a youth of great beauty and modesty, admired by all. Capitolinus, his colleague, a licentious and reckless man, made disgraceful proposals to the lad. The youth repelled him, and upon a second attempt told his father. Marcellus, greatly enraged, summoned the man before the Senate. Capitolinus attempted many quibbles and appealed to the tribunes, but they refused to protect him. As there were no witnesses, the Senate sent for the boy; and when they saw him blush and weep with modest anger, they required no further proof, but found Capitolinus guilty and condemned him to pay a fine. With this fine Marcellus made silver libation vessels and consecrated them to the gods.
chapter the third
After twenty-two years the first Punic War came to an end, and the Romans turned their attention to the Gauls. The Insubrians, a Celtic tribe dwelling at the foot of the Alps, were collecting forces from among the Gauls who fought for hire, called Gaesatae. After twenty-two years the first Punic War came to an end, and the Romans turned their attention to the Gauls. The Insubrians, a Celtic tribe dwelling at the foot of the Alps, were collecting forces from among the Gauls who fought for hire, called Gaesatae.
It was fortunate that this war had not begun while Rome was engaged with Carthage. The Gauls, like a gladiator who waits to fight the victor of another match, had remained quiet during that war, and only stepped forward after Rome was at leisure. Yet the terror they inspired was great, for the war would take place near the Roman frontiers; and the old fame of the Gauls, who once captured Rome itself, still terrified the Romans. A law had even been passed that the priests should be exempt from all military service except in case of another Gallic war. It was fortunate that this war had not begun while Rome was engaged with Carthage. The Gauls, like a gladiator who waits to fight the victor of another match, had remained quiet during that war, and only stepped forward after Rome was at leisure. Yet the terror they inspired was great, for the war would take place near the Roman frontiers; and the old fame of the Gauls, who once captured Rome itself, still terrified the Romans. A law had even been passed that the priests should be exempt from all military service except in case of another Gallic war.
Their alarm appeared in the vast number of troops raised, greater than on any other occasion, and in the extraordinary sacrifices performed. Though the Romans avoided barbarous rites, on this occasion they followed the Sibylline prophecies and buried alive two Greeks and two Gauls in the place called the Cattle Market. And in accordance with these prophecies they still, to this day, perform certain mysteries in the month of November, which may not be seen or spoken of by either Greeks or Gauls. Their alarm appeared in the vast number of troops raised, greater than on any other occasion, and in the extraordinary sacrifices performed. Though the Romans avoided barbarous rites, on this occasion they followed the Sibylline prophecies and buried alive two Greeks and two Gauls in the place called the Cattle Market. And in accordance with these prophecies they still, to this day, perform certain mysteries in the month of November, which may not be seen or spoken of by either Greeks or Gauls.
chapter the fourth
At the opening of the war the Romans won and lost battles without decision, until Flaminius and Furius, being consuls, led a great army against the Insubrians. Then prodigies appeared: the river at Picenum ran blood, and three moons were said to have been seen at Ariminum. The augurs declared that the consuls had been wrongly appointed and were of ill omen. The Senate therefore sent despatches recalling them immediately, so that they might resign their office. At the opening of the war the Romans won and lost battles without decision, until Flaminius and Furius, being consuls, led a great army against the Insubrians. Then prodigies appeared: the river at Picenum ran blood, and three moons were said to have been seen at Ariminum. The augurs declared that the consuls had been wrongly appointed and were of ill omen. The Senate therefore sent despatches recalling them immediately, so that they might resign their office.
Flaminius, however, did not open the despatches until he had defeated the barbarians and ravaged their country. When he returned to Rome, the people did not go out to meet him, and nearly refused him his triumph. They afterwards compelled both consuls to resign. So great was the Roman reverence for religion that even amid their greatest successes they would overlook no irregularity in sacred procedure. Flaminius, however, did not open the despatches until he had defeated the barbarians and ravaged their country. When he returned to Rome, the people did not go out to meet him, and nearly refused him his triumph. They afterwards compelled both consuls to resign. So great was the Roman reverence for religion that even amid their greatest successes they would overlook no irregularity in sacred procedure.
chapter the fifth
As an example, Tiberius Sempronius, when consul, named Scipio Nasica and Caius Marcius as his successors. When they had already taken up their provinces, he discovered in an old ritual book that if a consul, while observing birds outside the city, must return to the city before receiving omens, he must abandon the place he hired and begin anew. He had ignorantly used the same place twice before naming the consuls. Upon discovering this, he announced it to the Senate, who immediately recalled the consuls and made them resign. As an example, Tiberius Sempronius, when consul, named Scipio Nasica and Caius Marcius as his successors. When they had already taken up their provinces, he discovered in an old ritual book that if a consul, while observing birds outside the city, must return to the city before receiving omens, he must abandon the place he hired and begin anew. He had ignorantly used the same place twice before naming the consuls. Upon discovering this, he announced it to the Senate, who immediately recalled the consuls and made them resign.
So careful were the Romans in sacred matters that two noblemen were once deprived of priesthood: Cornelius Cethegus, for mishandling entrails, and Quintus Sulpicius, because his flamen's cap fell from his head during sacrifice. Another time a dictator and master of horse were removed from office because a mouse squeaked during their appointment. Yet, despite such scruples, they admitted no superstition and never altered the ancestral rites. So careful were the Romans in sacred matters that two noblemen were once deprived of priesthood: Cornelius Cethegus, for mishandling entrails, and Quintus Sulpicius, because his flamen's cap fell from his head during sacrifice. Another time a dictator and master of horse were removed from office because a mouse squeaked during their appointment. Yet, despite such scruples, they admitted no superstition and never altered the ancestral rites.
chapter the sixth
After Flaminius resigned, Marcellus was designated consul by the interreges. He chose Cnaeus Cornelius as colleague. Peace was said to be desired by the Gauls, and the Senate appeared inclined to grant it; but Marcellus roused the people to continue the war. Soon the Gaesatae renewed the conflict by crossing the Alps and stirring up the Insubrians. Thirty thousand of them invaded the territory beyond the river Po and attacked Acerrae. After Flaminius resigned, Marcellus was designated consul by the interreges. He chose Cnaeus Cornelius as colleague. Peace was said to be desired by the Gauls, and the Senate appeared inclined to grant it; but Marcellus roused the people to continue the war. Soon the Gaesatae renewed the conflict by crossing the Alps and stirring up the Insubrians. Thirty thousand of them invaded the territory beyond the river Po and attacked Acerrae.
Marcellus left his colleague with the infantry and one-third of the cavalry before Acerrae, and himself, with the rest of the cavalry and about six hundred active foot soldiers, marched night and day until he came upon the ten thousand Gaesatae at Clastidium. They perceived his arrival at once and despised his small force. Their king led them forward with shouting and fury. Marcellus left his colleague with the infantry and one-third of the cavalry before Acerrae, and himself, with the rest of the cavalry and about six hundred active foot soldiers, marched night and day until he came upon the ten thousand Gaesatae at Clastidium. They perceived his arrival at once and despised his small force. Their king led them forward with shouting and fury.
Marcellus, fearing their numbers, extended his cavalry line to prevent being outflanked. As he advanced, his horse turned about in fright; but Marcellus quickly wheeled him back, saluted the sun, and vowed to consecrate the finest armour of the enemy to Jupiter Feretrius. Marcellus, fearing their numbers, extended his cavalry line to prevent being outflanked. As he advanced, his horse turned about in fright; but Marcellus quickly wheeled him back, saluted the sun, and vowed to consecrate the finest armour of the enemy to Jupiter Feretrius.
chapter the seventh
At that moment the Gaulish king, splendidly armed in gold and silver, rode out to challenge him. Marcellus recognized at once that this armour was the finest of the enemy's spoils and the one he meant to dedicate. He charged, struck through the man's breastplate, bore him to the ground, and slew him with repeated blows. Dismounting, he lifted the armour and said, "Jupiter Feretrius, witness that I am the third Roman general to slay a hostile king with my own hand; and I dedicate these first and fairest spoils to thee. "
The Roman cavalry then charged and won a miraculous victory, destroying a vast host of mixed infantry and cavalry. Marcellus returned to his colleague, who struggled before the great Gaulish city of Mediolanum. But upon hearing of their king's death, the Gaesatae fled; Mediolanum fell; and the other cities surrendered, receiving moderate terms of peace. The Roman cavalry then charged and won a miraculous victory, destroying a vast host of mixed infantry and cavalry. Marcellus returned to his colleague, who struggled before the great Gaulish city of Mediolanum. But upon hearing of their king's death, the Gaesatae fled; Mediolanum fell; and the other cities surrendered, receiving moderate terms of peace.
chapter the eighth
By decree of the Senate, Marcellus alone triumphed. His procession was splendid with tall captives and rich spoils. The greatest marvel was Marcellus himself, carrying the armour of the slain Gaul. He had mounted it on the trunk of a tall young oak, each piece placed properly. Riding in his chariot, he bore this trophy through the city, the army marching behind with songs of victory. By decree of the Senate, Marcellus alone triumphed. His procession was splendid with tall captives and rich spoils. The greatest marvel was Marcellus himself, carrying the armour of the slain Gaul. He had mounted it on the trunk of a tall young oak, each piece placed properly. Riding in his chariot, he bore this trophy through the city, the army marching behind with songs of victory.
At the temple of Jupiter Feretrius he dedicated the spoils. He was the third, and up to our time the last, to dedicate the "rich spoils, " or spolia opima: first Romulus, then Cornelius Cossus, then Marcellus. No man after him. At the temple of Jupiter Feretrius he dedicated the spoils. He was the third, and up to our time the last, to dedicate the "rich spoils, " or spolia opima: first Romulus, then Cornelius Cossus, then Marcellus. No man after him.
Various explanations of "Feretrius" exist: some say from the bier, the feretron, upon which the spoils were carried; others from the word ferire, "to strike, " since the spoils were taken by slaying the enemy's general. Whatever the etymology, the spolia opima were regarded as the highest honour of Roman warfare. Various explanations of "Feretrius" exist: some say from the bier, the feretron, upon which the spoils were carried; others from the word ferire, "to strike, " since the spoils were taken by slaying the enemy's general. Whatever the etymology, the spolia opima were regarded as the highest honour of Roman warfare.
chapter the ninth
When Hannibal invaded Italy, Marcellus was sent to Sicily; but after the disaster at Cannae he sent fifteen hundred men to defend Rome. Then, by decree of the Senate, he marched to Canusium, gathered the survivors of the broken army, and led them out to show Rome was not yielded to the enemy. When Hannibal invaded Italy, Marcellus was sent to Sicily; but after the disaster at Cannae he sent fifteen hundred men to defend Rome. Then, by decree of the Senate, he marched to Canusium, gathered the survivors of the broken army, and led them out to show Rome was not yielded to the enemy.
The Romans had lost many great commanders. Fabius Maximus, though admired for caution, was blamed by some as overly slow. They considered Marcellus the bold counterpart to Fabius's prudence, and elected them together, one as consul, the other as proconsul. Poseidonius says that Fabius was called the shield of the state, and Marcellus the sword. Hannibal himself said he feared Fabius as a schoolmaster, but Marcellus as an opponent. The Romans had lost many great commanders. Fabius Maximus, though admired for caution, was blamed by some as overly slow. They considered Marcellus the bold counterpart to Fabius's prudence, and elected them together, one as consul, the other as proconsul. Poseidonius says that Fabius was called the shield of the state, and Marcellus the sword. Hannibal himself said he feared Fabius as a schoolmaster, but Marcellus as an opponent.
chapter the tenth
Hannibal's soldiers, elated by victory, roamed out and plundered without discipline. Marcellus attacked them repeatedly and weakened them. At Naples he encouraged the loyal citizens; at Nola he found a faction favouring Hannibal, led by Lucius Bandius, a noble and brave man who had fought gallantly at Cannae and received honours from Hannibal. Hannibal's soldiers, elated by victory, roamed out and plundered without discipline. Marcellus attacked them repeatedly and weakened them. At Naples he encouraged the loyal citizens; at Nola he found a faction favouring Hannibal, led by Lucius Bandius, a noble and brave man who had fought gallantly at Cannae and received honours from Hannibal.
Marcellus thought it impious to harm so brave a man. Feigning ignorance of his name, he drew near in conversation, praised his deeds, embraced him, and gave him a war horse and five hundred silver drachmas. By such courtesy he won him back to the Roman cause. Marcellus thought it impious to harm so brave a man. Feigning ignorance of his name, he drew near in conversation, praised his deeds, embraced him, and gave him a war horse and five hundred silver drachmas. By such courtesy he won him back to the Roman cause.
chapter the eleventh
After this Bandius became the firmest partisan and ally of Marcellus, and a terrible denouncer and assailant of the opposite party. This faction was numerous, and their design was, when the Romans should march out of the town against the enemy, to attack their baggage. Marcellus therefore, having marshalled his troops within the city, brought the baggage to the gates, and by proclamation forbade the people of Nola to approach the walls. Thus no force was visible, and he induced Hannibal to march up to the city in disorderly array, supposing that within all was confusion. After this Bandius became the firmest partisan and ally of Marcellus, and a terrible denouncer and assailant of the opposite party. This faction was numerous, and their design was, when the Romans should march out of the town against the enemy, to attack their baggage. Marcellus therefore, having marshalled his troops within the city, brought the baggage to the gates, and by proclamation forbade the people of Nola to approach the walls. Thus no force was visible, and he induced Hannibal to march up to the city in disorderly array, supposing that within all was confusion.
Then Marcellus ordered the gate nearest him to be thrown open, and with the best equipped of his cavalry charged out and fell upon the enemy hand to hand. Presently the infantry poured out of another gate with loud shouts; and while Hannibal was dividing his forces to meet them, a third gate opened, and from it issued the remainder of the Roman army, who from all sides attacked the Carthaginians. Bewildered by the unexpectedness of the assault, they fought without spirit, fearing those close at hand because of the others whom they saw were soon to beset them. Then Marcellus ordered the gate nearest him to be thrown open, and with the best equipped of his cavalry charged out and fell upon the enemy hand to hand. Presently the infantry poured out of another gate with loud shouts; and while Hannibal was dividing his forces to meet them, a third gate opened, and from it issued the remainder of the Roman army, who from all sides attacked the Carthaginians. Bewildered by the unexpectedness of the assault, they fought without spirit, fearing those close at hand because of the others whom they saw were soon to beset them.
Here, for the first time, did Hannibal's troops yield before the Romans, and were chased with great loss into their camp. It is said that more than five thousand of them perished, and that no more than five hundred Romans fell. Yet Livy does not consider this a great defeat nor that such numbers fell, but he declares that Marcellus gained much glory, and that the Roman people took courage after their misfortunes, perceiving that they did not fight against an unconquerable foe. Here, for the first time, did Hannibal's troops yield before the Romans, and were chased with great loss into their camp. It is said that more than five thousand of them perished, and that no more than five hundred Romans fell. Yet Livy does not consider this a great defeat nor that such numbers fell, but he declares that Marcellus gained much glory, and that the Roman people took courage after their misfortunes, perceiving that they did not fight against an unconquerable foe.
chapter the twelfth
For this reason, as one of the consuls was dead, the people called for Marcellus, though he was absent, to become his successor. In spite of the efforts of the government, they put off the election until he came to Rome from the army. He was chosen consul by the votes of all the tribes; but it thundered at the time, and as the priests declared this an unpropitious omen, and yet did not dare openly to oppose the people, Marcellus himself voluntarily resigned the office. For this reason, as one of the consuls was dead, the people called for Marcellus, though he was absent, to become his successor. In spite of the efforts of the government, they put off the election until he came to Rome from the army. He was chosen consul by the votes of all the tribes; but it thundered at the time, and as the priests declared this an unpropitious omen, and yet did not dare openly to oppose the people, Marcellus himself voluntarily resigned the office.
Yet he did not avoid military service, but was created proconsul; and returning to Nola and his army, he harassed those who had chosen the side of Hannibal. When Hannibal hastily marched to assist his friends and offered pitched battle, Marcellus declined. Later, when the greater part of the enemy's army was scattered in search of plunder and did not expect an attack, he fell upon them. Yet he did not avoid military service, but was created proconsul; and returning to Nola and his army, he harassed those who had chosen the side of Hannibal. When Hannibal hastily marched to assist his friends and offered pitched battle, Marcellus declined. Later, when the greater part of the enemy's army was scattered in search of plunder and did not expect an attack, he fell upon them.
He had distributed long lances, such as are used on shipboard, among his infantry, and instructed them to watch their moment and hurl these from afar at the Carthaginians, who had no javelin-men and whose heavy spears were only for thrusting at close quarters. In consequence of this, all who engaged the Romans that day turned their backs and fled in shame. Five thousand were slain, six hundred taken prisoner; and of their elephants, four were killed and two taken alive. He had distributed long lances, such as are used on shipboard, among his infantry, and instructed them to watch their moment and hurl these from afar at the Carthaginians, who had no javelin-men and whose heavy spears were only for thrusting at close quarters. In consequence of this, all who engaged the Romans that day turned their backs and fled in shame. Five thousand were slain, six hundred taken prisoner; and of their elephants, four were killed and two taken alive.
Most important of all, on the third day after the battle, three hundred Spanish and Numidian cavalry deserted to the Romans. This had never happened before to Hannibal, who, though commanding many nations, had kept them united so long. These men faithfully served Marcellus and the generals who succeeded him. Most important of all, on the third day after the battle, three hundred Spanish and Numidian cavalry deserted to the Romans. This had never happened before to Hannibal, who, though commanding many nations, had kept them united so long. These men faithfully served Marcellus and the generals who succeeded him.
chapter the thirteenth
Marcellus, when elected consul for the third time, sailed to Sicily; for Hannibal's successes had encouraged the Carthaginians to recover that island, especially as the Syracusans were disturbed by the death of the despot Hieronymus. A Roman force under Appius had already been sent. Marcellus, when elected consul for the third time, sailed to Sicily; for Hannibal's successes had encouraged the Carthaginians to recover that island, especially as the Syracusans were disturbed by the death of the despot Hieronymus. A Roman force under Appius had already been sent.
When Marcellus took command he received a large accession of Roman soldiers who had been disgraced after the battle of Cannae. Of those who fought there, many were slain and many captured, so that Rome scarcely believed enough citizens remained to defend the walls. Yet this remnant was so proud and resolute that, although Hannibal offered to release the captives for a small ransom, the Senate refused, even enduring to see some put to death and others sold as slaves. When Marcellus took command he received a large accession of Roman soldiers who had been disgraced after the battle of Cannae. Of those who fought there, many were slain and many captured, so that Rome scarcely believed enough citizens remained to defend the walls. Yet this remnant was so proud and resolute that, although Hannibal offered to release the captives for a small ransom, the Senate refused, even enduring to see some put to death and others sold as slaves.
Those who escaped by flight were sent to Sicily with orders not to set foot in Italy until the war should end. When Marcellus arrived, these men threw themselves before him, beseeching him to permit them to serve as honourable soldiers, promising with tears to prove that their misfortune at Cannae had been due more to ill chance than to cowardice. Marcellus was moved, and wrote to the Senate requesting permission to fill vacancies in his ranks from among them. Those who escaped by flight were sent to Sicily with orders not to set foot in Italy until the war should end. When Marcellus arrived, these men threw themselves before him, beseeching him to permit them to serve as honourable soldiers, promising with tears to prove that their misfortune at Cannae had been due more to ill chance than to cowardice. Marcellus was moved, and wrote to the Senate requesting permission to fill vacancies in his ranks from among them.
After much debate the Senate decreed that Rome did not need the service of cowardly citizens; but if Marcellus insisted upon using them, they must never receive crowns or rewards of valour. This decree vexed Marcellus; and after the war in Sicily he returned to Rome and reproached the Senate that, in spite of his services, they would not allow him to relieve so many citizens from such misery. After much debate the Senate decreed that Rome did not need the service of cowardly citizens; but if Marcellus insisted upon using them, they must never receive crowns or rewards of valour. This decree vexed Marcellus; and after the war in Sicily he returned to Rome and reproached the Senate that, in spite of his services, they would not allow him to relieve so many citizens from such misery.
chapter the fourteenth
In Sicily at this time he had just cause for complaint against Hippokrates the Syracusan general, who, favouring the Carthaginian side and desiring to establish himself as despot, put to death many Romans at Leontini. Marcellus took Leontini by storm, harmed no inhabitants, but flogged and executed all deserters. In Sicily at this time he had just cause for complaint against Hippokrates the Syracusan general, who, favouring the Carthaginian side and desiring to establish himself as despot, put to death many Romans at Leontini. Marcellus took Leontini by storm, harmed no inhabitants, but flogged and executed all deserters.
Hippokrates then spread a false report in Syracuse that Marcellus was exterminating the people of Leontini, and while the city was in confusion he seized it. Marcellus marched against Syracuse with his whole army and sent ambassadors to explain what had happened; but the Syracusans, dominated by the faction of Hippokrates, would not listen. Hippokrates then spread a false report in Syracuse that Marcellus was exterminating the people of Leontini, and while the city was in confusion he seized it. Marcellus marched against Syracuse with his whole army and sent ambassadors to explain what had happened; but the Syracusans, dominated by the faction of Hippokrates, would not listen.
He then attacked the city by land and sea. Appius commanded the land forces; Marcellus led sixty quinqueremes full of armed men and missiles. He raised a vast engine upon a raft of eight ships bound together, trusting to his siege engines and his own prestige. He then attacked the city by land and sea. Appius commanded the land forces; Marcellus led sixty quinqueremes full of armed men and missiles. He raised a vast engine upon a raft of eight ships bound together, trusting to his siege engines and his own prestige.
But Archimedes cared nothing for these, calling his engines mere holiday playthings of a geometrician. He had built them only at the request of King Hiero, who begged him to bring his sublime ideas into mechanical form. But Archimedes cared nothing for these, calling his engines mere holiday playthings of a geometrician. He had built them only at the request of King Hiero, who begged him to bring his sublime ideas into mechanical form.
Eudoxus and Archytas had first linked geometry to mechanics, illustrating difficult problems by physical instruments called mesographs. Plato disliked this, accusing them of debasing geometry by linking it to sense perception. Thus mechanics became separated from pure geometry, and long held in contempt, being ranked among military arts. Eudoxus and Archytas had first linked geometry to mechanics, illustrating difficult problems by physical instruments called mesographs. Plato disliked this, accusing them of debasing geometry by linking it to sense perception. Thus mechanics became separated from pure geometry, and long held in contempt, being ranked among military arts.
Archimedes, however, wrote that with any given power he could move any given weight; and exulting in his proof, declared that if he were given another world to stand upon, he could move this world. Hiero, marveling, asked for a demonstration. Archimedes then moved with ease a fully loaded three-masted transport ship, which many men could scarcely drag on land. From this the king urged him to build many engines for attack and defence. They were not used by Hiero, who loved peace, but were now ready in Syracuse, and the inventor himself directed their use. Archimedes, however, wrote that with any given power he could move any given weight; and exulting in his proof, declared that if he were given another world to stand upon, he could move this world. Hiero, marveling, asked for a demonstration. Archimedes then moved with ease a fully loaded three-masted transport ship, which many men could scarcely drag on land. From this the king urged him to build many engines for attack and defence. They were not used by Hiero, who loved peace, but were now ready in Syracuse, and the inventor himself directed their use.
chapter the fifteenth
When the Romans attacked by land and sea at once, the Syracusans at first were terrified; but Archimedes opened fire from his machines, casting upon the land forces all manner of darts and huge stones with incredible noise and violence. Men fell in heaps; the Roman ranks broke; ships were seized by iron hooks and lifted by counterweights, then plunged beneath the sea. When the Romans attacked by land and sea at once, the Syracusans at first were terrified; but Archimedes opened fire from his machines, casting upon the land forces all manner of darts and huge stones with incredible noise and violence. Men fell in heaps; the Roman ranks broke; ships were seized by iron hooks and lifted by counterweights, then plunged beneath the sea.
Others were snared by iron claws from cranes: first lifted by their prows till they stood upright upon their sterns, then dashed upon the rocks or dropped into the sea when the claws were released. Others were snared by iron claws from cranes: first lifted by their prows till they stood upright upon their sterns, then dashed upon the rocks or dropped into the sea when the claws were released.
Marcellus's great engine, called the Harp, was struck from afar by a ten-talent stone, then another and another, until the platform broke and the supporting hulks were torn apart. Marcellus retreated, abandoning the assault, and resolved to try again by night. Marcellus's great engine, called the Harp, was struck from afar by a ten-talent stone, then another and another, until the platform broke and the supporting hulks were torn apart. Marcellus retreated, abandoning the assault, and resolved to try again by night.
But Archimedes had also prepared engines for short range; and small "scorpions" lay hidden in little openings in the wall, ready to shoot sudden darts unseen. But Archimedes had also prepared engines for short range; and small "scorpions" lay hidden in little openings in the wall, ready to shoot sudden darts unseen.
chapter the sixteenth
When the Romans attacked by night, hoping not to be seen, they again met a storm of missiles: stones falling perpendicularly and darts poured from all parts of the wall. They were forced to retreat; and when they came within the range of the larger machines, a new hail of missiles fell upon them, destroying many and throwing the ships into disorder. They could not retaliate; for the engines of Archimedes were everywhere. When the Romans attacked by night, hoping not to be seen, they again met a storm of missiles: stones falling perpendicularly and darts poured from all parts of the wall. They were forced to retreat; and when they came within the range of the larger machines, a new hail of missiles fell upon them, destroying many and throwing the ships into disorder. They could not retaliate; for the engines of Archimedes were everywhere.
The Romans thought they fought not against men but against gods, as death fell upon them from invisible hands. The Romans thought they fought not against men but against gods, as death fell upon them from invisible hands.
chapter the seventeenth
Marcellus at length escaped all this unhurt, and said bitterly to his engineers: "Are we to give in to this Briareus of a geometrician, who, sitting at his ease by the seashore, plays at upsetting our ships, surpassing the hundred-handed giant of fable by hurling so many weapons at once? "
Indeed all Syracusans were but the limbs of Archimedes; his mind alone guided everything. At last the Romans were so terrified that if only a rope or small beam appeared upon the wall, they fled in panic, crying that Archimedes had brought some engine to bear. Marcellus ceased all assaults and trusted to time. Indeed all Syracusans were but the limbs of Archimedes; his mind alone guided everything. At last the Romans were so terrified that if only a rope or small beam appeared upon the wall, they fled in panic, crying that Archimedes had brought some engine to bear. Marcellus ceased all assaults and trusted to time.
Archimedes's mind was so exalted that, though he had acquired the glory of more than human intellect by these inventions, he would not leave writings upon mechanics, regarding such arts as base and vulgar. His delight was in pure speculation: in those studies where beauty and excellence appear unhampered by necessity, and argument soars above matter. Archimedes's mind was so exalted that, though he had acquired the glory of more than human intellect by these inventions, he would not leave writings upon mechanics, regarding such arts as base and vulgar. His delight was in pure speculation: in those studies where beauty and excellence appear unhampered by necessity, and argument soars above matter.
His geometrical writings are of unrivalled clarity. Some attributed this to genius; others to indefatigable labour. He seemed possessed by a kind of divine song, forgetting food and personal care, drawing diagrams in ashes or upon his own anointed skin. He discovered many beautiful problems, and begged that upon his tomb a cylinder enclosing a sphere be placed, with the proof of their ratio inscribed. His geometrical writings are of unrivalled clarity. Some attributed this to genius; others to indefatigable labour. He seemed possessed by a kind of divine song, forgetting food and personal care, drawing diagrams in ashes or upon his own anointed skin. He discovered many beautiful problems, and begged that upon his tomb a cylinder enclosing a sphere be placed, with the proof of their ratio inscribed.
chapter the eighteenth
Such was Archimedes, who at this time made himself, and as far as lay in him the city also, invincible. Such was Archimedes, who at this time made himself, and as far as lay in him the city also, invincible.
During the blockade Marcellus took Megara, one of the most ancient cities of Sicily, and captured Hippokrates's camp at Acrillae, slaying more than eight thousand men as they were planting palisades. He overran much of Sicily, induced many cities to revolt from Carthage, and conquered all who opposed him. During the blockade Marcellus took Megara, one of the most ancient cities of Sicily, and captured Hippokrates's camp at Acrillae, slaying more than eight thousand men as they were planting palisades. He overran much of Sicily, induced many cities to revolt from Carthage, and conquered all who opposed him.
He captured one Damippus, a Spartan, as he tried to sail out of Syracuse. The Syracusans wished to ransom him. In the negotiations Marcellus observed that a certain tower was carelessly guarded and the wall near it easy to climb. Having judged its height from frequent visits, he prepared scaling-ladders and waited for the festival of Artemis, when the Syracusans would be drunk and distracted. He captured one Damippus, a Spartan, as he tried to sail out of Syracuse. The Syracusans wished to ransom him. In the negotiations Marcellus observed that a certain tower was carelessly guarded and the wall near it easy to climb. Having judged its height from frequent visits, he prepared scaling-ladders and waited for the festival of Artemis, when the Syracusans would be drunk and distracted.
He seized the tower unnoticed, occupied the wall, and broke into the Hexapylon. When the Syracusans gathered for defence, he ordered trumpets to sound from all quarters, producing panic. Yet the largest and strongest part of the city remained: Achradina, fortified against the outer districts Neapolis and Tyche. He seized the tower unnoticed, occupied the wall, and broke into the Hexapylon. When the Syracusans gathered for defence, he ordered trumpets to sound from all quarters, producing panic. Yet the largest and strongest part of the city remained: Achradina, fortified against the outer districts Neapolis and Tyche.
chapter the nineteenth
These parts were soon taken; and at daybreak Marcellus descended through the Hexapylon amid the congratulations of his officers. It is said that when he surveyed from the heights that great and fair city, he burst into tears, thinking how sadly it would soon be changed when sacked by his soldiers. For though they demanded plunder, and many encouraged them, Marcellus would not even consider allowing incendiarism or slaughter. He reluctantly permitted only movable goods and slaves to be taken, forbidding harm to any free citizen. These parts were soon taken; and at daybreak Marcellus descended through the Hexapylon amid the congratulations of his officers. It is said that when he surveyed from the heights that great and fair city, he burst into tears, thinking how sadly it would soon be changed when sacked by his soldiers. For though they demanded plunder, and many encouraged them, Marcellus would not even consider allowing incendiarism or slaughter. He reluctantly permitted only movable goods and slaves to be taken, forbidding harm to any free citizen.
Even thus he thought the city grievously treated. The treasure was said to be not less than that later taken in Carthage itself. Even thus he thought the city grievously treated. The treasure was said to be not less than that later taken in Carthage itself.
The rest of the city surrendered by treachery, and the soldiers plundered all but the royal treasury, which Marcellus reserved for the state. The rest of the city surrendered by treachery, and the soldiers plundered all but the royal treasury, which Marcellus reserved for the state.
He was especially grieved at the fate of Archimedes. Absorbed in his drawing, he did not notice the city taken. When a soldier ordered him to come to Marcellus, he refused until he had finished his problem. The soldier slew him in anger. He was especially grieved at the fate of Archimedes. Absorbed in his drawing, he did not notice the city taken. When a soldier ordered him to come to Marcellus, he refused until he had finished his problem. The soldier slew him in anger.
Another tale says that he asked the soldier to wait until he finished his theorem; another that he was carrying instruments which the soldiers mistook for gold, and they slew him for the supposed treasure. All agree that Marcellus was deeply grieved, turned away from the murderer as from one accursed, and sought out the family of Archimedes and treated them kindly. Another tale says that he asked the soldier to wait until he finished his theorem; another that he was carrying instruments which the soldiers mistook for gold, and they slew him for the supposed treasure. All agree that Marcellus was deeply grieved, turned away from the murderer as from one accursed, and sought out the family of Archimedes and treated them kindly.
chapter the twentieth
The Romans had shown skill and courage in war, but little kindness or clemency. Marcellus seems the first to exhibit the Romans in a gentler light to the Greeks. Through his treatment of cities and individuals, harsh acts at Enna, Megara, or Syracuse were attributed more to the vanquished than the conquerors. The Romans had shown skill and courage in war, but little kindness or clemency. Marcellus seems the first to exhibit the Romans in a gentler light to the Greeks. Through his treatment of cities and individuals, harsh acts at Enna, Megara, or Syracuse were attributed more to the vanquished than the conquerors.
One example: there is in Sicily the city Engyion, ancient and famed for the appearance there of the goddesses called Mothers. The temple was believed to be Cretan in origin, and lances and helmets inscribed with the names of Meriones and Odysseus were shown there. One example: there is in Sicily the city Engyion, ancient and famed for the appearance there of the goddesses called Mothers. The temple was believed to be Cretan in origin, and lances and helmets inscribed with the names of Meriones and Odysseus were shown there.
The city inclined toward Carthage, but Nikias, its leading man, persuaded the people to join Rome. His enemies plotted to seize him and deliver him to the Carthaginians. Nikias discovered the plot and took measures for safety, but publicly made impious speeches against the Mothers, casting doubt on the old traditions to please his enemies and justify his feigned madness. The city inclined toward Carthage, but Nikias, its leading man, persuaded the people to join Rome. His enemies plotted to seize him and deliver him to the Carthaginians. Nikias discovered the plot and took measures for safety, but publicly made impious speeches against the Mothers, casting doubt on the old traditions to please his enemies and justify his feigned madness.
During a public assembly he suddenly fell to the ground, then rose in a trembling voice, growing shrill with terror, claiming the Mothers pursued him. Tearing his garments, he rushed naked to the gates. None dared to stop him, fearing the gods. During a public assembly he suddenly fell to the ground, then rose in a trembling voice, growing shrill with terror, claiming the Mothers pursued him. Tearing his garments, he rushed naked to the gates. None dared to stop him, fearing the gods.
His wife, in the secret, pretended to seek him, and escaped likewise. They reached Marcellus safely. His wife, in the secret, pretended to seek him, and escaped likewise. They reached Marcellus safely.
Later, when Marcellus captured the Engyionese and intended to execute them, Nikias at first wept, then embraced Marcellus as a suppliant, begging for the lives of all, beginning with his own enemies. Marcellus relented, released them all, touched not the city, and bestowed lands and gifts upon Nikias. Later, when Marcellus captured the Engyionese and intended to execute them, Nikias at first wept, then embraced Marcellus as a suppliant, begging for the lives of all, beginning with his own enemies. Marcellus relented, released them all, touched not the city, and bestowed lands and gifts upon Nikias.
Poseidonius the philosopher tells this tale. Poseidonius the philosopher tells this tale.
chapter the twenty-first
When the Romans recalled Marcellus to conduct the war in their own country, he removed most of the beautiful ornaments of the city of Syracuse, both to be admired in his triumphal procession and to adorn Rome. For at that time Rome neither possessed nor knew any works of art, nor had she any delicacy of taste in such matters. Filled with blood-stained arms and the spoils of barbarians, and crowded with trophies of war and memorials of triumphs, she presented no pleasant or delightful spectacle to feed the eyes of unwarlike or luxurious spectators. Rather, as Epameinondas called the plain of Boiotia "the stage of Ares, " and as Xenophon called Ephesus "the workshop of war, " so in my opinion one might call Rome at that time "the domain of Ares, who revels in war. "
Wherefore Marcellus gained the greater credit with the vulgar, because he enriched the city with statues possessing Hellenic grace and truth to nature; while Fabius Maximus was more esteemed by the elders. He neither touched nor removed anything of the kind from the city of Tarentum, which he took, but carried off all the money and property, leaving the statues in place, saying, "Let us leave the Tarentines their angry gods. "
They blamed Marcellus's proceedings as invidious to Rome, since he had led not only men but gods as captives in his triumph; and because the people, who before this were accustomed only to fight or till the ground and were ignorant of luxury and indolent pleasures, like the Herakles of Euripides, "unpolished, rough, but skilled in useful arts, " were now made by Marcellus into idle, babbling connoisseurs of fine art, wasting the greater part of the day in talk about it. Yet he prided himself even before Greeks, saying that he had taught the ignorant Romans to prize and admire the glories of Greek art. They blamed Marcellus's proceedings as invidious to Rome, since he had led not only men but gods as captives in his triumph; and because the people, who before this were accustomed only to fight or till the ground and were ignorant of luxury and indolent pleasures, like the Herakles of Euripides, "unpolished, rough, but skilled in useful arts, " were now made by Marcellus into idle, babbling connoisseurs of fine art, wasting the greater part of the day in talk about it. Yet he prided himself even before Greeks, saying that he had taught the ignorant Romans to prize and admire the glories of Greek art.
chapter the twenty-second
Marcellus's enemies opposed his claim to the triumph, alleging that the Sicilian campaign was not wholly completed and that he did not deserve a third triumph. He yielded so far as to lead the greater triumph only to the Alban Mount, and entered the city under the lesser form known by the Greeks as "euan, " and by the Romans as an "ovation. "
In an ovation the general does not ride in a four-horse chariot crowned with laurel, nor are trumpets sounded before him. Instead he walks on foot in low shoes, crowned with myrtle, surrounded by flute-players, looking joyous rather than terrible. This is a great proof that in ancient times it was the manner, not the magnitude, of the achievement that determined the form of triumph. In an ovation the general does not ride in a four-horse chariot crowned with laurel, nor are trumpets sounded before him. Instead he walks on foot in low shoes, crowned with myrtle, surrounded by flute-players, looking joyous rather than terrible. This is a great proof that in ancient times it was the manner, not the magnitude, of the achievement that determined the form of triumph.
Generals who gained their objective by battle and slaughter made the martial entry crowned with laurel, as in army lustrations; but those who settled affairs without battle, by persuasion or negotiation, received this peaceful and festive entry. For the flute is a peaceful instrument, and the myrtle the favourite plant of Aphrodite, who above all gods hates violence and war. Generals who gained their objective by battle and slaughter made the martial entry crowned with laurel, as in army lustrations; but those who settled affairs without battle, by persuasion or negotiation, received this peaceful and festive entry. For the flute is a peaceful instrument, and the myrtle the favourite plant of Aphrodite, who above all gods hates violence and war.
The name "ovation" does not come from the cry "Evan, " as many suppose, for the other triumph also is accompanied by shouts and songs. The Greeks changed the word to suit their tongue, believing the ceremony offered some honour to Dionysus, whom they call Evius and Thriambos. The name "ovation" does not come from the cry "Evan, " as many suppose, for the other triumph also is accompanied by shouts and songs. The Greeks changed the word to suit their tongue, believing the ceremony offered some honour to Dionysus, whom they call Evius and Thriambos.
It is curious that the Laconian lawgiver arranged sacrifices in precisely the opposite manner. In Sparta, those ex-generals who succeed by persuasion or fraud sacrifice an ox; those who succeed by battle sacrifice a cock. Though excessively warlike, they thought that a victory gained by counsel was greater and more befitting human beings than one gained by mere force. Which is preferable I leave to the judgment of my readers. It is curious that the Laconian lawgiver arranged sacrifices in precisely the opposite manner. In Sparta, those ex-generals who succeed by persuasion or fraud sacrifice an ox; those who succeed by battle sacrifice a cock. Though excessively warlike, they thought that a victory gained by counsel was greater and more befitting human beings than one gained by mere force. Which is preferable I leave to the judgment of my readers.
chapter the twenty-third
When Marcellus entered upon his fourth consulship, his enemies induced the Syracusans to send a deputation to Rome to complain loudly before the Senate of the cruel and unjust treatment they had received at his hands. Marcellus was sacrificing in the Capitol; and when the Syracusans came to the Senate, begging for a hearing, the other consul stopped them, thinking it wrong to accuse Marcellus in his absence. When Marcellus entered upon his fourth consulship, his enemies induced the Syracusans to send a deputation to Rome to complain loudly before the Senate of the cruel and unjust treatment they had received at his hands. Marcellus was sacrificing in the Capitol; and when the Syracusans came to the Senate, begging for a hearing, the other consul stopped them, thinking it wrong to accuse Marcellus in his absence.
But Marcellus, learning of this, came at once to the Senate-house; took his seat as consul upon the curule chair and completed the public business; then descended and placed himself, as a private man, where defendants usually stood, and summoned the Syracusans to bring forth their charges. But Marcellus, learning of this, came at once to the Senate-house; took his seat as consul upon the curule chair and completed the public business; then descended and placed himself, as a private man, where defendants usually stood, and summoned the Syracusans to bring forth their charges.
Astonished at his calm majesty and bearing, they were abashed. He who had been invincible in arms seemed yet more terrible and unapproachable in his consular purple. Still, being encouraged by his enemies, they began their impeachment, pleading piteously that they, friends and allies of Rome, had suffered what Rome's generals had not inflicted even upon foes. Astonished at his calm majesty and bearing, they were abashed. He who had been invincible in arms seemed yet more terrible and unapproachable in his consular purple. Still, being encouraged by his enemies, they began their impeachment, pleading piteously that they, friends and allies of Rome, had suffered what Rome's generals had not inflicted even upon foes.
Marcellus replied that they had done much harm to Rome, and had received no punishment but what is inevitable in war, for victorious soldiers cannot always be restrained from sacking a captured town. Their city was taken because they refused his offers of equitable terms. They could not plead compulsion by despots, for they themselves had chosen those despots to wage war. Marcellus replied that they had done much harm to Rome, and had received no punishment but what is inevitable in war, for victorious soldiers cannot always be restrained from sacking a captured town. Their city was taken because they refused his offers of equitable terms. They could not plead compulsion by despots, for they themselves had chosen those despots to wage war.
After both parties had spoken, the Syracusans left the Senate-house. Marcellus came out with them and stood outside the doors, awaiting the verdict with unaltered composure, neither fearful nor angry. After both parties had spoken, the Syracusans left the Senate-house. Marcellus came out with them and stood outside the doors, awaiting the verdict with unaltered composure, neither fearful nor angry.
When he was acquitted, and honourably so, the Syracusans fell upon the ground before him, beseeching him with tears to put away his anger and show pity to their city. Marcellus was moved. He reconciled himself to them, restored their freedom and laws and remaining property, and the Senate confirmed his acts. They in return passed a law that whenever Marcellus or any of his descendants should land in Sicily, the Syracusans should wear garlands and hold a festival with sacrifices. When he was acquitted, and honourably so, the Syracusans fell upon the ground before him, beseeching him with tears to put away his anger and show pity to their city. Marcellus was moved. He reconciled himself to them, restored their freedom and laws and remaining property, and the Senate confirmed his acts. They in return passed a law that whenever Marcellus or any of his descendants should land in Sicily, the Syracusans should wear garlands and hold a festival with sacrifices.
chapter the twenty-fourth
Next he proceeded against Hannibal. Whereas nearly all other generals after the disaster of Cannae had thought only of avoiding battle, none daring to meet Hannibal in the field, Marcellus adopted the opposite course. He argued that while they fancied they were wearing out Hannibal, they did not see that Italy was being consumed instead. Next he proceeded against Hannibal. Whereas nearly all other generals after the disaster of Cannae had thought only of avoiding battle, none daring to meet Hannibal in the field, Marcellus adopted the opposite course. He argued that while they fancied they were wearing out Hannibal, they did not see that Italy was being consumed instead.
Fabius, he said, thought too much of safety; and by waiting endlessly he would allow Rome, already weighed down by calamities, to perish as surely as Hannibal. He compared such delay to the timidity of physicians who fear decisive remedies. Fabius, he said, thought too much of safety; and by waiting endlessly he would allow Rome, already weighed down by calamities, to perish as surely as Hannibal. He compared such delay to the timidity of physicians who fear decisive remedies.
His first act was to capture several important Samnite towns that had revolted. Here he found much grain and money, and took three thousand of Hannibal's soldiers. When Hannibal defeated and slew the proconsul Cnaeus Fulvius in Apulia, Marcellus sent word to Rome bidding the people take courage, for he was on the march to rebuke Hannibal's exultation. His first act was to capture several important Samnite towns that had revolted. Here he found much grain and money, and took three thousand of Hannibal's soldiers. When Hannibal defeated and slew the proconsul Cnaeus Fulvius in Apulia, Marcellus sent word to Rome bidding the people take courage, for he was on the march to rebuke Hannibal's exultation.
He marched into Lucania, and finding Hannibal encamped upon strong hills near Numistro, he stationed himself in the plain. The battle began at the third hour and lasted till night without decisive result. Next day Marcellus again offered battle; but Hannibal moved away. After burying his dead and stripping the enemy, Marcellus pursued him, and won admiration for evading numerous ambuscades. He marched into Lucania, and finding Hannibal encamped upon strong hills near Numistro, he stationed himself in the plain. The battle began at the third hour and lasted till night without decisive result. Next day Marcellus again offered battle; but Hannibal moved away. After burying his dead and stripping the enemy, Marcellus pursued him, and won admiration for evading numerous ambuscades.
Since the comitia were near, the Senate wished not to recall Marcellus, but instead summoned the other consul home from Sicily. They bade him name a dictator, for a dictator is named by a magistrate, not elected by the people or Senate. The dictator is called so because the magistrate "names" him -- the Latin dicere meaning "to name. " Others say the title arises because he "dictates" orders without need of popular vote. Since the comitia were near, the Senate wished not to recall Marcellus, but instead summoned the other consul home from Sicily. They bade him name a dictator, for a dictator is named by a magistrate, not elected by the people or Senate. The dictator is called so because the magistrate "names" him -- the Latin dicere meaning "to name. " Others say the title arises because he "dictates" orders without need of popular vote.
chapter the twenty-fifth
When Marcellus's colleague returned from Sicily he wished to name another man dictator, and to avoid being compelled to name the one desired by the Senate, he sailed secretly by night back to Sicily. The people therefore themselves appointed Quintus Fulvius dictator, and the Senate wrote to Marcellus, bidding him confirm their choice. He did so, and was himself elected proconsul for the next year. When Marcellus's colleague returned from Sicily he wished to name another man dictator, and to avoid being compelled to name the one desired by the Senate, he sailed secretly by night back to Sicily. The people therefore themselves appointed Quintus Fulvius dictator, and the Senate wrote to Marcellus, bidding him confirm their choice. He did so, and was himself elected proconsul for the next year.
After conference with Fabius Maximus, it was arranged that Fabius would attempt Tarentum, while Marcellus should continually engage Hannibal. Marcellus came upon Hannibal near Canusium. Hannibal shifted his camp to avoid battle; but Marcellus pressed him until he was forced to fight. The clash was bitter until nightfall. After conference with Fabius Maximus, it was arranged that Fabius would attempt Tarentum, while Marcellus should continually engage Hannibal. Marcellus came upon Hannibal near Canusium. Hannibal shifted his camp to avoid battle; but Marcellus pressed him until he was forced to fight. The clash was bitter until nightfall.
Next day the Romans again appeared under arms. Hannibal, troubled, called his men together: "You see, " said he, "that even after our greatest victories we cannot rest unless we drive away this man. "
Marcellus seems to have lost that day by an unfortunate maneuver. His right wing faltered, and he ordered a legion to support it; the movement caused confusion, and two thousand seven hundred Romans fell. That night he reproached his men: he saw arms and bodies of Romans, he said, but not one true Roman spirit. They begged forgiveness. He replied that he would pardon them only when victorious. Marcellus seems to have lost that day by an unfortunate maneuver. His right wing faltered, and he ordered a legion to support it; the movement caused confusion, and two thousand seven hundred Romans fell. That night he reproached his men: he saw arms and bodies of Romans, he said, but not one true Roman spirit. They begged forgiveness. He replied that he would pardon them only when victorious.
He ordered that the disgraced troops receive barley instead of wheat. This shame hurt them more deeply than their wounds; and with renewed zeal they prepared for battle. He ordered that the disgraced troops receive barley instead of wheat. This shame hurt them more deeply than their wounds; and with renewed zeal they prepared for battle.
chapter the twenty-sixth
At dawn the scarlet robe, the well-known signal of battle, was displayed from the general's tent. The disgraced troops, at their own request, were placed in the foremost ranks. The rest followed. At dawn the scarlet robe, the well-known signal of battle, was displayed from the general's tent. The disgraced troops, at their own request, were placed in the foremost ranks. The rest followed.
Hannibal, hearing this, cried, "Hercules, what can one do with a man who knows not how to bear either good or bad fortune! When he is victorious he gives us no rest, and when defeated he takes none himself. "
The battle was fierce and equal until Hannibal ordered his elephants forward. Disorder fell upon the Roman line, but one tribune, Flavius, seized a standard and struck the first elephant with the spiked end until it turned back. He did the same to the next, and the next. Seeing this, Marcellus ordered the Roman cavalry to charge at full speed. They pursued the Carthaginians up to their very camp. The wounded elephants wrought havoc among their own men. More than eight thousand Carthaginians perished; but of the Romans three thousand fell, and the rest were wounded. The battle was fierce and equal until Hannibal ordered his elephants forward. Disorder fell upon the Roman line, but one tribune, Flavius, seized a standard and struck the first elephant with the spiked end until it turned back. He did the same to the next, and the next. Seeing this, Marcellus ordered the Roman cavalry to charge at full speed. They pursued the Carthaginians up to their very camp. The wounded elephants wrought havoc among their own men. More than eight thousand Carthaginians perished; but of the Romans three thousand fell, and the rest were wounded.
Hannibal slipped away by night; Marcellus, because of his wounded, could not pursue, but marched slowly into Campania and passed the summer at Sinuessa, recovering his army. Hannibal slipped away by night; Marcellus, because of his wounded, could not pursue, but marched slowly into Campania and passed the summer at Sinuessa, recovering his army.
chapter the twenty-seventh
Hannibal, having thus torn himself free, plundered Italy recklessly, as though his army had been disbanded. In Rome Marcellus was spoken against. His enemies stirred up Publius Bibulus, a violent partisan, who declared publicly that Marcellus, "after a little sparring, went to the hot baths as though after a gymnastic contest. "
Marcellus, hearing this, left the army with his lieutenants and went to Rome to defend himself. A trial was set in the Circus Flaminius. Bibulus accused him. Marcellus replied briefly; the noblest citizens spoke long in his praise, urging the people not to show themselves worse judges of war than Hannibal, who avoided fighting Marcellus whenever he could. Marcellus, hearing this, left the army with his lieutenants and went to Rome to defend himself. A trial was set in the Circus Flaminius. Bibulus accused him. Marcellus replied briefly; the noblest citizens spoke long in his praise, urging the people not to show themselves worse judges of war than Hannibal, who avoided fighting Marcellus whenever he could.
The people cleared him with honour, and even elected him consul for the fifth time. The people cleared him with honour, and even elected him consul for the fifth time.
chapter the twenty-eighth
Upon taking office he quelled an insurrection in Etruria by mild persuasion. He wished then to consecrate a temple he had built from Sicilian spoils to Glory and Valour; but the priests forbade placing two deities in one temple. Annoyed, he began a new one, yet was troubled by omens: lightning struck several temples, mice gnawed the gold of Jupiter's shrine, an ox spoke with a human voice, and a child was born with the head of an elephant. Upon taking office he quelled an insurrection in Etruria by mild persuasion. He wished then to consecrate a temple he had built from Sicilian spoils to Glory and Valour; but the priests forbade placing two deities in one temple. Annoyed, he began a new one, yet was troubled by omens: lightning struck several temples, mice gnawed the gold of Jupiter's shrine, an ox spoke with a human voice, and a child was born with the head of an elephant.
The priests detained him in Rome to perform expiations; yet he longed for battle, for no man ever desired so passionately to measure himself against Hannibal. His nightly dream, his daily talk, his constant prayer was that he might meet Hannibal in open field. The priests detained him in Rome to perform expiations; yet he longed for battle, for no man ever desired so passionately to measure himself against Hannibal. His nightly dream, his daily talk, his constant prayer was that he might meet Hannibal in open field.
He was more than sixty years old when he entered upon this fifth consulship. He was more than sixty years old when he entered upon this fifth consulship.
chapter the twenty-ninth
When the rites were completed, he marched with his colleague and greatly troubled Hannibal between Bantia and Venusia. Hannibal avoided battle, but, hearing that a Roman detachment marched against the Lokrians of Epizephyrian, he laid an ambuscade near Petelia and slew two thousand five hundred men. Marcellus, angered, drew nearer. When the rites were completed, he marched with his colleague and greatly troubled Hannibal between Bantia and Venusia. Hannibal avoided battle, but, hearing that a Roman detachment marched against the Lokrians of Epizephyrian, he laid an ambuscade near Petelia and slew two thousand five hundred men. Marcellus, angered, drew nearer.
Between the two camps rose a wooded hill, excellent for military post. Hannibal, seeing its advantage, preferred to use it for ambush. He filled the glens with javelin-men, sure the Romans would covet the position. Between the two camps rose a wooded hill, excellent for military post. Hannibal, seeing its advantage, preferred to use it for ambush. He filled the glens with javelin-men, sure the Romans would covet the position.
So it proved. Talk spread about occupying the hill. Marcellus rode out with a few horsemen to reconnoitre. He sacrificed first; the liver of the victim had no head. A second sacrifice produced an unusually large head, though the rest of the organs were excellent. The soothsayers were alarmed: sudden change from very bad to unusually good omens is itself ominous. So it proved. Talk spread about occupying the hill. Marcellus rode out with a few horsemen to reconnoitre. He sacrificed first; the liver of the victim had no head. A second sacrifice produced an unusually large head, though the rest of the organs were excellent. The soothsayers were alarmed: sudden change from very bad to unusually good omens is itself ominous.
Yet, as Pindar says, "not fire nor walls of iron can hinder fate. "
Marcellus rode forth with his colleague Crispinus and his son, a military tribune, with two hundred and twenty horsemen. None were Romans except twenty men from Fregellae, tried and faithful to Marcellus; the rest were Etruscans. Marcellus rode forth with his colleague Crispinus and his son, a military tribune, with two hundred and twenty horsemen. None were Romans except twenty men from Fregellae, tried and faithful to Marcellus; the rest were Etruscans.
A man on the crest of the hill watched the Roman army and signalled to the ambush. They allowed Marcellus to come near, then burst forth, surrounding his troop, casting darts, and cutting down the fleeing. The twenty Fregellans stood firm, defending the consuls until Crispinus, wounded by two darts, fled. Marcellus was pierced in the side by a lance. Even the Fregellans then withdrew, carrying off his wounded son. A man on the crest of the hill watched the Roman army and signalled to the ambush. They allowed Marcellus to come near, then burst forth, surrounding his troop, casting darts, and cutting down the fleeing. The twenty Fregellans stood firm, defending the consuls until Crispinus, wounded by two darts, fled. Marcellus was pierced in the side by a lance. Even the Fregellans then withdrew, carrying off his wounded son.
Forty-odd men were killed; five lictors and eighteen horsemen captured. Crispinus died a few days later. Never before had Rome lost both consuls in one battle. Forty-odd men were killed; five lictors and eighteen horsemen captured. Crispinus died a few days later. Never before had Rome lost both consuls in one battle.
chapter the thirtieth
Hannibal heard of the others' deaths with indifference; but when he learned that Marcellus had fallen, he hastened to the place and stood long beside the body, admiring its strength and beauty. He uttered no boast, showed no joy, but marveled at his strange fate. He removed the ring from Marcellus's finger, ordered the body to be dressed honourably and burned. He placed the relics in a silver urn with a golden crown and sent it to Marcellus's son. Hannibal heard of the others' deaths with indifference; but when he learned that Marcellus had fallen, he hastened to the place and stood long beside the body, admiring its strength and beauty. He uttered no boast, showed no joy, but marveled at his strange fate. He removed the ring from Marcellus's finger, ordered the body to be dressed honourably and burned. He placed the relics in a silver urn with a golden crown and sent it to Marcellus's son.
But some Numidians attacked the escort; in their struggle to seize the urn the bones were scattered. When Hannibal heard, he said, "Nothing can be done against the will of heaven. " He punished the Numidians, but made no further attempt to gather the relics, believing some god had decreed both Marcellus's strange death and his strange lack of burial. But some Numidians attacked the escort; in their struggle to seize the urn the bones were scattered. When Hannibal heard, he said, "Nothing can be done against the will of heaven. " He punished the Numidians, but made no further attempt to gather the relics, believing some god had decreed both Marcellus's strange death and his strange lack of burial.
Cornelius Nepos and Valerius Maximus tell this story; but Livy and Augustus Caesar declare that the urn did reach his son and that he was splendidly buried. Cornelius Nepos and Valerius Maximus tell this story; but Livy and Augustus Caesar declare that the urn did reach his son and that he was splendidly buried.
Besides his monuments at Rome, there was a gymnasium at Katana in Sicily bearing his name, and statues and votive tablets from the plunder of Syracuse were set up in Samothrace in the temple of the gods called Kabeiri, and in Lindus in the temple of Athena. Besides his monuments at Rome, there was a gymnasium at Katana in Sicily bearing his name, and statues and votive tablets from the plunder of Syracuse were set up in Samothrace in the temple of the gods called Kabeiri, and in Lindus in the temple of Athena.
On his statue there, according to Poseidonius, these verses are written: "This monument, O stranger, doth enshrine Marcellus, of the famous Claudian line, Who seven times was consul, and in fight His country's foes o'erthrew and put to flight. " For the writer of this epitaph counted his two proconsulates as well as his five consulates. His family remained one of the chief in Rome down to the time of Marcellus, the nephew of Augustus, who was the son of Octavia, Augustus's sister, and Caius Marcellus. He died in the office of aedile while yet a bridegroom, having just married Augustus's daughter Julia. In honour of his memory his mother Octavia established a library, and Augustus built a theatre, both of which bore his name.
Normalized Footnotes - Spoken Form footnote twelve. From the Iliad, book fourteen, line eighty-six. footnote twelve. From the Iliad, book fourteen, line eighty-six. footnote thirteen. Civica corona. The civic crown was made of oak leaves, and was given only to him who had saved the life of a fellow-citizen in war. footnote thirteen. Civica corona. The civic crown was made of oak leaves, and was given only to him who had saved the life of a fellow-citizen in war. footnote fourteen. Interreges were appointed when there were no consuls, to hold comitia for the election of new ones. footnote fourteen. Interreges were appointed when there were no consuls, to hold comitia for the election of new ones. footnote fifteen. Vessels of five banks of oars. footnote fifteen. Vessels of five banks of oars. footnote sixteen. Hexapylon, the place with six gates. footnote sixteen. Hexapylon, the place with six gates.