\nEdited by Jaegwon Kim and Ernest Sosa
Brown University
• A Blackwell
"II Publishing \n© 1999 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA
108 Cowley Road, Oxford OX4 1JF, UK
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright,
Designs, and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
First published 1999 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Reprinted 2000, 2002, 2003 (twice), 2004
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Metaphysics / edited by Jaegwon Kim and Ernest Sosa.
p. cm. - (Blackwell philosophy anthologies)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-631-20278-1 (alk. paper) - ISBN 0-631-20279-X (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Metaphysics. I. Kim, Jaegwon. II. Sosa, Ernest. III. Series.
BDll1. M55 1999
110-dc21 98-8538
CIP
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library.
Set in 9 on 11 pt Ehrhardt
by Pure Tech India Ltd, Pondicherry
Printed and bound in the United Kingdom
by 1J International Ltd, Pads tow, Cornwall
For further information on
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website:
http: //www. blackwellpublishing. com \nPreface ix
Acknowledgments xi
Part I Existence 1
Introduction 3
On What There Is 4
W. V. Quine
2 Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology 13
Rudolf Carnap
3 Existence and Description 23
Bertrand Russell
4 Referring to Nonexistent Objects 36
Terence Parsons
5 Ontological Relativity 45
W. V. Q! .Iine
Part II Identity 63
Introduction 65
6 The Identity ofIndiscernibles 66
Max Black
7 Identity and Necessity 72
Saul Kripke
8 The Same F 90
John Perry \nContents
9
10
Contingent Identity
Allan Gibbard
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
Stephen Yablo
Part III Modalities and Possible Worlds
11
12
13
14
15
Introduction
Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinctions
Alvin Plantinga
Identity through Possible Worlds
Roderick M. Chisholm
Counterparts or Double Lives?
David Lewis
Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity
Robert M. Adams
The Nature of Possibility
D. M. Armstrong
Part IV Universals, Properties, Kinds
16
17
18
19
20
Introduction
Universals as Attributes
D. M. Armstrong
New Work for a Theory of Universals
David Lewis
Natural Kinds
W. V. Quine
On Properties
Hilary Putnam
Causality and Properties
Sydney Shoemaker
Part V Things and their Persistence
21
22
23
24
25
Introduction
Identity through Time
Roderick M. Chisholm
Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis
W. V. Quine
Scattered Objects
Richard Cartwright
Parthood and Identity across Time
Judith Jarvis Thomson
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
Mark Heller
100
116
131
133
135
149
154
172
184
195
197
198
209
223
243
253
269
271
273
284
291
301
312 \nPart VI The Persistence of the Self
26
27
28
29
30
31
Introduction
The Persistence of Persons
Roderick M. Chisholm
Persons and their Pasts
Sydney Shoemaker
The Self and the Future
Bernard Williams
Personal Identity
Derek Parfit
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
Richard Swinburne
Human Beings
Mark Johnston
Part VII Causation
32
33
34
35
36
Introduction
Causes and Conditions
]. L. Mackie
Causal Relations
Donald Davidson
Causation
David Lewis
Causal Connections
Wesley C. Salmon
The Nature of Causation: A Singularist Account
Michael Tooley
Part VIII Emergence, Reduction, Supervenience
37
38
39
40
41
42
Introduction
Mechanism and Emergentism
C. D. Broad
Ontological Reduction and the World of Numbers
W. V. Quine
Special Sciences
Jerry A. Fodor
Multiple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduction
Jaegwon Kim
Physicalism: Ontology, Determination, and Reduction
Geoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
Jaegwon Kim
Contents
327
329
331
338
355
365
377
393
409
411
413
428
436
444
458
483
485
487
499
504
515
531
540 \nContents
Part IX Realism/ Antirealism
43
44
45
46
47
48
Introduction
Realism
Michael Dummett
Pragmatic Realism
Hilary Putnam
Putnam's Pragmatic Realism
Ernest Sosa
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
William P. Alston
Morals and Modals
Simon Blackburn
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
Crispin Wright
Name index
Subject index
557
559
561
591
607
620
634
649
666
671 \nMetaphysics is a philosophical inquiry into the
most basic and general features of reality and our
place in it. Because of its very subject matter,
metaphysics is often philosophy at its most theor­
etical and abstract. But, as the works in this book
show, simple, intuitive reflections on our familiar
experiences of everyday life and the concepts that
we use to describe them can lead us directly to
some of the most profound and intractable prob­
lems of metaphysics.
This anthology, intended as a companion to
Blackwell's A Companion to Metaphysics, is a collec­
tion of writings chosen to represent the state of
discussion on the central problems of contempor­
ary metaphysics. Many of the selections are "con­
temporary classics, " and many of the rest will likely
join the ranks of the "classics" in due course.
Throughout the selection process we tried to be
responsive to the needs of students who are relat­
ively new to metaphysics. Given the overall aim of
the volume and the nature of the field, it is un­
avoidable that some of the writings included con­
tain somewhat technical parts that demand close
study; however, we believe that most of the essen­
tial selections are accessible to the attentive reader
without an extensive background in metaphysics or
technical philosophy.
The selections are grouped in nine parts. Each
part is preceded by a brief editorial introduction,
including a list of works for further reading. These
introductions are not intended as comprehensive
surveys and discussions of the problems, positions,
and arguments on the topic of each part; for such
guidance the reader is encouraged to consult A
Companion to Metaphysics. Rather, their aim is to
give the reader some orientation, by indicating the
scope of the problems dealt with in the works
included in that section, and what their authors
attempt to accomplish.
Part I, on the nature of existence, deals with the
question of what it is for something to exist and
what it is for us to acknowledge something as
existing. Part II concerns the problem of identity
- whether qualitative indiscernibility entails iden­
tity, whether identity is always necessary or can be
contingent, whether identity is relative to sortals,
and so on. Part III is on "modal" concepts like
necessity and possibility, essence and essential
property, necessary and contingent truth, and
"possible worlds. " The part that follows is devoted
to age-old issues concerning universals, properties,
and kinds - the items in terms of which we char­
acterize things of this world. The central question
of Part V is what it is for something to be a "thing, "
and, in particular, what makes one thing at one
time to be "the same thing" as something at
another time. This part is followed by a group of
writings addressing the same question for persons:
there is a clear and deep difference, most of us
would feel, between our continuing to live till
tomorrow and our being replaced by an exact
"molecule-for-molecule" duplicate in our sleep \nPreface
tonight; but in what does this difference consist?
Part VII is devoted to the nature of causation, the
relation that David Hume famously called "the
cement of the universe. " Major contemporary
accounts of the nature of causation are represented
here. This is followed by a part concerning the
ways (besides the causal relation) in which things
and phenomena of this world may hang together,
and the topics dealt with here - emergence, reduc­
tion, and supervenience - are of critical importance
to current debates in philosophy of mind and phi­
losophy of science. The issue of realism/ antireal­
ism has lately returned as a major philosophical
problem, and the final part of the book includes
discussions of realism and its major contemporary
alternatives. It was often difficult to neatly segre­
gate the works into separate parts; the reader
should be aware that many of the selections are of
relevance to problems dealt with in more than one
part. This is especially true of the chapters in Parts
II and III, and those in Parts V and VI.
The topics represented in this book by no means
exhaust the field of metaphysics. For reasons of
space, we have had to leave out many important
topics, among them the following: facts, events,
and tropes; primary and secondary qualities; the
status of abstract entities; parts and wholes; the
objective and the subjective; time and becoming;
determinism and agency; and the nature and pos­
sibility of metaphysics. Even on the topics included
here, many important and worthy works have had
to be left out, either on account of limited space or
because of the difficulty of extracting from them
something of reasonable length that would be self­
contained. In choosing the works to be included,
our primary focus has been on seminal primary
literature that represents the major contemporary
positions on the issues involved. In consequence,
we have had to forgo many valuable follow-up
discussions and elaborations, objections and
replies, and expository surveys. We hope that the
interested reader will pursue the threads of discus­
sion inspired by the materials included here.
During much of the middle half of the century,
metaphysics was in the doldrums, at least within
the analytic tradition. This was largely due to the
anti-metaphysical influence of the two then dom­
inant philosophical trends. Logical positivism and
its formalistic, hyper-empiricist legacies lingered
through the 1950s and 1960s in the United States,
nourishing an atmosphere that did not encourage
serious metaphysics, while in Britain the anti­
metaphysical animus derived from "ordinary
language" philosophy and the later works of
Wittgenstein. However, metaphysics began a
surprisingly swift, robust comeback in the 1960s,
and since then has been among the most active and
productive areas of philosophy. It is now flourish­
ing as never before, showing perhaps that our need
for metaphysics is as basic as our need for philoso­
phy itself. We believe that this collection gives a
broad glimpse of metaphysics during the century
that is now about to close.
Maura Geisser, Brie Gertler, and Matt
McGrath have helped us with this project in vari­
ous ways, and we have received valuable advice
from our Brown colleagues Victor Caston and
Jamie Dreier. Also helpful were the comments
and suggestions by the anonymous readers of the
preliminary plan we submitted to Blackwell. Steve
Smith, our editor, has been unfailingly supportive
and helpful. We owe thanks to them all.
Jaegwon Kim
Ernest Sosa
October 1998 \nThe authors and publishers would like to thank the
following for permission to use copyright material:
American Philosophical Quarter~y for chapters 27,
32;
The American Philosophy Association and Wil­
liam P. Alston for chapter 46;
Blackwell Publishers for chapters 13 (with David
Lewis), 30, 47 (with Simon Blackburn);
Cambridge University Press for chapters 25, 42;
Columbia University for chapters 5, 10, 14, 24, 31,
33, 34 (with David Lewis), 38, 41, 45 (with Ernest
Sosa);
Cornell University Press for chapters 6, 8, 28, 29;
Harvard University Press for chapter 22;
Kluwer Academic Publishers for chapters 4, 9, 18,
19, 20, 23, 39, 43;
La Trobe University and David Lewis for chapter
17;
New York University Press for chapter 7;
Open Court, a division of Carus Publishing, for
chapters 21, 26, 44;
Oxford University Press for chapter 11;
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research and
Brown University for chapter 40;
Princeton University Press for chapter 35;
Review of Metaphysics for chapter 1;
Routledge and Kegan Paul for chapter 37;
The Bertrand Russell estate for chapter 3;
University of Calgary Press for chapters 15, 36;
University of Chicago Press for chapter 2;
University of Minnesota Press for chapters 12, 48;
Westview Press for chapter 16.
Every effort has been made to trace the copyright
holders, but if any have been inadvertently over­
looked, the publishers will be pleased to make the
necessary arrangements at the first opportunity. \n\nPART I \n\nIntroduction
The concept of existence is probably basic and
primitive in the sense that it is not possible to
produce an informative definition of it in terms
that are more clearly understood and that would
tell us something important and revealing about
what it is for something to exist. Rather, the pri­
mary conceptual question about existence has been
this: What kind of concept is expressed by "exist­
ence" and its cognates? When we say of something
that it exists, are we attributing to that thing a
certain proper~y, the property of existing, much in
the way we attribute the property red to this apple
when we say it is red? Something is red as opposed
to yellow or black - or, at any rate, not red. But
something exists as opposed to what? Being non­
existent? But how is that possible? Is it coherent to
suppose that some things exist and some things
don't exist? As Qp. ine says in his "On What
There Is" (chapter 1), isn't it a truism that every­
thing exists, and nothing else does?
But this doesn't seem to make the issues go
away. For, as Terence Parsons points out in "Refer­
ring to Nonexistent Objects" (chapter 4), our ordin­
ary discourse is full of apparent references to things
that do not exist, like fictional characters (Sherlock
Holmes, Hamlet), mythological creatures (Pegasus,
centaurs), and the fountain of youth that Ponce de
Leon sought to find. It seems natural and intelligi­
ble to say that there are things, like centaurs and the
fountain of youth, that do not exist. Moreover, we
Further reading
Alston, William P. , "Ontological commitment, " Philo­
sophical Studies 9 (1958), pp. 8-17.
Butchvarov, Panayot, Being Qua Being (Bloomington:
Indiana University Press, 1979).
Chisholm, Roderick M. , "Beyond being and nonbeing, "
Philosophical Studies 24 (1973), pp. 245-57.
Evans, Gareth, The Varieties of Reference (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1982).
Fine, Kit, "The problem of non-existence: I. Internal­
ism, " Topoi 1(1982), pp. 97-140.
Katz, Jerrold]. , "Names without bearers, " Philosophical
Review 103 (1994), pp. 1-39.
Lewis, David, "Truth in fiction, " in Philosophical Papers,
vol. I (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983).
Introduction
apparently can say things that are true of them and
things that are false of them. It seems true to say
that centaurs are mythical animals, that Sherlock
Holmes was a detective and lived on Baker Street,
and so on; and it seems false to say that Sherlock
Holmes was a baseball player, or that the golden
mountain is in Argentina. But how is it possible for
us to refer to them to begin with - things with
which we have no causal or epistemic contact?
Are we forced to countenance these nonexistent
objects as denizens of our ontology, or is it possible
to explain them away by paraphrasing statements
that are apparently about them into statements that
are free of such references? These are among the
questions addressed in the selections by Bertrand
Russell and Terence Parsons.
Quine's "On What There Is" and Carnap's
"Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology" (chapter
2) address some fundamental issues about what it is
for something to exist, and, more importantly,
what it is for us, or our theory, to recognize some­
thing as existing. Carnap's distinction between
"internal questions" and "external questions"
about existence - that is, questions about whether
something exists within a scheme of language, on
the one hand, and questions about whether or not
to accept a scheme that posits its existence, on the
other - introduces pragmatic and relativistic
dimensions into questions of existence. This ques­
tion of the possible relativity of ontology to
conceptual schemes is the topic of Quine's "Onto­
logical Relativity" (chapter 5).
Moore, G. E. , "Is existence a predicate? ," repro in Philo­
sophical Papers (London: Allen and Unwin, 1959).
Parsons, Terence, Nonexistent Objects (New Haven,
Conn. : Yale University Press, 1980).
Routley, Richard, Exploring Meinong's Jungle and Beyond
(Canberra: Australian National University, 1980).
Russell, Bertrand, "On denoting, " repro in R. C. Marsh
(ed. ), Logic and Knowledge (London: George, Allen
and Unwin, 1956).
Walton, Kendall, Mimesis as Make-Believe (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1990).
Williams, C. J. F. , What Is Existence? (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1981). \nw. V. Quine
A curious thing about the ontological problem is its
simplicity. It can be put in three Anglo-Saxon
monosyllables: 'What is there? ' It can be answered,
moreover, in a word - 'Everything' - and everyone
will accept this answer as true. However, this is
merely to say that there is what there is. There
remains room for disagreement over cases; and so
the issue has stayed alive down the centuries.
Suppose now that two philosophers, McX and I,
differ over ontology. Suppose McX maintains
there is something which I maintain there is not.
McX can, quite consistently with his own point of
view, describe our difference of opinion by saying
that I refuse to recognize certain entities. I should
protest, of course, that he is wrong in his formula­
tion of our disagreement, for I maintain that there
are no entities, of the kind which he alleges, for me
to recognize; but my finding him wrong in his
formulation of our disagreement is unimportant,
for I am committed to considering him wrong in
his ontology anyway.
When I try to formulate our difference of opin­
ion, on the other hand, I seem to be in a predica­
ment. I cannot admit that there are some things
which McX countenances and I do not, for in
admitting that there are such things I should be
contradicting my own rejection of them.
It would appear, if this reasoning were sound,
that in any ontological dispute the proponent of
the negative side suffers the disadvantage of not
Originally published in the Review of Metaphysics 2/1
(Sept. 1948). reprinted with permission.
CD
being able to admit that his opponent disagrees
with him.
This is the old Platonic riddle of nonbeing. Non­
being must in some sense be, otherwise what is it
that there is not? This tangled doctrine might be
nicknamed Plato's beard; historically it has proved
tough, frequently dulling the edge of Occam's
razor.
It is some such line of thought that leads philo­
sophers like McX to impute being where they
might otherwise be quite content to recognize
that there is nothing. Thus, take Pegasus. If Pega­
sus were not, McX argues, we should not be talking
about anything when we use the word; therefore it
would be nonsense to say even that Pegasus is not.
Thinking to show thus that the denial of Pegasus
cannot be coherently maintained, he concludes that
Pegasus is.
McX cannot, indeed, quite persuade himself
that any region of space-time, near or remote, con­
tains a flying horse of flesh and blood. Pressed for
further details on Pegasus, then, he says that Pega­
sus is an idea in men's minds. Here, however, a
confusion begins to be apparent. We may for the
sake of argument concede that there is an entity,
and even a unique entity (though this is rather
implausible), which is the mental Pegasus-idea;
but this mental entity is not what people are talking
about when they deny Pegasus.
McX never confuses the Parthenon with the
Parthenon-idea. The Parthenon is physical; the
Parthenon-idea is mental (according anyway to
McX's version of ideas, and I have no better to
offer). The Parthenon is visible; the Parthenon-\nidea is invisible. We cannot easily imagine two
things more unlike, and less liable to confusion,
than the Parthenon and the Parthenon-idea. But
when we shift from the Parthenon to Pegasus, the
confusion sets in - for no other reason than that
McX would sooner be deceived by the crudest and
most flagrant counterfeit than grant the non being
of Pegasus.
The notion that Pegasus must be, because it
would otherwise be nonsense to say even that Pega­
sus is not, has been seen to lead McX into an
elementary confusion. Subtler minds, taking the
same precept as their starting point, come out
with theories of Pegasus which are less patently
misguided than McX's, and correspondingly
more difficult to eradicate. One of these subtler
minds is named, let us say, Wyman. Pegasus,
Wyman maintains, has his being as an unactualized
possible. When we say of Pegasus that there is no
such thing, we are saying, more precisely, that
Pegasus does not have the special attribute of actu­
ality. Saying that Pegasus is not actual is on a par,
logically, with saying that the Parthenon is not red;
in either case we are saying something about an
entity whose being is unquestioned.
Wyman, by the way, is one of those philosophers
who have united in ruining the good old word
'exist'. Despite his espousal of unactualized poss­
ibles, he limits the word 'existence' to actuality -
thus preserving an illusion of ontological agree­
ment between himself and us who repudiate the
rest of his bloated universe. We have all been prone
to say, in our common-sense usage of 'exist', that
Pegasus does not exist, meaning simply that there
is no such entity at all. If Pegasus existed he would
indeed be in space and time, but only because the
word 'Pegasus' has spatio-temporal connotations,
and not because 'exists' has spatio-temporal con­
notations. If spatio-temporal reference is lacking
when we affirm the existence of the cube root of
27, this is simply because a cube root is not a spatio­
temporal kind of thing, and not because we are
being ambiguous in our use of 'exist'. 1 However,
Wyman, in an ill-conceived effort to appear agree­
able, genially grants us the nonexistence of Pegasus
and then, contrary to what we meant by non­
existence of Pegasus, insists that Pegasus is. Exist­
ence is one thing, he says, and subsistence is
another. The only way I know of coping with this
obfuscation of issues is to give Wyman the word
'exist'. I'll try not to use it again; I still have 'is'. So
much for lexicography; let's get back to Wyman's
ontology.
On What There Is
Wyman's overpopulated universe is in many
ways unlovely. It offends the aesthetic sense of us
who have a taste for desert landscapes, but this is
not the worst of it. Wyman's slum of possibles is a
breeding ground for disorderly elements. Take, for
instance, the possible fat man in that doorway; and,
again, the possible bald man in that doorway. Are
they the same possible man, or two possible men?
How do we decide? How many possible men are
there in that doorway? Are there more possible thin
ones than fat ones? How many of them are alike? Or
would their being alike make them one? Are no two
possible things alike? Is this the same as saying that
it is impossible for two things to be alike? Or,
finally, is the concept of identity simply inapplic­
able to unactualized possibles? But what sense can
be found in talking of entities which cannot mean­
ingfully be said to be identical with themselves and
distinct from one another? These elements are
well-nigh incorrigible. By a Fregean therapy of
individual concepts, some effort might be made at
rehabilitation; but I feel we'd do better simply to
clear Wyman's slum and be done with it.
Possibility, along with the other modalities of
necessity and impossibility and contingency, raises
problems upon which I do not mean to imply that
we should turn our backs. But we can at least limit
modalities to whole statements. We may impose
the adverb 'possibly' upon a statement as a whole,
and we may well worry about the semantical ana­
lysis of such usage; but little real advance in such
analysis is to be hoped for in expanding our uni­
verse to include so-called possible entities. I suspect
that the main motive for this expansion is simply
the old notion that Pegasus, for example, must be
because otherwise it would be nonsense to say even
that he is not.
Still, all the rank luxuriance of Wyman's uni­
verse of possibles would seem to come to naught
when we make a slight change in the example and
speak not of Pegasus but of the round square
cupola on Berkeley College. If, unless Pegasus
were, it would be nonsense to say that he is not,
then by the same token, unless the round square
cupola on Berkeley College were, it would be non­
sense to say that it is not. But, unlike Pegasus, the
round square cupola on Berkeley College cannot be
admitted even as an unactualized possible. Can we
drive Wyman now to admitting also a realm of
unactualizable impossibles? If so, a good many
embarrassing questions could be asked about
them. We might hope even to trap Wyman in
contradictions, by getting him to admit that certain \nW. V. Quine
of these entities are at once round and square. But
the wily Wyman chooses the other horn of the
dilemma and concedes that it is nonsense to say
that the round square cupola on Berkeley College is
not. He says that the phrase 'round square cupola'
is meaningless.
Wyman was not the first to embrace this altern­
ative. The doctrine of the meaninglessness of con­
tradictions runs away back. The tradition survives,
moreover, in writers who seem to share none of
Wyman's motivations. Still, I wonder whether the
first temptation to such a doctrine may not have
been substantially the motivation which we have
observed in Wyman. Certainly the doctrine has no
intrinsic appeal; and it has led its devotees to such
quixotic extremes as that of challenging the method
of proof by reductio ad absurdum - a challenge in
which I sense a reductio ad absurdum of the doctrine
itself.
Moreover, the doctrine of meaninglessness of
contradictions has the severe methodological draw­
back that it makes it impossible, in principle, ever
to devise an effective test of what is meaningful and
what is not. It would be forever impossible for us to
devise systematic ways of deciding whether a string
of signs made sense - even to us individually, let
alone other people - or not. For it follows from a
discovery in mathematical logic, due to Church, 2
that there can be no generally applicable test of
contradictoriness.
I have spoken disparagingly of Plato's beard, and
hinted that it is tangled. I have dwelt at length on
the inconveniences of putting up with it. It is time
to think about taking steps.
Russell, in his theory of so-called singular
descriptions, showed clearly how we might mean­
ingfully use seeming names without supposing that
there be the entities allegedly named. The names to
which Russell's theory directly applies are complex
descriptive names such as 'the author of Waverley',
'the present King of France', 'the round square
cupola on Berkeley College'. Russell analyzes
such phrases systematically as fragments of the
whole sentences in which they occur. The sentence
'The author of Waverley was a poet', for example,
is explained as a whole as meaning 'Someone (bet­
ter: something) wrote Waverley and was a poet, and
nothing else wrote Waverley'. (The point of this
added clause is to affirm the uniqueness which is
implicit in the word 'the', in 'the author of Waver­
ley'. ) The sentence 'The round square cupola on
Berkeley College is pink' is explained as 'Some­
thing is round and square and is a cupola on Ber-
keley College and is pink, and nothing else is round
and square and a cupola on Berkeley College'.
The virtue of this analysis is that the seeming
name, a descriptive phrase, is paraphrased in con­
text as a so-called incomplete symbol. No unified
expression is offered as an analysis of the descript­
ive phrase, but the statement as a whole which was
the context of that phrase still gets its full quota of
meaning - whether true or false.
The unanalyzed statement 'The author of
Waverley was a poet' contains a part, 'the author
of Waverley', which is wrongly supposed by McX
and Wyman to demand objective reference in order
to be meaningful at all. But in Russell's translation,
'Something wrote Waverley and was a poet and
nothing else wrote Waverley', the burden of object­
ive reference which had been put upon the
descriptive phrase is now taken over by words of
the kind that logicians call bound variables, vari­
ables of quantification: namely, words like 'some­
thing', 'nothing', 'everything'. These words, far
from purporting to be names specifically of the
author of Waverley, do not purport to be names at
all; they refer to entities generally, with a kind of
studied ambiguity peculiar to themselves. These
quantificational words or bound variables are, of
course a basic part of language, and their mean­
ingfulness, at least in context, is not to be chal­
lenged. But their meaningfulness in no way
presupposes there being either the author of Waver­
ley or the round square cupola on Berkeley College
or any other specifically preassigned objects.
Where descriptions are concerned, there is no
longer any difficulty in affirming or denying being.
'There is the author of Waverley' is explained by
Russell as meaning 'Someone (or, more strictly,
something) wrote Waverley and nothing else
wrote Waverley'. 'The author of Waverley is not'
is explained, correspondingly, as the alternation
'Either each thing failed to write Waverley or two
or more things wrote Waverley'. This alternation is
false, but meaningful; and it contains no expression
purporting to name the author of Waverley. The
statement 'The round square cupola on Berkeley
College is not' is analyzed in similar fashion. So the
old notion that statements of non being defeat
themselves goes by the board. When a statement
of being or nonbeing is analyzed by Russell's the­
ory of descriptions, it ceases to contain any expres­
sion which even purports to name the alleged entity
whose being is in question, so that the meaningful­
ness of the statement no longer can be thought to
presuppose that there be such an entity. \nNow what of 'Pegasus'? This being a word
rather than a descriptive phrase, Russell's argu­
ment does not immediately apply to it. However,
it can easily be made to apply. We have only to
rephrase 'Pegasus' as a description, in any way that
seems adequately to single out our idea; say, 'the
winged horse that was captured by Bellerophon'.
Substituting such a phrase for 'Pegasus', we can
then proceed to analyze the statement 'Pegasus is',
or 'Pegasus is not', precisely on the analogy of
Russell's analysis of 'The author of Waverley is'
and 'The author of Waverley is not'.
In order thus to subsume a one-word name or
alleged name such as 'Pegasus' under Russell's
theory of description, we must, of course, be able
first to translate the word into a description. But
this is no real restriction. If the notion of Pegasus
had been so obscure or so basic a one that no pat
translation into a descriptive phrase had offered
itself along familiar lines, we could still have availed
ourselves of the following artificial and trivial­
seeming device: we could have appealed to the ex
hypothesi unanalyzable, irreducible attribute of
being Pegasus, adopting, for its expression, the
verb 'is-Pegasus', or 'pegasizes'. The noun 'Pega­
sus' itself could then be treated as derivative, and
identified after all with a description: 'the thing
that is-Pegasus', 'the thing that pegasizes'.
If the importing of such a predicate as 'pegasizes'
seems to commit us to recognizing that there is a
corresponding attribute, pegasizing, in Plato's hea­
ven or in the minds of men, well and good. Neither
we nor Wyman nor McX have been contending,
thus far, about the being or nonbeing of universals,
but rather about that of Pegasus. If in terms of
pegasizing we can interpret the noun 'Pegasus' as
a description subject to Russell's theory of descrip­
tions, then we have disposed of the old notion that
Pegasus cannot be said not to be without presup­
posing that in some sense Pegasus is.
Our argument is now quite general. McX and
Wyman supposed that we could not meaningfully
affirm a statement of the form 'So-and-so is not',
with a simple or descriptive singular noun in place
of 'so-and-so', unless so-and-so is. This supposi­
tion is now seen to be quite generally groundless,
since the singular noun in question can always be
expanded into a singular description, trivially or
otherwise, and then analyzed out Ii la Russell.
We commit ourselves to an ontology containing
numbers when we say there are prime numbers
larger than a million; we commit ourselves to an
ontology containing centaurs when we say there are
On What There Is
centaurs; and we commit ourselves to an ontology
containing Pegasus when we say Pegasus is. But we
do not commit ourselves to an ontology containing
Pegasus or the author of Waverley or the round
square cupola on Berkeley College when we say
that Pegasus or the author of Waverley or the
cupola in question is not. We need no longer labor
under the delusion that the meaningfulness of a
statement containing a singular term presupposes
an entity named by the term. A singular term need
not name to be significant.
An inkling of this might have dawned on
Wyman and McX even without benefit of Russell
if they had only noticed - as so few of us do - that
there is a gulf between meaning and naming even in
the case of a singular term which is genuinely a
name of an object. The following example from
Frege will serve. 3 The phrase 'Evening Star'
names a certain large physical object of spherical
form, which is hurtling through space some scores
of millions of miles from here. The phrase 'Morn­
ing Star' names the same thing, as was probably
first established by some observant Babylonian.
But the two phrases cannot be regarded as having
the same meaning; otherwise that Babylonian could
have dispensed with his observations and con­
tented himself with reflecting on the meanings of
his words. The meanings, then, being different
from one another, must be other than the named
object, which is one and the same in both cases.
Confusion of meaning with naming not only
made McX think he could not meaningfully
repudiate Pegasus; a continuing confusion of
meaning with naming no doubt helped engender
his absurd notion that Pegasus is an idea, a mental
entity. The structure of his confusion is as follows.
He confused the alleged named object Pegasus with
the meaning of the word 'Pegasus', therefore con­
cluding that Pegasus must be in order that the word
have meaning. But what sorts of things are mean­
ings? This is a moot point; however, one might
quite plausibly explain meanings as ideas in the
mind, supposing we can make clear sense in turn
of the idea of ideas in the mind. Therefore Pegasus,
initially confused with a meaning, ends up as an
idea in the mind. It is the more remarkable that
Wyman, subject to the same initial motivation as
McX, should have avoided this particular blunder
and wound up with unactualized possibles instead.
Now let us turn to the ontological problem of
universals: the question whether there are such
entities as attributes, relations, classes, numbers,
functions. McX, characteristically enough, thinks
CD \nW. V. Quine
there are. Speaking of attributes, he says: 'There
are red houses, red roses, red sunsets; this much is
prephilosophical common sense in which we must
all agree. These houses, roses, and sunsets, then,
have something in common; and this which they
have in common is all I mean by the attribute of
redness. ' For McX, thus, there being attributes is
even more obvious and trivial than the obvious and
trivial fact of there being red houses, roses, and
sunsets. This, I think, is characteristic of metaphy­
sics, or at least of that part of metaphysics called
ontology: one who regards a statement on this
subject as true at all must regard it as trivially
true. One's ontology is basic to the conceptual
scheme by which he interprets all experiences,
even the most commonplace ones. Judged within
some particular conceptual scheme - and how else
is judgment possible? - an ontological statement
goes without saying, standing in need of no separ­
ate justification at all. Ontological statements fol­
low immediately from all manner of casual
statements of commonplace fact, just as - from
the point of view, anyway, of McX's conceptual
scheme - 'There is an attribute' follows from
'There are red houses, red roses, red sunsets'.
Judged in another conceptual scheme, an onto­
logical statement which is axiomatic to McX's
mind may, with equal immediacy and triviality,
be adjudged false. One may admit that there are
red houses, roses, and sunsets, but deny, except as a
popular and misleading manner of speaking, that
they have anything in common. The words
'houses', 'roses', and 'sunsets' are true of sundry
individual entities which are houses and roses and
sunsets, and the word 'red' or 'red object' is true of
each of sundry individual entities which are red
houses, red roses, red sunsets; but there is not, in
addition, any entity whatever, individual or other­
wise, which is named by the word 'redness', nor,
for that matter, by the word 'househood', 'rose­
hood', 'sunsethood'. That the houses and roses and
sunsets are all of them red may be taken as ultimate
and irreducible, and it may be held that McX is no
better off, in point of real explanatory power, for all
the occult entities which he posits under such
names as 'redness'.
One means by which McX might naturally have
tried to impose his ontology of universals on us was
already removed before we turned to the problem
of universals. McX cannot argue that predicates
such as 'red' or 'is-red', which we all concur in
using, must be regarded as names each of a single
universal entity in order that they be meaningful at
all. For we have seen that being a name of some­
thing is a much more special feature than being
meaningful. He cannot even charge us - at least not
by that argument - with having posited an attribute
of pegasizing by our adoption of the predicate
'pegasizes'.
However, McX hits upon a different strategem.
'Let us grant, ' he says, 'this distinction between
meaning and naming of which you make so much.
Let us even grant that "is red", "pegasizes", etc. ,
are not names of attributes. Still, you admit they
have meanings. But these meanings, whether they
are named or not, are still universals, and I venture
to say that some of them might even be the very
things that I call attributes, or something to much
the same purpose in the end. '
For McX, this is an unusually penetrating
speech; and the only way I know to counter it is
by refusing to admit meanings. However, I feel no
reluctance toward refusing to admit meanings, for I
do not thereby deny that words and statements are
meaningful. McX and I may agree to the letter in
our classification oflinguistic forms into the mean­
ingful and the meaningless, even though McX
construes meaningfulness as the having (in some
sense of 'having') of some abstract entity which he
calls a meaning, whereas I do not. I remain free to
maintain that the fact that a given linguistic utter­
ance is meaningful (or significant, as I prefer to say
so as not to invite hypostasis of meanings as enti­
ties) is an ultimate and irreducible matter of fact;
or, I may undertake to analyze it in terms directly
of what people do in the presence of the linguistic
utterance in question and other utterance similar
to it.
The useful ways in which people ordinarily talk
or seem to talk about meanings boil down to two:
the having of meanings, which is significance, and
sameness of meaning, or synonomy. What is called
giving the meaning of an utterance is simply the
uttering of a synonym, couched, ordinarily, in
clearer language than the original. If we are allergic
to meanings as such, we can speak directly of utter­
ances as significant or insignificant, and as syn­
onymous or heteronymous one with another. The
problem of explaining these adjectives 'significant'
and 'synonymous' with some degree of clarity and
rigor - preferably, as I see it, in terms of behavior -
is as difficult as it is important. 4 But the explan­
atory value of special and irreducible intermediary
entities called meanings is surely illusory.
Up to now I have argued that we can use singular
terms significantly in sentences without presup-\nposing that there are the entities which those terms
purport to name. I have argued further that we can
usc general terms, for example, predicates, without
conceding them to be names of abstract entities. I
have argued further that we can view utterances as
significant, and as synonymous or heteronymous
with one another, without countenancing a realm
of entities called meanings. At this point McX
begins to wonder whether there is any limit at all
to our ontological immunity. Does nothing we may
say commit us to the assumption of universals or
other entities which we may find unwelcome?
I have already suggested a negative answer to
this question, in speaking of bound variables, or
variables of quantification, in connection with Rus­
sell's theory of descriptions. We can very easily
involve ourselves in ontological commitments by
saying, for example, that there is something (bound
variable) which red houses and sunsets have in
common; or that there is something which is a
prime number larger than a million. But this is,
essentially, the only way we can involve ourselves in
ontological commitments: by our use of bound
variables. The use of alleged names is no criterion,
for we can repudiate their namehood at the drop of
a hat unless the assumption of a corresponding
entity can be spotted in the things we affirm in
terms of bound variables. Names are, in fact, alto­
gether immaterial to the ontological issue, for I
have shown, in connection with 'Pegasus' and
'pegasize', that names can be converted to descrip­
tions, and Russell has shown that descriptions can
be eliminated. Whatever we say with the help of
names can be said in a language which shuns names
altogether. To be assumed as an entity is, purely
and simply, to be reckoned as the value of a vari­
able. In terms of the categories of traditional gram­
mar, this amounts roughly to saying that to be is to
be in the range of reference of a pronoun. Pronouns
are the basic media of reference; nouns might bet­
ter have been named propronouns. The variables of
quantification, 'something', 'nothing', 'every­
thing', range over our whole ontology, whatever it
may be; and we are convicted of a particular onto­
logical presupposition if, and only if, the alleged
presupposition has to be reckoned among the enti­
ties over which our variables range in order to
render one of our affirmations true.
We may say, for example, that some dogs are
white and not thereby commit ourselves to recog­
nizing either doghood or whiteness as entities.
'Some dogs are white' says that some things that
are dogs are white; and, in order that this statement
On What There Is
be true, the things over which the bound variable
'something' ranges must include some white dogs,
but need not include doghood or whiteness. On the
other hand, when we say that some zoological spe­
cies are cross-fertile, we are committing ourselves
to recognizing as entities the several species them­
selves, abstract though they are. We remain so
committed at least until we devise some way of
so paraphrasing the statement as to show that
the seeming reference to species on the part of
our bound variable was an avoidable manner of
speaking. 5
Classical mathematics, as the example of primes
larger than a million clearly illustrates, is up to its
neck in commitments to an ontology of abstract
entities. Thus it is that the great medieval contro­
versy over universals has flared up anew in the
modern philosophy of mathematics. The issue is
clearer now than of old, because we now have a
more explicit standard whereby to decide what
ontology a given theory or form of discourse is
committed to: a theory is committed to those and
only those entities to which the bound variables of
the theory must be capable of referring in order
that the affirmations made in the theory be true.
Because this standard of ontological presupposi­
tion did not emerge clearly in the philosophical
tradition, the modern philosophical mathemati­
cians have not on the whole recognized that they
were debating the same old problem of universals
in a newly clarified form. But the fundamental
cleavages among modern points of view on founda­
tions of mathematics do come down pretty expli­
citly to disagreements as to the range of entities to
which the bound variables should be permitted to
refer.
The three main medieval points of view regard­
ing universals are designated by historians as real­
ism, conceptualism, and nominalism. Essentially
these same three doctrines reappear in twentieth­
century surveys of the philosophy of mathematics
under the new names logicism, intuitionism, and
formalism.
Realism, as the word is used in connection with
the medieval controversy over universals, is the
Platonic doctrine that universals or abstract entities
have being independently of the mind; the mind
may discover them but cannot create them. Logi­
cism, represented by Frege, Russell, Whitehead,
Church, and Carnap, condones the use of bound
variables to refer to abstract entities known and
unknown, specifiable and unspecifiable, indiscrim­
inately. \nW. V. Quine
Conceptualism holds that there are universals but
they are mind-made. Intuitionism, espoused in
modern times in one form or another by Poincare,
Brouwer, Weyl, and others, countenances the use
of bound variables to refer to abstract entities only
when those entities are capable of being cooked up
individually from ingredients specified in advance.
As Fraenkel has put it, logicism holds that classes
are discovered while intuitionism holds that they
are invented - a fair statement indeed of the old
opposition between realism and conceptualism.
This opposition is no mere quibble; it makes an
essential difference in the amount of classical
mathematics to which one is willing to subscribe.
Logicists, or realists, are able on their assumptions
to get Cantor's ascending orders of infinity; intu­
itionists are compelled to stop with the lowest order
of infinity, and, as an indirect consequence, to
abandon even some of the classical laws of real
numbers. The modern controversy between logi­
cism and intuitionism arose, in fact, from disagree­
ments over infinity.
Formalism, associated with the name of Hilbert,
echoes intuitionism in deploring the logicist's
unbridled recourse to universals. But formalism
also finds intuitionism unsatisfactory. This could
happen for either of two opposite reasons. The
formalist might, like the logicist, object to the
crippling of classical mathematics; or he might,
like the nominalists of old, object to admitting
abstract entities at all, even in the restrained sense
of mind-made entities. The upshot is the same: the
formalist keeps classical mathematics as a play of
insignificant notations. This play of notations can
still be of utility - whatever utility it has already
shown itself to have as a crutch for physicists and
technologists. But utility need not imply signific­
ance, in any literal linguistic sense. Nor need the
marked success of mathematicians in spinning out
theorems, and in finding objective bases for agree­
ment with one another's results, imply signific­
ance. For an adequate basis for agreement among
mathematicians can be found simply in the
rules which govern the manipulation of the nota­
tions - these syntactical rules being, unlike the
notations themselves, quite significant and intel­
ligible. 6
I have argued that the sort of ontology we adopt
can be consequential - notably in connection with
mathematics, although this is only an example.
Now how are we to adjudicate among rival onto­
logies? Certainly the answer is not provided by the
seman tical formula 'To be is to be the value of a
variable'; this formula serves rather, conversely, in
testing the conformity of a given remark or doc­
trine to a prior ontological standard. We look to
bound variables in connection with ontology not in
order to know what there is, but in order to know
what a given remark or doctrine, ours or someone
else's, says there is; and this much is quite properly
a problem involving language. But what there is is
another question.
In debating over what there is, there are still
reasons for operating on a seman tical plane. One
reason is to escape from the predicament noted at
the beginning of this essay: the predicament of my
not being able to admit that there are things which
McX countenances and I do not. So long as I ad­
here to my ontology, as opposed to McX's, I
cannot allow my bound variables to refer to entities
which belong to McX's ontology and not to mine. I
can, however, consistently describe our disagree­
ment by characterizing the statements which McX
affirms. Provided merely that my ontology
countenances linguistic forms, or at least concrete
inscriptions and utterances, I can talk about McX's
sentences.
Another reason for withdrawing to a semantical
plane is to find common ground on which to argue.
Disagreement in ontology involves basic disagree­
ment in conceptual schemes; yet McX and I,
despite these basic disagreements, find that our
conceptual schemes converge sufficiently in their
intermediate and upper ramifications to enable us
to communicate successfully on such topics as pol­
itics, weather, and, in particular, language. Insofar
as our basic controversy over ontology can be trans­
lated upward into a seman tical controversy about
words and what to do with them, the collapse of
the controversy into question-begging may be
delayed.
It is no wonder, then, that ontological contro­
versy should tend into controversy over language.
But we must not jump to the conclusion that what
there is depends on words. Translatability of a
question into seman tical terms is no indication
that the question is linguistic. To see Naples is to
bear a name which, when prefixed to the words
'sees Naples', yields a true sentence; still there is
nothing linguistic about seeing Naples.
Our acceptance of an ontology is, I think, similar
in principle to our acceptance of a scientific theory,
say a system of physics: we adopt, at least insofar as
we are reasonable, the simplest conceptual scheme
into which the disordered fragments of raw experi­
ence can be fitted and arranged. Our ontology is \ndetermined once we have fixed upon the over-all
conceptual scheme which is to accommodate
science in the broadest sense; and the considera­
tions which determine a reasonable construction of
any part of that conceptual scheme, for example,
the biological or the physical part, are not different
in kind from the considerations which determine a
reasonable construction of the whole. To whatever
extent the adoption of any system of scientific
theory may be said to be a matter of language, the
same - but no more - may be said of the adoption
of an ontology.
But simplicity, as a guiding principle in con­
structing conceptual schemes, is not a clear and
unambiguous idea; and it is quite capable of pres­
enting a double or multiple standard. Imagine, for
example, that we have devised the most economical
set of concepts adequate to the play-by-play
reporting of immediate experience. The entities
under this scheme - the values of bound variables
- are, let us suppose, individual subjective events of
sensation or reflection. We should still find, no
doubt, that a physicalistic conceptual scheme, pur­
porting to talk about external objects, offers great
advantages in simplifying our over-all reports. By
bringing together scattered sense events and treat­
ing them as perceptions of one object, we reduce
the complexity of our stream of experience to a
manageable conceptual simplicity. The rule of sim­
plicity is indeed our guiding maxim in assigning
sense-data to objects: we associate an earlier and a
later round sensum with the same so-called penny,
or with two different so-called pennies, in obedi­
ence to the demands of maximum simplicity in our
total world-picture.
Here we have two competing conceptual
schemes, a phenomenalistic one and a physicalistic
one. Which should prevail? Each has its advant­
ages; each has its special simplicity in its own way.
Each, I suggest, deserves to be developed. Each
may be said, indeed, to be the more fundamental,
though in different senses: the one is epistemo­
logically, the other physically, fundamental.
The physical conceptual scheme simplifies our
account of experience because of the way myriad
scattered sense events come to be associated with
single so-called objects; still there is no likelihood
that each sentence about physical objects can actu­
ally be translated, however deviously and com­
plexly, into the phenomenalistic language.
Physical objects are postulated entities which
round out and simplify our account of the flux of
experience, just as the introduction of irrational
On What There Is
numbers simplifies laws of arithmetic. From the
point of view of the conceptual scheme of the
elementary arithmetic of rational numbers alone,
the broader arithmetic of rational and irrational
numbers would have the status of a convenient
myth, simpler than the literal truth (namely, the
arithmetic of rationals) and yet containing that
literal truth as a scattered part. Similarly, from a
phenomenalistic point of view, the conceptual
scheme of physical objects is a convenient myth,
simpler than the literal truth and yet containing
that literal truth as a scattered part. 7
Now what of classes or attributes of physical
objects, in turn? A platonistic ontology of this sort
is, from the point of view of a strictly physicalistic
conceptual scheme, as much a myth as that physi­
calistic conceptual scheme itself is for phenomen­
alism. This higher myth is a good and useful one, in
turn, insofar as it simplifies our account of physics.
Since mathematics is an integral part of this higher
myth, the utility of this myth for physical science is
evident enough. In speaking of it nevertheless as a
myth, I echo that philosophy of mathematics to
which I alluded earlier under the name of formal­
ism. But an attitude of formalism may with equal
justice be adopted toward the physical conceptual
scheme, in turn, by the pure aesthete or phenom­
enalist.
The analogy between the myth of mathematics
and the myth of physics is, in some additional and
perhaps fortuitous ways, strikingly close. Consider,
for example, the crisis which was precipitated in
the foundations of mathematics, at the turn of the
century, by the discovery of Russell's paradox and
other antinomies of set theory. These contradic­
tions had to be obviated by unintuitive, ad hoc
devices; our mathematical myth-making became
deliberate and evident to all. But what of physics?
An antinomy arose between the undular and the
corpuscular accounts oflight; and if this was not as
out-and-out a contradiction as Russell's paradox, I
suspect that the reason is that physics is not as out­
and-out as mathematics. Again, the second great
modern crisis in the foundations of mathematics -
precipitated in 1931 by Giidel's proof that there are
bound to be undecidable statements in arithmetic8
- has its companion piece in physics in Heisen­
berg's indeterminacy principle.
In earlier pages I undertook to show that some
common arguments in favor of certain ontologies
are fallacious. Further, I advanced an explicit
standard whereby to decide what the ontological
commitments of a theory are. But the question \nW. V. Quine
what ontology actually to adopt still stands open,
and the obvious counsel is tolerance and an experi­
mental spirit. Let us by all means see how much of
the physicalistic conceptual scheme can be reduced
to a phenomenalistic one; still, physics also natu­
rally demands pursuing, irreducible in toto though
it be. Let us see how, or to what degree, natural
science may be rendered independent of platonistic
mathematics; but let us also pursue mathematics
and delve into its platonistic foundations.
Notes
The impulse to distinguish terminologically between
existence as applied to objects actualized somewhere in
space-time and existence (or subsistence or being) as
applied to other entities arises in part, perhaps, from an
idea that the observation of nature is relevant only to
questions of existence of the first kind. But this idea is
readily refuted by counter-instances such as 'the ratio
of the number of centaurs to the number of unicorns'.
If there were such a ratio, it would be an abstract entity,
viz. , a number. Yet it is only by studying nature that we
conclude that the number of centaurs and the number
of unicorns are both 0 and hence that there is no such
ratio.
2 Alonzo Church, 'A note on the Entscheidungsproblem',
Journal oJSymbolic Logic I (1936), pp. 40-1, 101-2.
3 Gottlob Frege, 'On sense and nominatum', in Herbert
Feigl and Wilfrid Sellars (eds), Readings in Philo­
sophtcal Analysts (New York: Appleton-Century­
Crofts, 1949), pp. 85-102.
From among the vanous conceptual schemes
best suited to these various pursuits, one - the
phenomenalistic - claims epistemological priority.
Viewed from within the phenomenalistic concep­
tual scheme, the ontologies of physical objects and
mathematical objects are myths. The quality of
myth, however, is relative; relative, in this case, to
the epistemological point of view. This point of
view is one among various, corresponding to one
among our various interests and purposes.
4 See 'Two dogmas of empiricism' and 'The problem of
meaning in linguistics', in W. V. Qt. iine, From a Logical
Point oj View (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University
Press, 1953).
W. V. Quine, 'Logic and the reification of universals',
in From a Logical Point oJ View.
6 See Nelson Goodman and W. V. Qt. iine, 'Steps toward
a constructive nominalism', Journal oj Symbolic Logic
12 (1947), pp. 105-22.
7 The arithmetical analogy is due to Philip Frank, Mod­
ern Science and its Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass. : Har­
vard University Press, 1949), pp. 108f.
8 Kurt Giidel, 'Uber formal unertscheidbare Siitze der
Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme',
Monatshejie jiir Mathematik und Physik 38 (1931), pp.
173-98. \nRudolf Carnap
1 The Problem of Abstract Entities
Empiricists are in general rather suspicious with
respect to any kind of abstract entities like proper­
ties, classes, relations, numbers, propositions, etc.
They usually feel much more in sympathy with
nominalists than with realists (in the medieval
sense). As far as possible they try to avoid any
reference to abstract entities and to restrict them­
selves to what is sometimes called a nominalistic
language, i. e. , one not containing such references.
However, within certain scientific contexts it seems
hardly possible to avoid them. In the case of math­
ematics, some empiricists try to find a way out by
treating the whole of mathematics as a mere calcu­
lus, a formal system for which no interpretation is
given or can be given. Accordingly, the mathema­
tician is said to speak not about numbers, func­
tions, and infinite classes, but merely about
meaningless symbols and formulas manipulated
according to given formal rules. In physics it is
more difficult to shun the suspected entities,
because the language of physics serves for the com­
munication of reports and predictions and hence
cannot be taken as a mere calculus. A physicist who
is suspicious of abstract entities may perhaps try to
declare a certain part of the language of physics as
uninterpreted and uninterpretable, that part which
Originally published in Meaning and Necessity (Chi­
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1956), pp. 205-21.
Reprinted by permission of the University of Chicago
Press.
refers to real numbers as space-time coordinates or
as values of physical magnitudes, to functions,
limits, etc. More probably he will just speak about
all these things like anybody else but with an
uneasy conscience, like a man who in his everyday
life does with qualms many things which are not in
accord with the high moral principles he professes
on Sundays. Recently the problem of abstract enti­
ties has arisen again in connection with semantics,
the theory of meaning and truth. Some semanti­
cists say that certain expressions designate certain
entities, and among these designated entities they
include not only concrete material things but also
abstract entities, e. g. , properties as designated by
predicates and propositions as designated by sen­
tences. 1 Others object strongly to this procedure as
violating the basic principles of empiricism and
leading back to a metaphysical ontology of the
Platonic kind.
It is the purpose of this article to clarify this
controversial issue. The nature and implications
of the acceptance of a language referring to abstract
entities will first be discussed in general; it will be
shown that using such a language does not imply
embracing a Platonic ontology but is perfectly
compatible with empiricism and strictly scientific
thinking. Then the special question of the role of
abstract entities in semantics will be discussed. It is
hoped that the clarification of the issue will be
useful to those who would like to accept abstract
entities in their work in mathematics, physics,
semantics, or any other field; it may help them to
overcome nominalistic scruples. \nRudolf Carnap
2 Linguistic Frameworks
Are there properties, classes, numbers, proposi­
tions? In order to understand more clearly the
nature of these and related problems, it is above
all necessary to recognize a fundamental distinction
between two kinds of questions concerning the
existence or reality of entities. If someone wishes
to speak in his language about a new kind of enti­
ties, he has to introduce a system of new ways of
speaking, subject to new rules; we shall call this
procedure the construction of a linguistic frame­
work for the new entities in question. And now we
must distinguish two kinds of questions of exist­
ence: first, questions of the existence of certain
entities of the new kind within the framework; we
call them internal questions; and second, questions
concerning the existence or reality of the system of
entities as a whole, called external questions. Internal
questions and possible answers to them are
formulated with the help of the new forms of
expressions. The answers may be found either by
purely logical methods or by empirical methods,
depending upon whether the framework is a logical
or a factual one. An external question is of a pro­
blematic character which is in need of closer ex­
amination.
The world of things. Let us consider as an example
the simplest kind of entities dealt with in the every­
day language: the spatio-temporally ordered sys­
tem of observable things and events. Once we have
accepted the thing language with its framework for
things, we can raise and answer internal questions,
e. g. , "Is there a white piece of paper on my desk? ,"
"Did King Arthur actually live? ," "Are unicorns
and centaurs real or merely imaginary? ," and the
like. These questions are to be answered by empiri­
cal investigations. Results of observations are evalu­
ated according to certain rules as confirming or
disconfirming evidence for possible answers.
(This evaluation is usually carried out, of course,
as a matter of habit rather than a deliberate, rational
procedure. But it is possible, in a rational recon­
struction, to lay down explicit rules for the evalua­
tion. This is one of the main tasks of a pure, as
distinguished from a psychological, epistemology. )
The concept of reality occurring in these internal
questions is an empirical, scientific, nonmetaphy­
sical concept. To recognize something as a real
thing or event means to succeed in incorporating
it into the system of things at a particular space­
time position so that it fits together with the other
things recognized as real, according to the rules of
the framework.
From these questions we must distinguish the
external question of the reality of the thing world
itself. In contrast to the former questions, this
question is raised neither by the man in the street
nor by scientists, but only by philosophers. Realists
give an affirmative answer, subjective idealists a
negative one, and the controversy goes on for cen­
turies without ever being solved. And it cannot be
solved because it is framed in a wrong way. To be
real in the scientific sense means to be an element
of the system; hence this concept cannot be mean­
ingfully applied to the system itself. Those who
raise the question of the reality of the thing world
itself have perhaps in mind not a theoretical ques­
tion, as their formulation seems to suggest, but
rather a practical question, a matter of a practical
decision concerning the structure of our language.
We have to make the choice whether or not to
accept and use the forms of expression in the
framework in question.
In the case of this particular example, there is
usually no deliberate choice because we all have
accepted the thing language early in our lives as a
matter of course. Nevertheless, we may regard it as
a matter of decision in this sense: we are free to
choose to continue using the thing language or not;
in the latter case we could restrict ourselves to a
language of sense-data and other 'phenomenal'
entities, or construct an alternative to the custom­
ary thing language with another structure, or,
finally, we could refrain from speaking. If someone
decides to accept the thing language, there is no
objection against saying that he has accepted the
world of things. But this must not be interpreted as
if it meant his acceptance of a beliefin the reality of
the thing world; there is no such belief or assertion
or assumption, because it is not a theoretical ques­
tion. To accept the thing world means nothing
more than to accept a certain form of language, in
other words, to accept rules for forming statements
and for testing, accepting, or rejecting them. The
acceptance of the thing language leads, on the basis
of observations made, also to the acceptance, belief,
and assertion of certain statements. But the thesis
of the reality of the thing world cannot be among
these statements, because it cannot be formulated
in the thing language or, it seems, in any other
theoretical language.
The decision of accepting the thing language,
although itself not of a cognitive nature, will never­
theless usually be influenced by theoretical know-\nledge, just like any other deliberate decision con­
cerning the acceptance of linguistic or other rules.
The purposes for which the language is intended to
be used, for instance, the purpose of communicat­
ing factual knowledge, will determine which fac­
tors are relevant for the decision. The efficiency,
fruitfulness, and simplicity of the use of the thing
language may be among the decisive factors. And
the questions concerning these qualities are indeed
of a theoretical nature. But these questions cannot
be identified with the question of realism. They are
not yes-no questions but questions of degree. The
thing language in the customary form works indeed
with a high degree of efficiency for most purposes
of everyday life. This is a matter of fact, based upon
the content of our experiences. However, it would
be wrong to describe this situation by saying: "The
fact of the efficiency of the thing language is con­
firming evidence for the reality of the thing world";
we should rather say instead: "This fact makes it
advisable to accept the thing language. "
The system of numbers. As an example of a system
which is of a logical rather than a factual nature let
us take the system of natural numbers. The frame­
work for this system is constructed by introducing
into the language new expressions with suitable
rules: (1) numerals like "five" and sentence forms
like "there are five books on the table"; (2) the
general term "number" for the new entities, and
sentence forms like "five is a number"; (3) expres­
sions for properties of numbers (e. g. , "odd, "
"prime"), relations (e. g. , "greater than"), and
functions (e. g. , "plus"), and sentence forms like
"two plus three is five"; (4) numerical variables
("m, " "n, " etc. ) and quantifiers for universal sen­
tences ("for every n, .. . ") and existential sentences
("there is an n such that. .. ") with the customary
deductive rules.
Here again there are internal questions, e. g. , "Is
there a prime number greater than a hundred? "
Here, however, the answers are found, not by
empirical investigation based on observations, but
by logical analysis based on the rules for the new
expressions. Therefore the answers are here analy­
tic, i. e. , logically true.
What is now the nature of the philosophical
question concerning the existence or reality of
numbers? To begin with, there is the internal ques­
tion which, together with the affirmative answer,
can be formulated in the new terms, say, by "There
are numbes" or, more explicitly, "There is an n
such that n is a number. " This statement follows
Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology
from the analytic statement "five is a number" and
is therefore itself analytic. Moreover, it is rather
trivial (in contradistinction to a statement like
"There is a prime number greater than a million, "
which is likewise analytic but far from trivial),
because it does not say more than that the new
system is not empty; but this is immediately seen
from the rule which states that words like "five"
are substitutable for the new variables. Therefore
nobody who meant the question "Are there num­
bers? " in the internal sense would either assert or
even seriously consider a negative answer. This
makes it plausible to assume that those philoso­
phers who treat the question of the existence of
numbers as a serious philosophical problem and
offer lengthy arguments on either side, do not
have in mind the internal question. And, indeed,
if we were to ask them: "Do you mean the question
as to whether the framework of numbers, if we
were to accept it, would be found to be empty or
not? ," they would probably reply: "Not at all; we
mean a question prior to the acceptance of the new
framework. " They might try to explain what they
mean by saying that it is a question of the ontolo­
gical status of numbers; the question whether or
not numbers have a certain metaphysical character­
istic called reality (but a kind of ideal reality, dif­
ferent from the material reality of the thing world)
or subsistence or status of "independent entities. "
Unfortunately, these philosophers have so far not
given a formulation of their question in terms of
the common scientific language. Therefore our
judgment must be that they have not succeeded
in giving to the external question and to the possi­
ble answers any cognitive content. Unless and until
they supply a clear cognitive interpretation, we are
justified in our suspicion that their question is a
pseudo-question, that is, one disguised in the form
of a theoretical question while in fact it is non­
theoretical; in the present case it is the practical
problem whether or not to incorporate into the
language the new linguistic forms which constitute
the framework of numbers.
The system of propositions. New variables, "p, " "q, "
etc. , are introduced with a rule to the effect that any
(declarative) sentence may be substituted for a
variable of this kind; this includes, in addition to
the sentences of the original thing language, also all
general sentences with variables of any kind which
may have been introduced into the language.
Further, the general term "proposition" is intro­
duced. "p is a proposition" may be defined by "p or \nRudolf Carnap
notp" (or by any other sentence form yielding only
analytic sentences). Therefore, every sentence of
the form ". .. is a proposition" (where any sentence
may stand in the place of the dots) is analytic. This
holds, for example, for the sentence:
(a) "Chicago is large is a proposition. "
(We disregard here the fact that the rules of
English grammar require not a sentence but a
that-clause as the subject of another sentence;
accordingly, instead of (a) we should have to say
"That Chicago is large is a proposition". ) Predi­
cates may be admitted whose argument expressions
are sentences; these predicates may be either exten­
sional (e. g. , the customary truth-functional con­
nectives) or not (e. g. , modal predicates like
"possible, " "necessary, " etc. ). With the help of
the new variables, general sentences may be
formed, e. g. ,
(b) "For every p, either p or not-p. "
(c) "There is ap such thatp is not necessary and
not -p is not necessary. "
(d) "There is a p such that p is a proposition. "
(c) and (d) are internal assertions of existence. The
statement "There are propositions" may be meant
in the sense of (d); in this case it is analytic (since it
follows from (a» and even trivial. If, however, the
statement is meant in an external sense, then it is
noncognitive.
It is important to notice that the system of rules
for the linguistic expressions of the propositional
framework (of which only a few rules have here
been briefly indicated) is sufficient for the intro­
duction of the framework. Any further explana­
tions as to the nature of the propositions (i. e. , the
elements of the system indicated, the values of the
variables "p, " "q, " etc. ) are theoretically unneces­
sary because, if correct, they follow from the rules.
For example, are propositions mental events (as in
Russell's theory)? A look at the rules shows us that
they are not, because otherwise existential state­
ments would be of the form: "If the mental state of
the person in question fulfils such and such condi­
tions, then there is a p such that. .. . " The fact that
no references to mental conditions occur in exis­
tential statements (like (c), (d), etc. ) shows that
propositions are not mental entities. Further, a
statement of the existence of linguistic entities
(e. g. , expressions, classes of expressions, etc. )
must contain a reference to a language. The fact
that no such reference occurs in the existential
statements here shows that propositions are not
linguistic entities. The fact that in these statements
no reference to a subject (an observer or knower)
occurs (nothing like: "There is a p which is neces­
sary for Mr X") shows that the propositions (and
their properties, like necessity, etc. ) are not sub­
jective. Although characterizations of these or
similar kinds are, strictly speaking, unnecessary,
they may nevertheless be practically useful. If
they are given, they should be understood, not as
ingredient parts of the system, but merely as mar­
ginal notes with the purpose of supplying to the
reader helpful hints or convenient pictorial associa­
tions which may make his learning of the use of the
expressions easier than the bare system of the rules
would do. Such a characterization is analogous to
an extra-systematic explanation which a physicist
sometimes gives to the beginner. He might, for
example, tell him to imagine the atoms of a gas as
small balls rushing around with great speed, or the
electromagnetic field and its oscillations as quasi­
elastic tensions and vibrations in an ether. In fact,
however, all that can accurately be said about atoms
or the field is implicitly contained in the physical
laws of the theories in question. 2
The system of thing properties. The thing language
contains words like "red, " "hard, " "stone, "
"house, " etc. , which are used for describing what
things are like. Now we may introduce new vari­
ables, say "f, " "g, " etc. , for which those words are
substitutable and furthermore the general term
"property. " New rules are laid down which admit
sentences like "Red is a property, " "Red is a
color, " "These two pieces of paper have at least
one color in common" (i. e. , "There is anfsuch that
fis a color, and. .. "). The last sentence is an inter­
nal assertion. It is of an empirical, factual nature.
However, the external statement, the philosophical
statement of the reality of properties - a special
case of the thesis of the reality of universals - is
devoid of cognitive content.
The ~ystems of integers and rational numbers. Into a
language containing the framework of natural
numbers we may introduce first the (positive and
negative) integers as relations among natural num­
bers and then the rational numbers as relations
among integers. This involves introducing new
types of variables, expressions substitutable for
them, and the general terms "integer" and
"rational number. " \nThe system of real numbers. On the basis of the
rational numbers, the real numbers may be intro­
duced as classes of a special kind (segments) of
rational numbers (according to the method devel­
oped by Dedekind and Frege). Here again a new
type of variables is introduced, expressions substi­
tutable for them (e. g. , "v! z"), and the general term
"real number. "
The spatia-temporal coordinate system for physics.
The new entities are the space-time points. Each
is an ordered quadruple of four real numbers,
called its coordinates, consisting of three spatial
and one temporal coordinates. The physical state
of a spatio-temporal point or region is described
either with the help of qualitative predicates (e. g. ,
"hot") or by ascribing numbers as values of a
physical magnitude (e. g. , mass, temperature, and
the like). The step from the system of things
(which does not contain space-time points but
only extended objects with spatial and temporal
relations between them) to the physical coordinate
system is again a matter of decision. Our choice of
certain features, although itself not theoretical, is
suggested by theoretical knowledge, either logical
or factual. For example, the choice of real numbers
rather than rational numbers or integers as coord­
inates is not much influenced by the facts of experi­
ence but mainly due to considerations of
mathematical simplicity. The restriction to rational
coordinates would not be in conflict with any
experimental knowledge we have, because the
result of any measurement is a rational number.
However, it would prevent the use of ordinary
geometry (which says, e. g. , that the diagonal of a
square with the side 1 has the irrational value v! z)
and thus lead to great complications. On the other
hand, the decision to use three rather than two or
four spatial coordinates is strongly suggested, but
still not forced upon us, by the result of common
observations. If certain events allegedly observed in
spiritualistic seances, e. g. , a ball moving out of a
sealed box, were confirmed beyond any reasonable
doubt, it might seem advisable to use four spatial
coordinates. Internal questions are here, in general,
empirical questions to be answered by empirical
investigations. On the other hand, the external
questions of the reality of physical space and phy­
sical time are pseudo-questions. A question like
"Are there (really) space-time points? " is ambigu­
ous. It may be meant as an internal question; then
the affirmative answer is, of course, analytic and
trivial. Or it may be meant in the external sense:
Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology
"Shall we introduce such and such forms into our
language? "; in this case it is not a theoretical but a
practical question, a matter of decision rather than
assertion, and hence the proposed formulation
would be misleading. Or finally, it may be meant
in the following sense: "Are our experiences such
that the use of the linguistic forms in question will
be expedient and fruitful? " This is a theoretical
question of a factual, empirical nature. But it con­
cerns a matter of degree; therefore a formulation in
the form "real or not? " would be inadequate.
3 What does Acceptance of a Kind of
Entities Mean?
Let us now summarize the essential characteristics
of situations involving the introduction of a new
kind of entities, characteristics which are common
to the various examples outlined above.
The acceptance of a new kind of entities is repre­
sented in the language by the introduction of a
framework of new forms of expressions to be used
according to a new set of rules. There may be new
names for particular entities of the kind in question;
but some such names may already occur in the
language before the introduction of the new frame­
work. (Thus, for example, the thing language con­
tains certainly words of the type of "blue" and
"house" before the framework of properties is
introduced; and it may contain words like "ten" in
sentences of the form "I have ten fingers" before
the framework of numbers is introduced. ) The lat­
ter fact shows that the occurrence of constants of the
type in question - regarded as names of entities of
the new kind after the new framework is introduced
- is not a sure sign of the acceptance of the new kind
of entities. Therefore the introduction of such con­
stants is not to be regarded as an essential step in
the introduction of the framework. The two essen­
tial steps are rather the following. First, the intro­
duction of a general term, a predicate of higher
level, for the new kind of entities, permitting us to
say of any particular entity that it belongs to this
kind (e. g. , "Red is a property, " "Five is a number").
Second, the introduction of variables of the new
type. The new entities are values of these variables;
the constants (and the closed compound expres­
sions, if any) are substitutable for the variables. 3
With the help of the variables, general sentences
concerning the new entities can be formulated.
After the new forms are introduced into the
language, it is possible to formulate with their \nRudolf Carnap
help internal questions and possible answers to
them. A question of this kind may be either empiri­
calor logical; accordingly a true answer is either
factually true or analytic.
From the internal questions we must clearly
distinguish external questions, i. e. , philosophical
questions concerning the existence or reality of
the total system of the new entities. Many philoso­
phers regard a question of this kind as an ontolo­
gical question which must be raised and answered
before the introduction of the new language forms.
The latter introduction, they believe, is legitimate
only if it can be justified by an ontological insight
supplying an affirmative answer to the question of
reality. In contrast to this view, we take the position
that the introduction of the new ways of speaking
does not need any theoretical justification because
it does not imply any assertion of reality. We may
still speak (and have done so) of "the acceptance of
the new entities, " since this form of speech is cus­
tomary; but one must keep in mind that this phrase
does not mean for us anything more than accept­
ance of the new framework, i. e. , of the new linguis­
tic forms. Above all, it must not be interpreted as
referring to an assumption, belief, or assertion of
"the reality of the entities. " There is no such
assertion. An alleged statement of the reality of
the system of entities is a pseudo-statement with­
out cognitive content. To be sure, we have to face
at this point an important question; but it is a
practical, not a theoretical question; it is the ques­
tion of whether or not to accept the new linguistic
forms. The acceptance cannot be judged as being
either true or false because it is not an assertion. It
can only be judged as being more or less expedient,
fruitful, conducive to the aim for which the lan­
guage is intended. Judgments of this kind supply
the motivation for the decision of accepting or
rejecting the kind of entities. 4
Thus it is clear that the acceptance of a linguistic
framework must not be regarded as implying a
metaphysical doctrine concerning the reality of
the entities in question. It seems to me due to a
neglect of this important distinction that some
contemporary nominalists label the admission of
variables of abstract types as "Platonism. "s This
is, to say the least, an extremely misleading
terminology. It leads to the absurd consequence
that the position of everybody who accepts the
language of physics with its real number variables
(as a language of communication, not merely as a
calculus) would be called Platonistic, even ifhe is a
strict empiricist who rejects Platonic metaphysics.
A brief historical remark may here be inserted.
The noncognitive character of the questions which
we have called here external questions was recog­
nized and emphasized already by the Vienna Circle
under the leadership of Moritz Schlick, the group
from which the movement of logical empiricism
originated. Influenced by ideas of Ludwig Witt­
genstein, the Circle rejected both the thesis of the
reality of the external world and the thesis of its
irreality as pseudo-statements; 6 the same was the
case for both the thesis of the reality of universals
(abstract entities, in our present terminology) and
the nominalistic thesis that they are not real and
that their alleged names are not names of anything
but merely flatus vocis. (It is obvious that the appar­
ent negation of a pseudo-statement must also be a
pseudo-statement. ) It is therefore not correct to
classify the members of the Vienna Circle as
nominalists, as is sometimes done. However, if we
look at the basic anti-metaphysical and pro-scien­
tific attitude of most nominalists (and the same
holds for many materialists and realists in the mod­
ern sense), disregarding their occasional pseudo­
theoretical formulations, then it is, of course, true
to say that the Vienna Circle was much closer to
those philosophers than to their opponents.
4 Abstract Entities in Semantics
The problem of the legitimacy and the status of
abstract entities has recently again led to contro­
versial discussions in connection with semantics. In
a semantical meaning analysis certain expressions
in a language are often said to designate (or name or
denote or signify or refer to) certain extra-linguistic
entities. 7 As long as physical things or events (e. g. ,
Chicago or Caesar's death) are taken as designata
(entities designated), no serious doubts arise. But
strong objections have been raised, especially by
some empiricists, against abstract entities as desig­
nata, e. g. , against seman tical statements of the fol­
lowing kind:
(I) "The word 'red' designates a property of
things. "
(2) "The word 'color' designates a property of
properties of things. "
(3) "The word 'five' designates a number. "
(4) "The word 'odd' designates a property of
numbers. "
(5) "The sentence 'Chicago is large' designates a
proposition. " \nThose who criticize these statements do not, of
course, reject the use of the expressions in ques­
tion, like "red" or "five"; nor would they deny that
these expressions are meaningful. But to be mean­
ingful, they would say, is not the same as having a
meaning in the sense of an entity designated. They
reject the belief, which they regard as implicitly
presupposed by those seman tical statements, that
to each expression of the types in question (adject­
ives like "red, " numerals like "five, " etc. ) there is a
particular real entity to which the expression stands
in the relation of designation. This belief is rejected
as incompatible with the basic principles of empiri­
cism or of scientific thinking. Derogatory labels
like "Platonic realism, " "hypostatization, " or
"'Fido'-Fido principle" are attached to it. The
latter is the name given by Gilbert Ryle to the
criticized belief, which, in his view, arises by a
naIve inference of analogy: just as there is an entity
well known to me, viz. , my dog Fido, which is
designated by the name "Fido, " thus there must
be for every meaningful expression a particular
entity to which it stands in the relation of designa­
tion or naming, i. e. , the relation exemplified by
"Fido"-Fido. 8 The belief criticized is thus a case
ofhypostatization, i. e. , of treating as names expres­
sions which are not names. While "Fido" is a
name, expressions like "red, " "five, " etc. are said
not to be names, not to designate anything.
Our previous discussion concerning the accept­
ance of frameworks enables us now to clarify the
situation with respect to abstract entities as desig­
nata. Let us take as an example the statement:
(a) "'Five' designates a number. "
The formulation of this statement presupposes
that our language L contains the forms of ex­
pressions which we have called the framework
of numbers, in particular, numerical variables
and the general term "number. " If L contains
these forms, the following is an analytic statement
in L:
(b) "Five is a number. "
Further, to make the statement (a) possible, L
must contain an expression like "designates" or "is
a name of" for the seman tical relation of desig­
nation. If suitable rules for this term are laid down,
the following is likewise analytic:
(c) "'Five' designates five. "
Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology
(Generally speaking, any expression of the form
"'. .. ' designates. .. " is an analytic statement pro-
vided the term ". .. " is a constant in an accepted
framework. If the latter condition is not fulfilled,
the expression is not a statement. ) Since (a) follows
from (c) and (b), (a) is likewise analytic.
Thus it is clear that if someone accepts the
framework of numbers, then he must acknowledge
(c) and (b) and hence (a) as true statements. Gen­
erally speaking, if someone accepts a framework for
a certain kind of entities, then he is bound to admit
the entities as possible designata. Thus the ques­
tion of the admissibility of entities of a certain type
or of abstract entities in general as designata is
reduced to the question of the acceptability of the
linguistic framework for those entities. Both the
nominalistic critics, who refuse the status of desig­
nators or names to expressions like "red, " "five, "
etc. , because they deny the existence of abstract
entities, and the skeptics, who express doubts con­
cerning the existence and demand evidence for it,
treat the question of existence as a theoretical ques­
tion. They do, of course, not mean the internal
question; the affirmative answer to this question is
analytic and trivial and too obvious for doubt or
denial, as we have seen. Their doubts refer rather
to the system of entities itself; hence they mean the
external question. They believe that only after
making sure that there really is a system of entities
of the kind in question are we justified in accepting
the framework by incorporating the linguistic
forms into our language. However, we have seen
that the external question is not a theoretical ques­
tion but rather the practical question whether or
not to accept those linguistic forms. This accep­
tance is not in need of a theoretical justification
(except with respect to expediency and fruitful­
ness), because it does not imply a belief or asser­
tion. Ryle says that the "Fido"-Fido principle is "a
grotesque theory. " Grotesque or not, Ryle is wrong
in calling it a theory. It is rather the practical
decision to accept certain frameworks. Maybe
Ryle is historically right with respect to those
whom he mentions as previous representatives of
the principle, viz. , John Stuart Mill, Frege, and
Russell. If these philosophers regarded the ac­
ceptance of a system of entities as a theory, an
assertion, they were victims of the same old, meta­
physical confusion. But it is certainly wrong to
regard my seman tical method as involving a belief
in the reality of abstract entities, since I reject
a thesis of this kind as a metaphysical pseudo­
statement. \nRudolf Carnap
The critics of the use of abstract entities In
semantics overlook the fundamental difference
between the acceptance of a system of entities and
an internal assertion, e. g. , an assertion that there
are elephants or electrons or prime numbers
greater than a million. Whoever makes an internal
assertion is certainly obliged to justify it by provid­
ing evidence, empirical evidence in the case of
electrons, logical proof in the case of the prime
numbers. The demand for a theoretical justifica­
tion, correct in the case of internal assertions, is
sometimes wrongly applied to the acceptance of a
system of entities. Thus, for example, Ernest Nagel
asks for "evidence relevant for affirming with war­
rant that there are such entities as infinitesimals or
propositions. ,, 9 He characterizes the evidence
required in these cases - in distinction to the
empirical evidence in the case of electrons - as
"in the broad sense logical and dialectical. " Beyond
this no hint is given as to what might be regarded
as relevant evidence. Some nominalists regard
the acceptance of abstract entities as a kind of
superstition or myth, populating the world with
fictitious or at least dubious entities, analogous
to the belief in centaurs or demons. This shows
again the confusion mentioned, because a super­
stition or myth is a false (or dubious) internal
statement.
Let us take as example the natural numbers as
cardinal numbers, i. e. , in contexts like "Here are
three books. " The linguistic forms of the frame­
work of numbers, including variables and the gen­
eral term "number, " are generally used in our
common language of communication; and it is
easy to formulate explicit rules for their use.
Thus the logical characteristics of this framework
are sufficiently clear (while many internal ques­
tions, i. e. , arithmetical questions, are, of course,
still open). In spite of this, the controversy con­
cerning the external question of the ontological
reality of the system of numbers continues. Sup­
pose that one philosopher says: "I believe that there
are numbers as real entities. This gives me the right
to use the linguistic forms of the numerical frame­
work and to make semantical statements about
numbers as designata of numerals. " His nomina­
listic opponent replies: "You are wrong; there are
no numbers. The numerals may still be used as
meaningful expressions. But they are not names,
there are no entities designated by them. Therefore
the word 'number' and numerical variables must
not be used (unless a way were found to introduce
them as merely abbreviating devices, a way of
translating them into the nominalistic thing lan­
guage). " I cannot think of any possible evidence
that would be regarded as relevant by both philo­
sophers, and therefore, if actually found, would
decide the controversy or at least make one of the
opposite theses more probable than the other. (To
construe the numbers as classes or properties of the
second level, according to the Frege-Russell
method, does, of course, not solve the controversy,
because the first philosopher would affirm and the
second deny the existence of the system of classes
or properties of the second level. ) Therefore I feel
compelled to regard the external question as a
pseudo-question, until both parties to the contro­
versy offer a common interpretation of the question
as a cognitive question; this would involve an indi­
cation of possible evidence regarded as relevant by
both sides.
There is a particular kind of misinterpretation of
the acceptance of abstract entities in various fields
of science and in semantics that needs to be cleared
up. Certain early British empiricists (e. g. , Berkeley
and Hume) denied the existence of abstract entities
on the ground that immediate experience presents
us only with particulars, not with universals, e. g. ,
with this red patch, but not with Redness or Color­
in-General; with this scalene triangle, but not with
Scalene Triangularity or Triangularity-in-Gen­
eral. Only entities belonging to a type of which
examples were to be found within immediate
experience could be accepted as ultimate constitu­
ents of reality. Thus, according to this way of
thinking, the existence of abstract entities could
be asserted only if one could show either that
some abstract entities fall within the given, or that
abstract entities can be defined in terms of the
types of entity which are given. Since these empiri­
cists found no abstract entities within the realm of
sense-data, they either denied their existence, or
else made a futile attempt to define universals in
terms of particulars. Some contemporary philo­
sophers, especially English philosophers following
Bertrand Russell, think in basically similar terms.
They emphasize a distinction between the data
(that which is immediately given in consciousness,
e. g. , sense-data, immediately past experiences,
etc. ) and the constructs based on the data. Exist­
ence or reality is ascribed only to the data; the
constructs are not real entities; the corresponding
linguistic expressions are merely ways of speech
not actually designating anything (reminiscent of
the nominalists' flatus vocis). We shall not criticize
here this general conception. (As far as it is a \nprinciple of accepting certain entitles and not
accepting others, leaving aside any ontological,
phenomenalistic, and nominalistic pseudo-state­
ments, there cannot be any theoretical objection
to it. ) But if this conception leads to the view that
other philosophers or scientists who accept abstract
entities thereby assert or imply their occurrence as
immediate data, then such a view must be rejected
as a misinterpretation. References to space-time
points, the electromagnetic field, or electrons in
physics, to real or complex numbers and their
functions in mathematics, to the excitatory poten­
tial or unconscious complexes in psychology, to an
inflationary trend in economics, and the like, do
not imply the assertion that entities of these kinds
occur as immediate data. And the same holds for
references to abstract entities as designata in
semantics. Some of the criticisms by English phi­
losophers against such references give the impres­
sion that, probably due to the misinterpretaion just
indicated, they accuse the semanticist not so much
of bad metaphysics (as some nominalists would do)
but of bad psychology. The fact that they regard a
seman tical method involving abstract entities not
merely as doubtful and perhaps wrong, but as
manifestly absurd, preposterous and grotesque,
and that they show a deep horror and indignation
against this method, is perhaps to be explained by a
misinterpretation of the kind described. In fact, of
course, the semanticist does not in the least assert
or imply that the abstract entities to which he refers
can be experienced as immediately given either by
sensation or by a kind of rational intuition. An
assertion of this kind would indeed be very dubious
psychology. The psychological question as to
which kinds of entities do and which do not occur
as immediate data is entirely irrelevant for seman­
tics, just as it is for physics, mathematics, econom­
ics, etc. , with respect to the examples mentioned
above. 10
5 Conclusion
For those who want to develop or use semantical
methods, the decisive question is not the alleged
ontological question of the existence of abstract
entities but rather the question whether the use of
abstract linguistic forms or, in technical terms, the
use of variables beyond those for things (or phe-
Empiricism, Semantics, and Ontology
nomenal data) is expedient and fruitful for the
purposes for which semantical analyses are made,
viz. , the analysis, interpretation, clarification, or
construction of languages of communication, espe­
cially languages of science. This question is here
neither decided nor even discussed. It is not a
question simply of yes or no, but a matter of
degree. Among those philosophers who have car­
ried out seman tical analyses and thought about
suitable tools for this work, beginning with Plato
and Aristotle and, in a more technical way on the
basis of modern logic, with C. S. Peirce and Frege,
a great majority accepted abstract entities. This
does, of course, not prove the case. After all,
semantics in the technical sense is still in the initial
phases of its development, and we must be pre­
pared for possible fundamental changes in meth­
ods. Let us therefore admit that the nominalistic
critics may possibly be right. But if so, they will
have to offer better arguments than they have so
far. Appeal to ontological insight will not carry
much weight. The critics will have to show that it
is possible to construct a seman tical method which
avoids all references to abstract entities and
achieves by simpler means essentially the same
results as the other methods.
The acceptance or rejection of abstract linguistic
forms, just as the acceptance or rejection of any
other linguistic forms in any branch of science, will
finally be decided by their efficiency as instru­
ments, the ratio of the results achieved to the
amount and complexity of the efforts required.
To decree dogmatic prohibitions of certain linguis­
tic forms instead of testing them by their success or
failure in practical use, is worse than futile; it is
positively harmful because it may obstruct scienti­
fic progress. The history of science shows exam pies
of such prohibitions based on prejudices deriving
from religious, mythological, metaphysical, or
other irrational sources, which slowed up the
developments for shorter or longer periods of
time. Let us learn from the lessons of history. Let
us grant to those who work in any special field of
investigation the freedom to use any form of
expression which seems useful to them; the work
in the field will sooner or later lead to the elimina­
tion of those forms which have no useful function.
Let us be cautious in making assertions and critical in
examining them, but tolerant in permitting linguistic
forms. \nRudolf Carnap
Notes
The terms "sentence" and "statement" are here used
synonymously for declarative (indicative, proposi­
tional) sentences.
2 In my book Meaning and Necessity (Chicago: Univer­
sity of Chicago Press, 1947) I have developed a seman­
tical method which takes propositions as entities
designated by sentences (more specifically, as inten­
sions of sentences). In order to facilitate the under­
standing of the systematic development, I added some
informal, extra-systematic explanations concerning
the nature of propositions. I said that the term "pro­
position" "is used neither for a linguistic expression
nor for a subjective, mental occurrence, but rather for
something objective that mayor may not be exempli­
fied in nature. .. . We apply the term 'proposition' to
any entities of a certain logical type, namely, those
that may be expressed by (declarative) sentences in a
language" (p. 27). After some more detailed discus­
sions concerning the relation between propositions
and facts, and the nature of false propositions, I
added: "It has been the purpose of the preceding
remarks to facilitate the understanding of our concep­
tion of propositions. If, however, a reader should find
these explanations more puzzling than clarifying, or
even unacceptable, he may disregard them" (p. 31)
(that is, disregard these extra-systematic explanations,
not the whole theory of the propositions as intensions
of sentences, as one reviewer understood). In spite of
this warning, it seems that some of those readers who
were puzzled by the explanations, did not disregard
them but thought that by raising objections against
them they could refute the theory. This is analogous
to the procedure of some laymen who by (correctly)
criticizing the ether picture or other visualizations of
physical theories, thought they had refuted those the­
ories. Perhaps the discussions in the present paper
will help in clarifying the role of the system of lin­
guistic rules for the introduction of a framework for
entities on the one hand, and that of extra-systematic
explanations concerning the nature of the entities on
the other.
3 W. V. Quine was the first to recognize the importance
of the introduction of variables as indicating the
acceptance of entities. "The ontology to which one's
use of language commits him comprises simply the
objects that he treats as falling. .. within the range of
values of his variables" (W. V. Quine, "Notes on
existence and necessity, " Journal of Philosophy 40
(1943), pp. 113~27, at p. 118; compare also his "Des­
ignation and existence, " Journal of Philosophy 36
(1939), pp. 702~9, and "On universals, " Journal of
Symbolic Logic 12 (1947), pp. 74-84.
4 For a closely related point of view on these questions
see the detailed discussions in Herbert Feigl, "Exist­
ential hypotheses, " Philosophy of Science 17 (1950),
pp. 35~62.
Paul Bernays, "Sur Ie platonisme dans les mathema­
tiques, " L 'Enseignement math. 34 (1935), pp. 52~69.
W. V. Quine, see previous note and a recent paper
"On what there is, " this volume, ch. I, Quine does
not acknowledge the distinction which I emphasize
above, because according to his general conception
there are no sharp boundary lines between logical
and factual truth, between questions of meaning and
questions offact, between the acceptance of a language
structure and the acceptance of an assertion formu­
lated in the language. This conception, which seems
to deviate considerably from customary ways of think­
ing, will be explained in his article "Semantics and
abstract objects, " Proceedings of the American Academy
of Arts and Sciences 80 (1951), pp. 90-6. When Quine
in the above article classifies my logicistic conception
of mathematics (derived from Frege and Russell) as
"platonic realism" (p. 9), this is meant (according to a
personal communication from him) not as ascribing to
me agreement with Plato's metaphysical doctrine of
universals, but merely as referring to the fact that I
accept a language of mathematics containing variables
of higher levels. With respect to the basic attitude to
take in choosing a language form (an "ontology" in
Quine's terminology, which seems to me misleading),
there appears now to be agreement between us: "the
obvious counsel is tolerance and an experimental
spirit" (ibid. , p. 12).
6 See Rudolf Carnap, Scheinprobleme in der Philo­
sophie; das Fremdpsychische und der Realismusstreit
(Berlin, 1928); Moritz Schlick, Positivismu. 1 und
Realismus, repro in Gesammelte AU{siitze (Vienna:
1938).
7 See Rudolf Carnap, Introduction to Semantics (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1942); idem,
Meaning and Necessity. The distinction I have drawn
in the latter book between the method of the name­
relation and the method of intension and extension is
not essential for our present discussion. The term
"designation" is used in the present article in a neu­
tral way; it may be understood as referring to the
name-relation or to the intension-relation or to the
extension-relation or to any similar relations used in
other seman tical methods.
8 Gilbert Ryle, "Meaning and necessity, " Philosophy 24
(1949), pp. 69~76.
9 Ernest Nagel, review ofRudolfCarnap, Meaning and
Necessizy, 1st edn, Journal of Philosophy 45 (1948), pp.
467~72.
10 Wilfrid Sellars, "Acquaintance and description
again, " Journal of Philosophy 46 (1949), pp. 496~504,
at pp. 502 f. analyzes clearly the roots of the
mistake "of taking the designation relation of seman­
tic theory to be a reconstruction of being present to an
experience. " \nBertrand Russell
General Propositions and Existence
I am going to speak today about general proposi­
tions and existence. The two subjects really belong
together; they are the same topic, although it might
not have seemed so at the first glance. The propo­
sitions and facts that I have been talking about
hitherto have all been such as involved only per­
fectly definite particulars, or relations, or qualities,
or things of that sort, never involved the sort of
indefinite things one alludes to by such words as
'all', 'some', 'a', 'any', and it is propositions and
facts of that sort that I am coming on to today.
Really all the propositions of the sort that I mean
to talk of today collect themselves into two groups­
the first that are about 'all', and the second that are
about 'some'. These two sorts belong together;
they are each other's negations. If you say, for
instance, 'All men are mortal', that is the negative
of 'Some men are not mortal'. In regard to general
propositions, the distinction of affirmative and
negative is arbitrary. Whether you are going to
regard the propositions about 'all' as the affirmative
ones and the propositions about 'some' as the neg­
ative ones, or vice versa, is purely a matter of taste.
For example, if! say 'I met no one as I came along',
that, on the face of it, you would think is a negative
'Existence and description' is a new title for lectures V
and VI of 'The Philosophy of Logical Atomism', first pub­
lished in The Monist (1918), and reprinted with permis­
sion of the author's estate.
proposition. Of course, that is really a proposition
about 'all', i. e. , 'All men are among those whom I
did not meet'. If, on the other hand, I say 'I met a
man as I came along', that would strike you as
affirmative, whereas it is the negative of 'All men
are among those I did not meet as I came along'.
If you consider such propositions as 'All men
are mortal' and 'Some men are not mortal',
you might say it was more natural to take the
general propositions as the affirmative and the
existence-propositions as the negative, but, simply
because it is quite arbitrary which one is to choose,
it is better to forget these words and to speak only
of general propositions and propositions asserting
existence. All general propositions deny the exist­
ence of something or other. If you say 'All men are
mortal', that denies the existence of an immortal
man, and so on.
I want to say emphatically that general proposi­
tions are to be interpreted as not involving exist­
ence. When I say, for instance, 'All Greeks are
men', I do not want you to suppose that that
implies that there are Greeks. It is to be considered
emphatically as not implying that. That would
have to be added as a separate proposition. If you
want to interpret it in that sense, you will have to
add the further statement 'and there are Greeks'.
That is for purposes of practical convenience. If
you include the fact that there are Greeks, you are
rolling two propositions into one, and it causes
unnecessary confusion in your logic, because the
sorts of propositions that you want are those that do
assert the existence of something and general \nBertrand Russell
propositions which do not assert existence. If it
happened that there were no Greeks, both the
proposition that 'All Greeks are men' and the pro­
position that 'No Greeks are men' would be true.
The proposition 'No Greeks are men' is, of course,
the proposition 'All Greeks are not-men'. Both
propositions will be true simultaneously if it hap­
pens that there are no Greeks. All statements about
all the members of a class that has no members are
true, because the contradictory of any general
statement does assert existence and is therefore
false in this case. This notion, of course, of general
propositions not involving existence is one which is
not in the traditional doctrine of the syllogism. In
the traditional doctrine of the syllogism, it was
assumed that when you have such a statement as
'All Greeks are men', that implies that there are
Greeks, and this produced fallacies. For instance,
'All chimeras are animals, and all chimeras breathe
flame, therefore some animals breathe flame. ' This
is a syllogism in Darapti, but that mood of the
syllogism is fallacious, as this instance shows.
That was a point, by the way, which had a certain
historical interest, because it impeded Leibniz in
his attempts to construct a mathematical logic. He
was always engaged in trying to construct such a
mathematical logic as we have now, or rather such a
one as Boole constructed, and he was always failing
because of his respect for Aristotle. Whenever he
invented a really good system, as he did several
times, it always brought out that such moods as
Darapti are fallacious. If you say 'All A is B and all
A is C, therefore some B is C' - if you say this, you
incur a fallacy, but he could not bring himself to
believe that it was fallacious, so he began again.
That shows you that you should not have too much
respect for distinguished men. 1
Now when you come to ask what really is
asserted in a general proposition, such as 'All
Greeks are men' for instance, you find that what
is asserted is the truth of all values of what I call a
propositional function. A propositional function is
simply any expression containing an undetermined
constituent, or several undetermined constituents, and
becoming a proposition as soon as the undetermined
constituents are determined. If! say 'x is a man' or 'n
is a number', that is a propositional function; so is
any formula of algebra, say (x + y)(x - y) =
x2 - y2. A propositional function is nothing, but,
like most of the things one wants to talk about in
logic, it does not lose its importance through that
fact. The only thing really that you can do with a
propositional function is to assert either that it is
always true, or that it is sometimes true, or that it is
never true. If you take:
'If x is a man, x is mortal',
that is always true (just as much when x is not a
man as when x is a man); if you take:
'x is a man',
that is sometimes true; if you take:
'x is a unicorn',
that is never true.
One may call a propositional function
necessa~y, when it is always true;
possible, when it is sometimes true;
impossible, when it is never true.
Much false philosophy has arisen out of con­
fusing propositional functions and propositions.
There is a great deal in ordinary traditional philo­
sophy which consists simply in attributing to pro­
positions the predicates which only apply to
propositional functions, and, still worse, sometimes
in attributing to individuals predicates which
merely apply to propositional functions. This case
of necessary, possible, impossible, is a case in point. In
all traditional philosophy there comes a heading of
'modality', which discusses necessary, possible, and
impossible as properties of propositions, whereas in
fact they are properties of propositional functions.
Propositions are only true or false.
If you take 'x is x', that is a propositional func­
tion which is true whatever 'x' may be, i. e. , a
necessary propositional function. If you take 'x is
a man', that is a possible one. If you take 'x is a
unicorn', that is an impossible one.
Propositions can only be true or false, but pro­
positional functions have these three possibilities.
It is important, I think, to realize that the whole
doctrine of modality only applies to propositional
functions, not to propositions.
Propositional functions are involved in ordinary
language in a great many cases where one does not
usually realize them. In such a statement as 'I met a
man', you can understand my statement perfectly
well without knowing whom I met, and the actual
person is not a constituent of the proposition. You
are really asserting there that a certain proposi­
tional function is sometimes true, namely the pro­
positional function 'I met x and x is human'. There \nis at least one value of x for which that is true, and
that therefore is a possible propositional function.
Whenever you get such words as 'a', 'some', 'all',
'every', it is always a mark of the presence of a
propositional function, so that these things are
not, so to speak, remote or recondite: they are
obvious and familiar.
A propositional function comes in again in such
a statement as 'Socrates is mortal', because 'to be
mortal' means 'to die at some time or other'. You
mean there is a time at which Socrates dies, and
that again involves a propositional function,
namely, that 't is a time, and Socrates dies at t' is
possible. If you say 'Socrates is immortal', that also
will involve a propositional function. That means
that 'If t is any time whatever, Socrates is alive at
time t', if we take immortality as involving exist­
ence throughout the whole of the past as well as
throughout the whole of the future. But if we take
immortality as only involving existence throughout
the whole of the future, the interpretation of
'Socrates is immortal' becomes more complete,
viz. , 'There is a time t, such that if t' is any time
later than t, Socrates is alive at t". Thus when you
come to write out properly what one means by a
great many ordinary statements, it turns out a little
complicated. 'Socrates is mortal' and 'Socrates is
immortal' are not each other's contradictories,
because they both imply that Socrates exists in
time, otherwise he would not be either mortal or
immortal. One says, 'There is a time at which he
dies', and the other says, 'Whatever time you take,
he is alive at that time', whereas the contradictory
of 'Socrates is mortal' would be true ifthere is not a
time at which he lives.
An undetermined constituent in a propositional
function is called a variable.
Existence
When you take any propositional function and
assert of it that it is possible, that it is sometimes
true, that gives you the fundamental meaning of
'existence'. You may express it by saying that there
is at least one value of x for which that proposi­
tional function is true. Take 'x is a man'; there is at
least one value of x for which this is true. That is
what one means by saying that 'There are men', or
that 'Men exist'. Existence is essentially a property
of a propositional function. It means that that pro­
positional function is true in at least one instance. If
you say 'There are unicorns', that will mean that
'There is an x, such that x is a unicorn'. That is
Existence and Description
written in phrasing which is unduly approximated
to ordinary language, but the proper way to put it
would be '(x is a unicorn) is possible'. We have got
to have some idea that we do not define, and one
takes the idea of 'always true', or of 'sometimes
true', as one's undefined idea in this matter, and
then you can define the other one as the negative of
that. In some ways it is better to take them both as
undefined, for reasons which I shall not go into at
present. It will be out of this notion of sometimes,
which is the same as the notion of possible, that we
get the notion of existence. To say that unicorns
exist is simply to say that '(x is a unicorn) is
possible'.
It is perfectly clear that when you say 'Unicorns
exist', you are not saying anything that would apply
to any unicorns there might happen to be, because
as a matter of fact there are not any, and therefore if
what you say had any application to the actual
individuals, it could not possibly be significant
unless it were true. You can consider the proposi­
tion 'Unicorns exist' and can see that it is false. It is
not nonsense. Of course, if the proposition went
through the general conception of the unicorn to
the individual, it could not be even significant
unless there were unicorns. Therefore when you
say 'Unicorns exist', you are not saying anything
about any individual things, and the same applies
when you say 'Men exist'. If you say that 'Men
exist, and Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates
exists', that is exactly the same sort of fallacy as it
would be if you said 'Men are numerous, Socrates
is a man, therefore Socrates is numerous', because
existence is a predicate of a propositional function,
or derivatively of a class. When you say of a pro­
positional function that it is numerous, you will
mean that there are several values of x that will
satisfy it, that there are more than one; or, if you
like to take 'numerous' in a larger sense, more than
ten, more than twenty, or whatever number you
think fitting. If x, y, and z all satisfy a propositional
function, you may say that that proposition is
numerous, but x, y, and z severally are not numer­
ous. Exactly the same applies to existence, that is to
say that the actual things that there are in the world
do not exist, or, at least, that is putting it too
strongly, because that is utter nonsense. To say
that they do not exist is strictly nonsense, but to
say that they do exist is also strictly nonsense.
It is of propositional functions that you can
assert or deny existence. You must not run away
with the idea that this entails consequences that it
does not entail. If! say 'The things that there are in \nBertrand Russell
the world exist', that is a perfectly correct state­
ment, because 1 am there saying something about a
certain class of things; 1 say it in the same sense in
which 1 say 'Men exist'. But 1 must not go on to
'This is a thing in the world, and therefore this
exists'. It is there the falIacy comes in, and it is
simply, as you see, a falIacy of transferring to the
individual that satisfies a propositional function a
predicate which only applies to a propositional
function. You can see this in various ways. For
instance, you sometimes know the truth of an exist­
ence-proposition without knowing any instance of
it. You know that there are people in Timbuctoo,
but 1 doubt if any of you could give me an instance
of one. Therefore you clearly can know existence­
propositions without knowing any individual that
makes them true. Existence-propositions do not
say anything about the actual individual but only
about the class or function.
It is exceedingly difficult to make this point clear
as long as one adheres to ordinary language,
because ordinary language is rooted in a certain
feeling about logic, a certain feeling that our pri­
meval ancestors had, and as long as you keep to
ordinary language you find it very difficult to get
away from the bias which is imposed upon you by
language. When 1 say, e. g. , 'There is an x such that
x is a man', that is not the sort of phrase one would
like to use. 'There is an x' is meaningless. What is
'an x' anyhow? There is not such a thing. The only
way you can realIy state it correctly is by inventing
a new language ad hoc, and making the statement
apply straight off to 'x is a man', as when one says
'(x is a man) is possible', or invent a special symbol
for the statement that 'x is a man' is sometimes
true.
1 have dwelt on this point because it realIy is of
very fundamental importance. 1 shalI come back to
existence in my next lecture: existence as it applies
to descriptions, which is a slightly more complic­
ated case than 1 am discussing here. 1 think an
almost unbelievable amount of false philosophy
has arisen through not realizing what 'existence'
means.
As 1 was saying a moment ago, a propositional
function in itself is nothing: it is merely a schema.
Therefore in the inventory of the world, which is
what 1 am trying to get at, one comes to the ques­
tion: What is there really in the world that corre­
sponds with these things? Of course, it is clear that
we have general propositions, in the same sense in
which we have atomic propositions. For the
moment 1 will include existence-propositions with
general propositions. We have such propositions as
'All men are mortal' and 'Some men are Greeks'.
But you have not only such propositions; you have
also such facts, and that, of course, is where you get
back to the inventory of the world: that, in addition
to particular facts, which 1 have been talking about
in previous lectures, there are also general facts and
existence-facts; that is to say, there are not merely
propositions of that sort but also facts of that sort.
That is rather an important point to realize. You
cannot ever arrive at a general fact by inference
from particular facts, however numerous. The old
plan of complete induction, which used to occur in
books, which was always supposed to be quite safe
and easy as opposed to ordinary induction, that
plan of complete induction, unless it is accompan­
ied by at least one general proposition, will not
yield you the result that you want. Suppose, for
example, that you wish to prove in that way that
'All men are mortal', you are supposed to proceed
by complete induction, and say 'A is a man that is
mortal', 'B is a man that is mortal', 'C is a man that
is mortal', and so on until you finish. You will not
be able, in that way, to arrive at the proposition.
'All men are mortal' unless you know when you
have finished. That is to say that, in order to arrive
by this road at the general proposition 'All men are
mortal', you must already have the general propo­
sition 'All men are among those 1 have enumer­
ated'. You never can arrive at a general proposition
by inference from particular propositions alone.
You will always have to have at least one general
proposition in your premisses. That illustrates, 1
think, various points. One, which is epistemologi­
cal, is that if there is, as there seems to be, know­
ledge of general propositions (I mean by that,
knowledge of general propositions which is not
obtained by inference), because if you can never
infer a general proposition except from premisses
of which one at least is general, it is clear that you
can never have knowledge of such propositions by
inference unless there is knowledge of some general
propositions which is not by inference. 1 think that
the sort of way such knowledge - or rather the
belief that we have such knowledge - comes into
ordinary life is probably very odd. 1 mean to say
that we do habitually assume general propositions
which are exceedingly doubtful; as, for instance,
one might, if one were counting up the people in
this room, assume that one could see all of them,
which is a general proposition, and very doubtful as
there may be people under the tables. But, apart
from that sort of thing, you do have in any empiri-\ncal verification of general propositions some kind of
assumption that amounts to this, that what you do
not see is not there. Of course, you would not put it
so strongly as that, but you would assume that,
with certain limitations and certain qualifications,
if a thing does not appear to your senses, it is not
there. That is a general proposition, and it is only
through such propositions that you arrive at the
ordinary empirical results that one obtains in
ordinary ways. If you take a census of the country,
for instance, you assume that the people you do not
see are not there, provided you search properly and
carefully, otherwise your census might be wrong. It
is some assumption of that sort which would
underline what seems purely empirical. You
could not prove empirically that what you do not
perceive is not there, because an empirical proof
would consist in perceiving, and by hypothesis you
do not perceive it, so that any proposition of that
sort, if it is accepted, has to be accepted on its own
evidence. I only take that as an illustration. There
are many other illustrations one could take of the
sort of propositions that are commonly assumed,
many of them with very little justification.
I come now to a question which concerns logic
more nearly, namely, the reasons for supposing
that there are general facts as well as general pro­
positions. When we were discussing molecular pro­
positions I threw doubt upon the supposition that
there are molecular facts, but I do not think one can
doubt that there are general facts. It is perfectly
clear, I think, that when you have enumerated all
the atomic facts in the world, it is a further fact
about the world that those are all the atomic facts
there are about the world, and that is just as much
an objective fact about the world as any of them are.
It is clear, I think, that you must admit general facts
as distinct from and over and above particular facts.
The same thing applies to 'All men are mortal'.
When you have taken all the particular men that
there are, and found each one of them severally to
be mortal, it is definitely a new fact that all men are
mortal; how new a fact, appears from what I said a
moment ago, that it could not be inferred from the
mortality of the several men that there are in the
world. Of course, it is not so difficult to admit what
I might call existence-facts - such facts as 'There
are men', 'There are sheep', and so on. Those, I
think, you will readily admit as separate and dis­
tinct facts over and above the atomic facts I spoke
of before. Those facts have got to come into the
inventory of the world, and in that way proposi­
tional functions come in as involved in the study of
Existence and Description
general facts. I do not profess to know what the
right analysis of general facts is. It is an exceedingly
difficult question, and one which I should very
much like to see studied. I am sure that, although
the convenient technical treatment is by means of
propositional functions, that is not the whole ofthe
right analysis. Beyond that I cannot go.
There is one point about whether there are
molecular facts. I think I mentioned, when I was
saying that I did not think there were disjunctive
facts, that a certain difficulty does arise in regard to
general facts. Take 'All men are mortal'. That
means: , "x is a man" implies
"x is a mortal" whatever
x may be. '
You can see at once that it is a hypothetical propo­
sition. It does not imply that there are any men, nor
who are men, and who are not; it simply says that if
you have anything which is a man, that thing is
mortal. As Mr Bradley has pointed out in the
second chapter of his Principles of Logic, 'Trespas­
sers will be prosecuted' may be true even ifno one
trespasses, since it means merely that, if anyone
trespasses, he will be prosecuted. It comes down to
this that
'''x is a man" implies "x is a mortal" is always
true'
is a fact. It is perhaps a little difficult to see how
that can be true if one is going to say that
'''Socrates is a man" implies "Socrates is a mor­
tal'" is not itself a fact, which is what I suggested
when I was discussing disjunctive facts. I do not
feel sure that you could not get round that diffi­
culty. I only suggest it as a point which should be
considered when one is denying that there are
molecular facts, since, if it cannot be got round,
we shall have to admit molecular facts.
Now I want to come to the subject of completely
general propositions and propositional functions.
By those I mean propositions and propositional
functions that contain only variables and nothing
else at all. This covers the whole of logic. Every
logical proposition consists wholly and solely of
variables, though it is not true that every proposi­
tion consisting wholly and solely of variables is
logical. You can consider stages of generalizations
as, e. g. ,
'Socrates loves Plato' \nBertrand Russell
'x loves Plato'
'x lovesy'
'xRy. '
There you have been going through a process of
successive generalization. When you have got to
xRy, you have got a schema consisting only of
variables, containing no constants at all, the pure
schema of dual relations, and it is clear that any
proposition which expresses a dual relation can be
derived from xRy by assigning values to x and R
and y. So that that is, as you might say, the pure
form of all those propositions. I mean by the form
of a proposition that which you get when for every
single one of its constituents you substitute a vari­
able. If you want a different definition of the form
of a proposition, you might be inclined to define it
as the class of all those propositions that you can
obtain from a given one by substituting other con­
stituents for one or more of the constituents the
proposition contains. E. g. , in 'Socrates loves Plato',
you can substitute somebody else for Socrates,
somebody else for Plato, and some other verb for
'loves'. In that way there are a certain number of
propositions which you can derive from the propo­
sition 'Socrates loves Plato', by replacing the con­
stituents of that proposition by other constituents,
so that you have there a certain class of proposi­
tions, and those propositions all have a certain
form, and one can, if one likes, say that the form
they all have is the class consisting of all of them.
That is rather a provisional definition, because as a
matter of fact, the idea of form is more fundamental
than the idea of class. I should not suggest that as a
really good definition, but it will do provisionally to
explain the sort of thing one means by the form of a
proposition. The form of a proposition is that
which is in common between any two propositions
of which the one can be obtained from the other by
substituting other constituents for the original
ones. When you have got down to those formulas
that contain only variables, like xRy, you are on
the way to the sort of thing that you can assert in
logic.
To give an illustration, you know what I mean by
the domain of a relation: I mean all the terms that
have that relation to something. Suppose I say:
'xRy implies that x belongs to the domain of R',
that would be a proposition of logic and is one that
contains only variables. You might think it contains
such words as 'belong' and 'domain', but that is an
error. It is only the habit of using ordinary language
that makes those words appear. They are not really
there. That is a proposition of pure logic. It does
not mention any particular thing at all. This is to be
understood as being asserted whatever x and Rand
y may be. All the statements oflogic are of that sort.
It is not a very easy thing to see what are the
constituents of a logical proposition. When one
takes 'Socrates loves Plato', 'Socrates' is a consti­
tuent, 'loves' is a constituent, and 'Plato' is a con­
stituent. Then you turn 'Socrates' into x, 'loves'
into R, and 'Plato' into y. x and Rand yare
nothing, and they are not constituents, so it seems
as though all the propositions oflogic were entirely
devoid of constituents. I do not think that can quite
be true. But then the only other thing you can seem
to say is that the form is a constituent, that proposi­
tions of a certain form are always true: that may be
the right analysis, though I very much doubt
whether it is.
There is, however, just this to observe, viz. , that
the form of a proposition is never a constituent of
that proposition itself. If you assert that 'Socrates
loves Plato', the form of that proposition is the
form of the dual relation, but this is not a consti­
tuent of the proposition. If it were, you would have
to have that constituent related to the other con­
stituents. You will make the form much too sub­
stantial if you think of it as really one of the things
that have that form, so that the form of a proposi­
tion is certainly not a constituent of the proposition
itself. Nevertheless it may possibly be a constituent
of general statements about propositions that have
that form, so I think it is possible that logical pro­
positions might be interpreted as being about
forms.
I can only say, in conclusion, as regards the
constituents of logical propositions, that it is a
problem which is rather new. There has not been
much opportunity to consider it. I do not think any
literature exists at all which deals with it in any way
whatever, and it is an interesting problem.
I just want now to give you a few illustrations of
propositions which can be expressed in the lan­
guage of pure variables but are not propositions of
logic. Among the propositions that are propositions
of logic are included all the propositions of pure
mathematics, all of which cannot onl y be expressed
in logical terms but can also be deduced from the
premisses of logic, and therefore they are logical
propositions. Apart from them there are many that
can be expressed in logical terms, but cannot be
proved from logic, and are certainly not proposi­
tions that form part oflogic. Suppose you take such
a proposition as: 'There is at least one thing in the \nworld'. That is a proposition that you can express
in logical terms. It will mean, if you like, that the
propositional function 'x = x' is a possible one.
That is a proposition, therefore, that vou can
express in logical terms; but you cann~t know
from logic whether it is true or false. So far as
you do know it, you know it empirically, because
there might happen not to be a universe, and then it
would not be true. It is merely an accident, so to
speak, that there is a universe. The proposition that
there are exactly 30, 000 things in the world can also
be expressed in purely logical terms, and is cer­
tainly not a proposition of logic but an empirical
proposition (true or false), because a world contain­
ing more than 30, 000 things and a world containing
fewer than 30, 000 things are both possible, so that
if it happens that there are exactly 30, 000 things,
that is what one might call an accident and is not a
proposition of logic. There are again two proposi­
tions that one is used to in mathematical logic,
namely, the multiplicative axiom and the axiom of
infinity. These also can be expressed in logical
terms, but cannot be proved or disproved by
logic. In regard to the axiom of infinity, the
impossibility of logical proof or disproof may be
taken as certain, but in the case of the multiplica­
tive axiom, it is perhaps still open to some degree to
doubt. Everything that is a proposition oflogic has
got to be in some sense or other like a tautology. It
has got to be something that has some peculiar
quality, which I do not know how to define, that
belongs to logical propositions and not to others.
Examples of typical logical propositions are:
'If p implies q and q implies r, then p implies r. '
'If all a's are b's and all b's are c's, then all a's are
c's. '
'If all a's are b's, and x is an a, then x is a b. '
Those are propositions of logic. They have a cer­
tain peculiar quality which marks them out from
other propositions and enables us to know them
a priori. But what exactly that characteristic is, I am
not able to tell you. Although it is a necessary
characteristic of logical propositions that they
should consist solely of variables, i. e. , that they
should assert the universal truth, or the some­
times-truth, of a propositional function consisting
wholly of variables - although that is a necessary
characteristic, it is not a sufficient one. I am sorry
that I have had to leave so many problems
unsolved. I always have to make this apology, but
the world really is rather puzzling and I cannot
help it.
Existence and Description
Discussion
Question: Is there any word you would substitute
for 'existence' which would give existence to indi­
viduals? Are you applying the word 'existence' to
two ideas, or do you deny that there are two ideas?
Mr Russell: No, there is not an idea that will
apply to individuals. As regards the actual things
there are in the world, there is nothing at all you
can say about them that in any way corresponds to
this notion of existence. It is a sheer mistake to say
that there is anything analogous to existence that
you can say about them. You get into confusion
through language, because it is a perfectly correct
thing to say 'All the things in the world exist', and
it is so easy to pass from this to 'This exists because
it is a thing in the world'. There is no sort of point
in a predicate which could not conceivably be false.
I mean, it is perfectly clear that, if there were such a
thing as this existence of individuals that we talk of
it would be absolutely impossible for it not t~
apply, and that is the characteristic of a mistake.
2 Descriptions and Incomplete
Symbols
I am proposing to deal this time with the subject of
descriptions, and what I call 'incomplete symbols',
and the existence of described individuals. You will
remember that last time I dealt with the existence
of kinds of things, what you mean by saying 'There
are men' or 'There are Greeks' or phrases of that
sort, where you have an existence which may be
plural. I am going to deal today with an existence
which is asserted to be singular, such as 'The man
with the iron mask existed' or some phrase of that
sort, where you have some object described by the
phrase 'The so-and-so' in the singular, and I want
to discuss the analysis of propositions in which
phrases of that kind occur.
There are, of course, a great many propositions
very familiar in metaphysics which are of that sort:
'I exist' or 'God exists' or 'Homer existed', and
other such statements are always occurring in
metaphysical discussions, and are, I think, treated
in ordinary metaphysics in a way which embodies a
simple logical mistake that we shall be concerned
with today, the same sort of mistake that I spoke of
last week in connection with the existence of kinds
of things. One way of examining a proposition of
that sort is to ask yourself what would happen if
it were false. If you take such a proposition as \nBertrand Russell
'Romulus existed', probably most of us think that
Romulus did not exist. It is obviously a perfectly
significant statement, whether true or false, to say
that Romulus existed. If Romulus himself entered
into our statement, it would be plain that the state­
ment that he did not exist would be nonsense,
because you cannot have a constituent of a proposi­
tion which is nothing at all. Every constituent has
got to be there as one of the things in the world, and
therefore if Romulus himself entered into the pro­
positions that he existed or that he did not exist,
both these propositions could not only not be true,
but could not be even significant, unless he existed.
That is obviously not the case, and the first con­
clusion one draws is that, although it looks as if
Romulus were a constituent of that proposition,
that is really a mistake. Romulus does not occur
in the proposition 'Romulus did not exist'.
Suppose you try to make out what you do mean
by that proposition. You can take, say, all the
things that Livy has to say about Romulus, all the
properties he ascribes to him, including the only
one probably that most of us remember, namely,
the fact that he was called 'Romulus'. You can put
all this together, and make a propositional function
saying 'x has such-and-such properties', the prop­
erties being those you find enumerated in Livy.
There you have a propositional function, and
when you say that Romulus did not exist you are
simply saying that that propositional function is
never true, that it is impossible in the sense I was
explaining last time, i. e. , that there is no value of x
that makes it true. That reduces the non-existence
of Romulus to the sort of non-existence I spoke of
last time, where we had the non-existence of uni­
corns. But it is not a complete account of this kind of
existence or non-existence, because there is one
other way in which a described individual can fail
to exist, and that is where the description applies to
more than one person. You cannot, e. g. , speak of
'The inhabitant of London', not because there are
none, but because there are so many.
You see, therefore, that this proposition 'Romu­
lus existed' or 'Romulus did not exist' does intro­
duce a propositional function, because the name
'Romulus' is not really a name but a sort of trunc­
ated description. It stands for a person who did
such-and-such things, who killed Remus, and
founded Rome, and so on. It is short for that
description; if you like, it is short for 'the person
who was called "Romulus" '. If it were really a
name, the question of existence could not arise,
because a name has got to name something or it is
not a name, and if there is no such person as
Romulus, there cannot be a name for that person
who is not there, so that this single word 'Romulus'
is really a sort of truncated or telescoped descrip­
tion, and if you think of it as a name, you will get
into logical errors. When you realize that it is
a description, you realize therefore that any propo­
sition about Romulus really introduces the pro­
positional function embodying the description, as
(say) 'x was called "Romulus" '. That introduces
you at once to a propositional function, and when
you say 'Romulus did not exist', you mean that this
propositional function is not true for one value of x.
There are two sorts of descriptions, what one
may call 'ambiguous descriptions', when we speak
of 'a so-and-so', and what one may call 'definite
descriptions', when we speak of 'the so-and-so' (in
the singular). Instances are:
Ambiguous: A man, a dog, a pig, a Cabinet Minister.
Definite: The man with the iron mask.
The last person who came into this room.
The only Englishman who ever occupied
the Papal See.
The number of the inhabitants of
London.
The sum of 43 and 34.
(It is not necessary for a description that it should
describe an individual: it may describe a predicate
or a relation or anything else. )
It is phrases of that sort, definite descriptions,
that I want to talk about today. I do not want to talk
about ambiguous descriptions, as what there was to
say about them was said last time.
I want you to realize that the question whether a
phrase is a definite description turns only upon its
form, not upon the question whether there is a
definite individual so described. For instance, I
should call 'The inhabitant of London' a definite
description, although it does not in fact describe
any definite individual.
The first thing to realize about a definite
description is that it is not a name. We will take
'The author of Waverley'. That is a definite
description, and it is easy to see that it is not a
name. A name is a simple symbol (i. e. , a symbol
which does not have any parts that are symbols), a
simple symbol used to designate a certain particu­
lar or by extension an object which is not a parti­
cular but is treated for the moment as if it were, or
is falsely believed to be a particular, such as a
person. This sort of phrase, 'The author of Waver­
ley', is not a name because it is a complex symbol. It \ncontains parts which are symbols. It contains four
words, and the meanings of those four words are
already fixed, and they have fixed the meaning of
'The author of Waverley' in the only sense in which
that phrase does have any meaning. In that sense,
its meaning is already determinate, i. e. , there is
nothing arbitrary or conventional about the mean­
ing of that whole phrase, when the meanings of
'the', 'author', 'of, and 'Waverley' have already
been fixed. In that respect, it differs from 'Scott',
because when you have fixed the meaning of all the
other words in the language, you have done noth­
ing toward fixing the meaning of the name 'Scott'.
That is to say, if you understand the English lan­
guage, you would understand the meaning of the
phrase 'The author of Waverley' if you had never
heard it before, whereas you would not understand
the meaning of 'Scott' if you had never heard the
word before because to know the meaning of a
name is to know who it is applied to.
You sometimes find people speaking as if
descriptive phrases were names, and you will find
it suggested, e. g. , that such a proposition as 'Scott
is the author of Waverley' really asserts that 'Scott'
and the 'the author of Waverley' are two names for
the same person. That is an entire delusion; first of
all, because 'the author of Waverley' is not a name,
and, secondly, because, as you can perfectly well
see, if that were what is meant, the proposition
would be one like 'Scott is Sir Walter', and would
not depend upon any fact except that the person in
question was so called, because a name is what a
man is called. As a matter of fact, Scott was the
author of Waverley' at a time when no one called
him so, when no one knew whether he was or not,
and the fact that he was the author was a physical
fact, the fact that he sat down and wrote it with his
own hand, which does not have anything to do with
what he was called. It is in no way arbitrary. You
cannot settle by any choice of nomenclature
whether he is or is not to be the author of Waverley,
because in actual fact he chose to write it and you
cannot help yourself. That illustrates how 'the
author of Waverley' is quite a different thing from
a name. You can prove this point very clearly by
formal arguments. In 'Scott is the author of Waver­
ley' the 'is', of course, expresses identity, i. e. , the
entity whose name is Scott is identical with the
author of Waverley. But, when I say 'Scott is mor­
tal', this 'is' is the 'is' of predication, which is quite
different from the 'is' of identity. It is a mistake
to interpret 'Scott is mortal' as meaning 'Scott is
identical with one among mortals', because (among
Existence and Description
other reasons) you will not be able to say what
'mortals' are except by means of the propositional
function 'x is mortal', which brings back the 'is' of
predication. You cannot reduce the 'is' of predica­
tion to the other 'is'. But the 'is' in 'Scott is the
author of Waverley' is the 'is' of identity and not of
predication?
If you were to try to substitute for 'the author of
Waverley' in that proposition any name whatever,
say 'c', so that the proposition becomes 'Scott is c',
then if 'c' is a name for anybody who is not Scott,
that proposition would become false, while if, on
the other hand, 'c' is a name for Scott, then the
proposition will become simply a tautology. It is at
once obvious that if 'c' were 'Scott' itself, 'Scott is
Scott' is just a tautology. But if you take any other
name which is just a name for Scott, then if the
name is being used as a name and not as a descrip­
tion, the proposition will still be a tautology. For
the name itself is merely a means of pointing to the
thing, and does not occur in what you are asserting,
so that if one thing has two names, you make
exactly the same assertion whichever of the two
names you use, provided they are really names
and not truncated descriptions.
So there are only two alternatives. If 'c' is a
name, the proposition 'Scott is c' is either false or
tautologous. But the proposition 'Scott is the
author of Waverley' is neither, and therefore is
not the same as any proposition of the form 'Scott
is c', where 'c' is a name. That is another way of
illustrating the fact that a description is quite a
different thing from a name.
I should like to make clear what I was saying just
now, that if you substitute another name in place of
'Scott' which is also a name of the same individual,
say, 'Scott is Sir Walter', then 'Scott' and 'Sir
Walter' are being used as names and not as descrip­
tions, your proposition is strictly a tautology. If one
asserts 'Scott is Sir Walter', the way one would
mean it would be that one was using the names as
descriptions. One would mean that the person
called 'Scott' is the person called 'Sir Walter', and
'the person called "Scott" is a description, and so is
'the person called "Sir Walter". ' So that would not
be a tautology. It would mean that the person called
'Scott' is identical with the person called 'Sir Wal­
ter'. But if you are using both as names, the matter
is quite different. You must observe that the name
does not occur in that which you assert when you
use the name. The name is merely that which is a
means of expressing what it is you are trying to
assert, and when I say 'Scott wrote Waverley', the \nBertrand Russell
name 'Scott' does not occur in the thing I am
asserting. The thing I am asserting is about the
person, not about the name. So if I say 'Scott is
Sir Walter', using these two names as names,
neither 'Scott' nor 'Sir Walter' occurs in what I
am asserting, but only the person who has these
names, and thus what I am asserting is a pure
tautology.
It is rather important to realize this about the
two different uses of names or of any other sym­
bols: the one when you are talking about the symbol
and the other when you are using it as a symbol, as a
means of talking about something else. Normally, if
you talk about your dinner, you are not talking
about the word 'dinner' but about what you are
going to eat, and that is a different thing altogether.
The ordinary use of words is as a means of getting
through to things, and when you are using words in
that way the statement 'Scott is Sir Walter' is a
pure tautology, exactly on the same level as 'Scott is
Scott'.
That brings me back to the point that when you
take 'Scott is the author of Waverley' and you
substitute for 'the author of Waverley' a name in
the place of a description, you get necessarily either
a tautology or a falsehood - a tautology if you
substitute 'Scott' or some other name for the
same person, and a falsehood if you substitute any­
thing else. But the proposition itself is neither a
tautology nor a falsehood, and that shows you that
the proposition 'Scott is the author of Waverley' is a
different proposition from any that can be obtained
if you substitute a name in the place of 'the author
of Waverley'. That conclusion is equally true of any
other proposition in which the phrase 'the author
of Waverley' occurs. If you take any proposition in
which that phrase occurs and substitute for that
phrase a proper name, whether that name be 'Scott'
or any other, you will get a different proposition.
Generally speaking, if the name that you substitute
is 'Scott', your proposition, if it was true before will
remain true, and if it was false before will remain
false. But it is a different proposition. It is not
always true that it will remain true or false, as
may be seen by the example: 'George IV wished
to know if Scott was the author of Waverley'. It is
not true that George IV wished to know if Scott
was Scott. So it is even the case that the truth or the
falsehood of a proposition is sometimes changed
when you substitute a name of an object for a
description of the same object. But in any case it
is always a different proposition when you substi­
tute a name for a description.
Identity is a rather puzzling thing at first sight.
When you say 'Scott is the author of Waverley', you
are half-tempted to think there are two people, one
of whom is Scott and the other the author of
Waverley, and they happen to be the same. That
is obviously absurd, but that is the sort of way one
is always tempted to deal with identity.
When I say 'Scott is the author of Waverley' and
that 'is' expresses identity, the reason that identity
can be asserted there truly and without tautology is
just the fact that the one is a name and the other a
description. Or they might both be descriptions. If
I say 'The author of Waverley is the author of
Marmion', that, of course, asserts identity between
two descriptions.
Now the next point that I want to make clear is
that when a description (when I say 'description' I
mean, for the future, a definite description) occurs
in a proposition, there is no constituent of that
proposition corresponding to that description as a
whole. In the true analysis of the proposition, the
description is broken up and disappears. That is to
say, when I say 'Scott is the author of Waverley', it
is a wrong analysis of that to suppose that you have
there three constituents, 'Scott', 'is', and 'the
author of Waverley'. That, of course, is the sort of
way you might think of analysing. You might admit
that 'the author of Waverley' was complex and
could be further cut up, but you might think the
proposition could be split into those three bits to
begin with. That is an entire mistake. 'The author
of Waverley' is not a constituent of the proposition
at all. There is no constituent really there corres­
ponding to the descriptive phrase. I will try to
prove that to you now.
The first and most obvious reason is that you can
have significant propositions denying the existence
of 'the so-and-so'. 'The unicorn does not exist. '
'The greatest finite number does not exist. ' Propo­
sitions of that sort are perfectly significant, are
perfectly sober, true, decent propositions, and
that could not possibly be the case if the unicorn
were a constituent of the proposition, because
plainly it could not be a constituent as long as
there were not any unicorns. Because the constitu­
ents of propositions, of course, are the same as the
constituents of the corresponding facts, and since it
is a fact that the unicorn does not exist, it is per­
fectly clear that the unicorn is not a constituent of
that fact, because if there were any fact of which the
unicorn was a constituent, there would be a uni­
corn, and it would not be true that it did not exist.
That applies in this case of descriptions particu-\nlarly. Now since it is possible for 'the so-and-so'
not to exist and yet for propositions in which 'the
so-and-so' occurs to be significant and even true,
we must try to see what is meant by saying that the
so-and-so does exist.
The occurrence of tense in verbs is an exceed­
ingly annoying vulgarity due to our preoccupation
with practical affairs. It would be much more
agreeable if they had no tense, as I believe is the
case in Chinese, but I do not know Chinese. You
ought to be able to say 'Socrates exists in the past',
'Socrates exists in the present' or 'Socrates exists in
the future', or simply 'Socrates exists', without any
implication of tense, but language does not allow
that, unfortunately. Nevertheless, I am going to use
language in this tenseless way: when I say 'The so­
and-so exists', I am not going to mean that it exists
in the present or in the past or in the future, but
simply that it exists, without implying anything
involving tense.
'The author of Waverley exists': there are two
things required for that. First of all, what is 'the
author of Waverley'? It is the person who wrote
Waverley, i. e. , we are coming now to this, that you
have a propositional function involved, viz. , 'x
writes Waverl~y', and the author of Waverley is
the person who writes Waverley, and in order that
the person who writes Waverley may exist, it is
necessary that this propositional function should
have two properties:
It must be true for at least one x.
2 It must be true for at most one x.
If nobody had ever written Waverley, the author
could not exist, and if two people had written it, the
author could not exist. So that you want these two
properties, the one that it is true for at least one x,
and the other that it is true for at most one x, both
of which are required for existence.
The property of being true for at least one x is
the one we dealt with last time: what I expressed by
saying that the propositional function is possible.
Then we come on to the second condition, that it
is true for at most one x, and that you can express in
this way: 'If x and y wrote Waverley, then x is
identical with y, whatever x and y may be. ' That
says that at most one wrote it. It does not say that
anybody wrote Waverley at all, because if nobody
had written it, that statement would still be true. It
only says that at most one person wrote it.
The first of these conditions for existence fails in
the case of the unicorn, and the second in the case
of the inhabitant of London.
Existence and Description
We can put these two conditions together and
get a portmanteau expression including the mean­
ing of both. You can reduce them both down to
this: that '("x wrote Waverley" is equivalent to "x
is e" whatever x may be) is possible in respect of e'.
That is as simple, I think, as you can make the
statement.
You see, that means to say that there is some
entity e, we may not know what it is, which is such
that when x is e, it is true that x wrote Waverley,
and when x is not e, it is not true that x wrote
Waverley, which amounts to saying that e is the
only person who wrote Waverley; and I say there is
a value of e which makes that true. So that this
whole expression, which is a propositional function
about e, is possible in respect of e (in the sense
explained last time).
That is what I mean when I say that the author of
Waverley exists. When I say 'The author of Waver­
ley exists', I mean that there is an entity e such that
'x wrote Waverley' is true when x is e, and is false
when x is not e. 'The author of Waverley' as a
constituent has quite disappeared there, so that
when I say 'The author of Waverley exists', I am
not saying anything about the author of Waverley.
You have instead this elaborate to-do with proposi­
tional functions, and 'the author of Waverley' has
disappeared. That is why it is possible to say sig­
nificantly 'The author of Waverley did not exist'. It
would not be possible if 'the author of Waverley'
were a constituent of propositions in whose verbal
expression this descriptive phrase occurs.
The fact that you can discuss the proposition
'God exists' is a proof that 'God', as used in that
proposition, is a description and not a name. If
'God' were a name, no question as to existence
could arise.
I have now defined what I mean by saying that a
thing described exists. I have still to explain what I
mean by saying that a thing described has a certain
property. Supposing you want to say 'The author
of Waverl~y was human', that will be represented
thus: '("x wrote Waverley" is equivalent to "x is e"
whatever x may be, and e is human) is possible with
respect to e. '
You will observe that what we gave before as the
meaning of 'The author of Waverley exists' is part
of this proposition. It is part of any proposition in
which 'the author of Waverley' has what I call a
'primary occurrence'. When I speak of a 'primary
occurrence', I mean that you are not having a
proposition about the author of Waverley occurring
as a part of some larger proposition, such as \nBertrand Russell
'I believe that the author of Waverley was human'
or 'I believe that the author of Waverley exists'.
When it is a primary occurrence, i. e. , when the
proposition concerning it is not just part of a larger
proposition, the phrase which we defined as the
meaning of 'The author of Waverley exists' will be
part of that proposition. If I say the author of
Waverley was human, or a poet, or a Scotsman, or
whatever I say about the author of Waverley in the
way of a primary occurrence, always this statement
of his existence is part of the proposition. In that
sense all these propositions that I make about the
author of Waverley imply that the author of Waver­
ley exists. So that any statement in which a descrip­
tion has a primary occurrence implies that the
object described exists. If I say 'The present King
of France is bald', that implies that the present
King of France exists. If I say, 'The present King
of France has a fine head of hair', that also implies
that the present King of France exists. Therefore
unless you understand how a proposition contain­
ing a description is to be denied, you will come to
the conclusion that it is not true either that the
present King of France is bald or that he is not
bald, because if you were to enumerate all the
things that are bald you would not find him there,
and if you were to enumerate all the things that are
not bald, you would not find him there either. The
only suggestion I have found for dealing with that
on conventional lines is to suppose that he wears a
wig. You can only avoid the hypothesis that he
wears a wig by observing that the denial of the
proposition 'The present King of France is bald'
will not be 'The present King of France is not
bald', if you mean by that 'There is such a person
as the King of France and that person is not bald'.
The reason for this is that when you state that the
present King of France is bald, you say 'There is a c
such that c is now King of France and c is bald', and
the denial is not 'There is a c such that c is now
King of France and c is not bald'. It is more
complicated. It is: 'Either there is not a c such
that c is now King of France, or, if there is such a
c, then c is not bald. ' Therefore you see that, if you
want to deny the proposition. 'The present King of
France is bald', you can do it by denying that he
exists, instead of by denying that he is bald. In
order to deny this statement that the present
King of France is bald, which is a statement con­
sisting of two parts, you can proceed by denying
either part. You can deny the one part, which
would lead you to suppose that the present King
of France exists but is not bald, or the other part,
which will lead you to the denial that the present
King of France exists; and either of those two
denials will lead you to the falsehood of the propo­
sition 'The present King of France is bald'. When
you say 'Scott is human', there is no possibility of a
double denial. The only way you can deny 'Scott is
human' is by saying 'Scott is not human'. But
where a descriptive phrase occurs, you do have
the double possibility of denial.
It is of the utmost importance to realize that 'the
so-and-so' does not occur in the analysis of propo­
sitions in whose verbal expression it occurs; that
when I say 'The author of Waverley is human', 'the
author of Waverley' is not the subject of that pro­
position, in the sort of way that Scott would be if
I said 'Scott is human', using 'Scott' as a name.
I cannot emphasize sufficiently how important this
point is, and how much error you get into in
metaphysics if you do not realize that when I say
'The author of Waverley is human', that is not a
proposition of the same form as 'Scott is human'. It
does not contain a constituent 'the author of
Waverley'. The importance of that is very great
for many reasons, and one of them is this question
of existence. As I pointed out to you last time, there
is a vast amount of philosophy that rests upon the
notion that existence is, so to speak, a property that
you can attribute to things, and that the things that
exist have the property of existence and the things
that do not exist do not. That is rubbish, whether
you take kinds of things, or individual things
described. When I say, e. g. , 'Homer existed', I
am meaning by 'Homer' some description, say
'the author of the Homeric poems', and I am
asserting that those poems were written by one
man, which is a very doubtful proposition; but if
you could get hold of the actual person who did
actually write those poems (supposing there was
such a person), to say of him that he existed would
be uttering nonsense, not a falsehood but nonsense,
because it is only of persons described that it can be
significantly said that they exist. Last time I
pointed out the fallacy in saying 'Men exist,
Socrates is a man, therefore Socrates exists'.
When I say 'Homer exists, this is Homer, therefore
this exists', that is a fallacy of the same sort. It is an
entire mistake to argue: 'This is the author of the
Homeric poems and the author of the Homeric
poems exists, therefore this exists'. It is only
where a prepositional function comes in that exist­
ence may be significantly asserted. You can assert
'The so-and-so exists', meaning that there is just
one c which has those properties, but when you get \nhold of a c that has them, you cannot say of this c
that it exists, because that is nonsense: it is not
false, but it has no meaning at all.
So the individuals that there are in the world do
not exist, or rather it is nonsense to say that they
exist and nonsense to say that they do not exist. It is
not a thing you can say when you have named
them, but only when you have described them.
When you say 'Homer exists', you mean 'Homer'
is a description which applies to something. A
description when it is fully stated is always of the
form 'the so-and-so'.
The sort of things that are like these descriptions
in that they occur in words in a proposition, but are
not in actual fact constituents of the proposition
rightly analysed, things of that sort I call 'incom­
plete symbols'. There are a great many sorts
of incomplete symbols in logic, and they are
sources of a great deal of confusion and false
philosophy, because people get misled by gram­
mar. You think that the proposition 'Scott is
mortal' and the proposition 'The author of Waver­
ley is mortal' are of the same form. You think that
they are both simple propositions attributing a
predicate to a subject. That is an entire delusion:
one of them is (or rather might be), and one of them
is not. These things, like 'the author of Waverley',
which I call incomplete symbols, are things that
have absolutely no meaning whatsoever in isola­
tion, but merely acquire a meaning in a context.
'Scott' taken as a name has a meaning all by itself.
It stands for a certain person, and there it is. But
'the author of Waverley' is not a name, and does
not all by itself mean anything at all, because
Notes
I Cf. Louis Couturat, La Logique de Leibniz (Paris:
F. Alean, 1901).
Existence and Description
when it is rightly used in propositions, those pro­
positions do not contain any constituent corres­
ponding to it.
There are a great many other sorts of incomplete
symbols besides descriptions. These are classes,
which I shall speak of next time, and relations
taken in extension, and so on. Such aggregations
of symbols are really the same thing as what I call
'logical fictions', and they embrace practically all
the familiar objects of daily life: tables, chairs,
Piccadilly, Socrates, and so on. Most of them are
either classes, or series, or series of classes. In any
case they are all incomplete symbols; i. e. , they are
aggregations that only have a meaning in use, and
do not have any meaning in themselves.
It is important, if you want to understand the
analysis of the world, or the analysis of facts, or if
you want to have any idea what there really is in the
world, to realize how much of what there is in
phraseology is of the nature of incomplete symbols.
You can see that very easily in the case of 'the
author of Waverley' because 'the author of Waver­
ley' does not stand simply for Scott, nor for any­
thing else. If it stood for Scott, 'Scott is the author
of Waverley' would be the same proposition as
'Scott is Scott', which it is not, since George IV
wished to know the truth of the one and did not
wish to know the truth of the other. If 'the author
of Waverley' stood for anything other than Scott,
'Scott is the author of Waverley' would be false,
which it is not. Hence you have to conclude that
'the author of Waverley' does not, in isolation,
really stand for anything at all; and that is the
characteristic of incomplete symbols.
2 The confusion of these two meanings of, is' is essential
to the Hegelian conception of identity-in-difference. \nTerence Parsons
This paper has three parts. In part I I'm going
to argue that there's a big difference between
the way English speakers treat empty singular
terms and the way they treat singular terms that
refer to objects that don't exist. That is, the data of
linguistic behavior suggest that referring to some­
thing that doesn't exist is very different from fail­
ing to refer to anything at alL Most Anglo­
American philosophers haven't believed in non­
existent objects, and so they've generally tried to
treat singular terms which refer to nonexistent
objects as if they were singular terms which fail to
refer to anything at alL And I think that that is
wrong; I'm going to argue that it's wrong in part I
of the paper.
In part II of the paper I'm going to describe for
you a theory about nonexistent objects. I think
people are generally opposed to nonexistent objects
because they don't understand them, and because
such objects have gotten a bad press from people
like Russell and Quine, people who argue very
eloquently. But I think that if we had a better
understanding of nonexistent objects, then we
wouldn't be persuaded by these arguments against
them. So I am trying to bring about such an under­
standing by sketching a theory about nonexistent
objects. The present paper only contains a sketch of
such a theory; a more comprehensive development
will be given elsewhere. !
Originally published in Theory and Decision 11 (1979).
pp. 95-110. Copyright © by Reidel Publishing Com­
pany. Reprinted by permission of Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Finally, in part III I'm going to sketch a theory
of singular terms. According to this theory, some
of these terms will refer to existing objects, some of
them will refer to nonexistent objects, and some
of them just won't refer at alL
Part 1: Referring to Nonexistent
Objects isn't Failing to Refer
The first point I'd like to make is that people
behave differently when they fail to refer than
when they refer to something that doesn't exist -
that is, they react differently when they realize
what they've done in each case. I'm going to give
you two conversations. In each conversation there
are two characters, A and B, plus one outsider. In
the first conversation speaker B plays the devil's
advocate; you're supposed to find speaker A's reac­
tions normaL
A: "The man in the doorway over there looks
pretty silly. "
Outsider: "But there is no man in the doorway
over there. "
A: (Looks again) "Oh! I thought there was; I
was wrong. "
B: "Does he look anything like your depart-
ment chairman? "
A: "Who? "
B: "The man in the doorway over there. "
A: "There isn't any man there; I was mistaken
about that. " \nB: "Well, he doesn't exist, but he's there, isn't
he? "
A: "Look, I was talking about a guy who exists;
that is I thought I was, but I was wrong, I
wasn't talking about anybody. I can't tell
you what 'he' looks like because there's no
'he' to describe. "
Now that was supposed to be a case of failure of
reference. The speaker was trying to refer to some­
one, but he just made a mistake and failed to do so.
When confronted with questions about the object
he was referring to he treats the questions as spuri­
ous (i. e. , he does this once he realizes his mistake).
Now here's another case:
A: "The unicorn I dreamed about last night
looked pretty silly. "
Outsider: "But there are no unicorns. "
A: "So what? "
Outsider: "Well there aren't any unicorns, so
there couldn't be any such thing as the uni­
corn you dreamed about last night, so 'it'
couldn't possibly have looked silly. "
A: "Come on, it's not a real unicorn, it's one I
dreamed about. "
B: "Did it look anything like your department
chairman? "
A: "No, actually it looked a little bit like my
hairdresser. "
In this conversation speaker A rejects the conten­
tion that he had failed to refer to anything, though
he grants that what he is referring to doesn't exist.
And he treats questions about it as perfectly rea­
sonable. Some philosophers would criticize A for
this; they'll say that he should have rejected the
questions. But that won't work. The question was
reasonable, and it had an answer, which A com­
municated to B.
Now I know what many of you are thinking:
sure, A managed to communicate some informa­
tion to B, but did he do it by referring to a non­
existent object? The grammatical form of the
English sentences being used suggests yes, but as
Russell, and the early Wittgenstein, and Carnap,
and Ryle, and Quine, and Chisholm, and half the
rest of the philosophical world have been telling us
for ages now, you can't trust the "surface"
grammatical form of a sentence to reveal what's
really going on. Since there aren't any nonexistent
objects to be referred to, A's sentences must have a
different logical form than their grammatical form
suggests. And what we need to do to account for
Referring to Nonexistent Objects
what's going on is merely to show how to para­
phrase A's sentences in such a way that we eliminate
the apparent reference to an unreal object.
Well I hate to be a spoilsport, but, as various
people have pointed out, there's one major flaw in
this idea: nobody knows how to produce the para­
phrases. It hasn't been done. None of you know
how to do it either. So here's the situation: speakers
of English act as if they sometimes refer to non­
existent objects. We either have to take this at face
value or explain it away. Nobody knows how to
explain it away.
I've tried to illustrate the situation with reference
to a couple of lifelike conversations. If you're will­
ing to supply the lifelike contexts yourselves, there
are lots of other examples. You are all probably
willing to assert each of the following sentences:
(1) Ironically, a certain fictional detective
(namely, Sherlock Holmes) is much more
famous than any real detective, living or dead.
(2) Certain Greek gods were also worshipped by
the Romans, though they called them by dif­
ferent names. For example, the Romans wor­
shipped Zeus, though they called him
"Jupiter. "
(3) Any good modern criminologist knows much
more about chemical analysis than Sherlock
Holmes knew.
(4) Pegasus is the winged horse of Greek mytho-
logy.
(5) Pegasus is not the chief Greek deity; Zeus is.
I suggest that you are not only willing to assert
these sentences, but you are also prepared to treat
the singular terms in them as if they referred; you
are willing to "refer back" to previous utterances of
"Zeus" with pronouns, and you do not treat ques­
tions about the chief Roman deity as spurious;
many of them you're willing to answer.
Of course, I certainly haven't shown that all of
this apparent reference to the nonexistent can't be
paraphrased away. But some of the best minds have
been trying for over fifty years now, without suc­
cess. Maybe it's time to stop beating our heads
against that wall. Besides, there's another wall
that's more fun.
Part 2: A Quasi-Meinongian View
Alexius Meinong is perhaps the most infamous
believer in nonexistent objects. The theory to be \nTerence Parsons
sketched here was inspired by him, though I think
there are ways in which it diverges from his views. 2
I am going to assume that no two existing objects
have exactly the same properties. This is not so
much an assumption about the paucity of existing
objects as it is an assumption about the variety of
properties; in particular I assume that for any exist­
ing object there is at least one property (and prob­
ably many) that it has and that no other existing
object has. Anyway, given this assumption, there's
a natural one-one correlation between real, existing
objects and certain non-empty sets of properties.
For example, Madame Curie is a real object, and
correlated with her is the set of properties that
she has:
Madame Curie {p: Madame Curie has p}
Now, make a list of all existing objects. Correlated
with each one is a set of properties - the set of all
the properties it has:
REAL OBJECTS
0]
O2
SETS OF PROPERTIES
{p: 0] has p}
{p: O2 hasp}
{p: 0" hasp}
The left-hand list now exhausts the ontology that
people like Russell, QIine, Frege, and most of us
find acceptable; the existing objects constitute all
there is. But the theory now being presented says
that there's a lot more, and it goes like this. It's not
clear how to continue the left-hand list (that's our
goal), but you can easily see how to continue the
right-hand list - just write down any other non­
empty set of properties. For example, write down:
{goldenness, mountainhood, .. . }
filling in whatever properties for the dots that you
like. Now the theory under discussion says that for
any such set in the right-hand list, there is correl­
ated with it exactly one object. So write in "0, ,+]"
in the left-hand list:
{goldenness, mountainhood, .. . }
The object 0, ,+] can't be an existing object, because
it has the properties goldenness and mountainhood
- it's a gold mountain - and there aren't any real
gold mountains. But, as Meinong pointed out, that
doesn't stop there from being unreal gold moun­
tains; although certain narrow-minded people
object to this, that's just because they're preju­
diced! (He called this 'the prejudice in favor of
the actual. ')
It's clear how to extend the right-hand list - just
include any set of properties that isn't already
there. Corresponding to each such set is a unique
object, and vice versa - i. e. , each object appears
only once in the left-hand list. The two lists extend
our original correlation, so that it is now a correla­
tion between all objects and the sets of properties
that they have.
Actually we can dispense with talk of lists and
correlations and present the theory in a more direct
manner in terms of two principles. For reasons that
will become apparent shortly, let me call the prop­
erties I have been discussing nuclear properties.
The principles are:
No two objects (real or unreal) have exactly the
same nuclear properties.
2 For any set of nuclear properties, some object
has all of the properties in that set and no other
nuclear properties.
Principle 2 does most of the work; it's a sort of
"comprehension" principle for objects. Notice that
principle 2 does not require that objects be "logic­
ally closed"; e. g. , an object may have the property
of being blue and the property of being square
without having the property of being blue-and­
square. This lack of logical closure is important in
certain applications of the theory, particularly
applications to fictional objects and objects in
dreams. 3
Many nonexistent objects will be incomplete. By
calling an object 'complete, ' I mean that for any
nuclear property, the object either has that prop­
erty or it has its negation. This characterization
presupposes that it makes sense to talk of the 'nega­
tion" of a nuclear property in a somewhat unusual
sense. The assumption is that for any nuclear prop­
erty, p, there is another nuclear property, q, which
(necessarily) is had by all and only those existing
objects which don't have p, and which I call the
negation of p. The negation of a nuclear property, p,
will not be a property that any object has if and only
if it does not have p, for no nuclear property fits
that description (by principle 2 any nuclear prop­
erty, q, is such that some object has both p and q). 4
Given this account of nuclear property negation,
all existing objects are complete. Some nonexistent
objects are complete too, but some aren't. Consider \nthe object whose sole nuclear properties are gold­
enness and mountainhood. It does not have the
property of blueness, nor does it have the property
of nonblueness either; I will say that it is indeterm­
inate with respect to blueness. That object will in
fact be indeterminate with respect to every nuclear
property except goldenness and mountainhood.
(The object in question may be the one that Mei­
nong was referring to when he used the words "the
gold mountain"; whether this is so or not involves
questions of textual interpretation that I am unsure
about. )
Completeness is different from logical closure.
Consider the set of properties got by taking all of
my properties and replacing "hazel-eyed" by
"non-hazel-eyed. " According to principle 2 there
is an object which has the resulting properties and
no others. This object will be complete, but it will
not be logically closed. For example, it has brown­
hairedness and it has non-hazel-eyedness, but it
does not have the nuclear property of being both­
brown-haired-and-non-hazel-eyed.
To get an object which is logically closed yet
incomplete, add to "the gold mountain" all nuclear
properties that are entailed by goldenness and
mountainhood. Then it will have, e. g. , the prop­
erty of either-being-Iocated-in-North-America-or­
not-being-Iocated-in-North-America, but it will
not have either of those disjuncts; it will be inde­
terminate with respect to being located in North
America.
Some objects are impossible. By calling an
object, x, possible, I mean that it is possible that
there exists an object which has all of x's nuclear
properties (and perhaps more besides). 5 All exist­
ing objects are automatically possible objects by
this definition. And some unreal ones are too,
e. g. , "the gold mountain. " But consider the object
whose sole nuclear properties are roundness and
squareness (this may be Meinong's famous "round
square"). This is an impossible object, since there
could not be an existing object which has both of
these properties. Still, as Meinong pointed out,
that doesn't prevent there from being an imposs­
ible object which has them.
Principles 1 and 2 yield a theory that has an
important virtue: they not only tell us that there
are nonexistent objects, they also in part tell us
what nonexistent objects there are, and they tell
us what properties they have. Nuclear properties
anyway, which brings us to the following point:
Not all predicates can stand for nuclear properties.
Referring to Nonexistent Objects
Take "exists. " In the theory I've sketched, if we
allowed "exists" to stand for a nuclear property,
there would be trouble. Because, suppose it did
stand for a nuclear property, existence. Now con­
sider this set of properties:
{goldenness, mountainhood, existence}
If existence were a nuclear property, then there
would be an object correlated with this set of prop­
erties; call it "the existent gold mountain. " Then
the existent gold mountain would turn out to have
the property existence; that is, the existent gold
mountain would exist. But that's just false.
Initially we were troubled by there being a gold
mountain; Meinong placated us by pointing out
that it's only an unreal object, it doesn't exist. But
in the case of the existent gold mountain, this option
doesn't seem open. Conclusion: "exists, " at least as
it is used above, does not stand for a nuclear prop­
erty. I'll call "exists" an extranuclear predicate, and
in general I'll divide predicates into two categories,
those which stand for nuclear properties, which I'll
call nuclear predicates, and the others, which I'll
call extranuclear.
Which are which? First, here are some examples:
NUCLEAR PREDICATES:
"is blue, " "is tall, " "kicked Socrates, " "was
kicked by Socrates, " "kicked somebody, " "is
golden, " "is a mountain, ". ..
EXTRANUCLEAR PREDICATES:
Ontological: "exists, " "is mythical, " "is
fictional, ". ..
Modal: "is possible, " "is impossible, ". ..
Intentional: "is thought about by Meinong, " "is
worshipped by someone, ". ..
Technical: "is complete, ". ..
I'd like to emphasize that this division of pre­
dicates into nuclear and extranuclear is not peculiar
to Meinong at all, it's an old and familiar one.
People like Frege and Russell distinguish predic­
ates that stand for properties of individuals from
those that don't. The extranuclear predicates listed
above are mostly ones that Frege and Russell have
been telling us all along do not stand for properties
of individuals. For example, is "exists" a predicate?
Some people say flatly "no. " Frege tells us that it is
a predicate, but not a predicate of individuals; it's a
higher-order predicate, a predicate of concepts.
Likewise, we all know that "is possible" is either \nTerence Parsons
not a predicate at all, or it's a predicate not of
individuals but of propositions or sentences. With
the intentional predicates we're not sure what to
say, but we are sure that there's trouble in suppos­
ing them to be properties of individuals.
Our historical situation yields a very rough kind
of decision procedure for telling whether a predic­
ate is nuclear or extranuclear. It's this: if everyone
agrees that the predicate stands for an ordinary
property of individuals, then it's a nuclear predic­
ate, and it stands for a nuclear property. On the
other hand, if everyone agrees that it doesn't stand
for an ordinary property of individuals (for what­
ever reason), or if there's a history of controversy
about whether it stands for a property of indi­
viduals, then it's an extranuclear predicate, and
it does not stand for a nuclear property.
Of course, this "decision procedure" is a very
imperfect one. Probably its main virtue is to give us
enough clear cases of nuclear and extranuclear pre­
dicates for us to develop an intuitive feel for the
distinction, so that we can readily classify new
cases. I find that I have such a feel, and that other
people pick it up quite readily, and even those who
are skeptical about the viability of the distinction
seem to agree about which predicates are supposed
to be which.
The theory itself will help by putting severe
constraints on what can be nuclear. For example,
it is a thesis of the theory that no nuclear property,
F, satisfies:
(: JX) (X is a set of nuclear properties & F rf. X
& (x) (x has every member of X: J x has F».
This is because if F is nuclear and F rf. X, then the
object which has exactly those nuclear properties in
X has every member of X without having F. For
similar reasons, no nuclear property, F, satisfies:
(: JX) (X is a set of nuclear properties & F rf. X
& (x) (x has every member of X: J x lacks F».
If we make some minimal assumptions about
nuclear properties, then these principles will show
that lots of properties are extranuclear. For ex­
ample, suppose that we assume the following to
be nuclear: being a unicorn, being a ball bearing,
being round, being square. Then we can show that
all of the paradigm extranuclear predicates listed
above are indeed extranuclear. For example, for
F = existence, pick as X the unit set of being a
unicorn. Every object that has every member of X,
i. e. , every object that is a unicorn, lacks existence.
So existence is extranuclear. For each of the fol­
lowing choices of F, the corresponding choice of X
can be used in one of the above theses to show that
F is extranuclear: 6
F
is mythical, is fictional
is possible, is impossible
is thought about by
Meinong
is worshipped by someone
is complete
X
{is a ball bearing}
{is round, is square}
{p: Jimmy Carter has
p}
{is a ball bearing}
{p: Madame Curie
hasp}
Part 3: Singular Terms
Now let me turn to singular terms, specifically
definite descriptions and proper names. Ideally I
would discuss these within the context of ordinary
language, but I find it too complicated to say any­
thing both precise and general and brief in that
context. So instead I'll talk about a certain artificial
language, one that's designed to allow us a lot of
talk about objects. The language will look very
much like the predicate calculus, and that's good,
because we all know how to symbolize lots of
English in that language. There are problems
here, of course; for example, whether the English
"if. .. then. .. " means the same as the material
conditional. But most of my examples will deal
with atomic sentences, so we can avoid many of
these issues.
In fact, to avoid complexity, I'll just talk about
the monadic part of the language? Here's what it
looks like:
We have nuclear predicates: pN, QN, R N, .. .;
they are supposed to stand for nuclear properties.
We have extranuclear predicates: pE, QE,
RE, .. ., and they are supposed to stand for extra­
nuclear properties.
And we have object names and object variables:
a, b, c, .. ., x, y, z, .. .; these are supposed to stand
for objects.
I've called a, b, c, .. . object "names, " but don't
take that too seriously because I really don't think
that they behave very much like English proper
names (one reason is that they're not allowed to
lack reference, like Russellian "logically proper
names"). In fact, eventually I won't use them at
all; they're just a temporary expedient to help out
in my exposition. \nWe make sentences as in the predicate calculus.
For example, suppose that
DN stands for being a detective,
£E stands for existing, and
s stands for Sherlock Holmes.
Then we can write:
JYvs for "Holmes is a detective" (which is true), and
£E s for "Holmes exists" (which is false).
I suppose that we also have some connectives, so
that we can write things like: (JYI s & ~ £Es), mean­
ing that Sherlock Holmes is a detective who doesn't
exist. And this is a truth of the simplest sort; the
name, s, refers to Sherlock Holmes, and we say of
him, of that object, that he's a detective and that he
doesn't exist.
Quantifiers are nice to have too, so I'll suppose
we have quantifiers. They range over objects, all
objects of course, not just the ones that exist. So we
can truly say things like: (: :Ix)(JYvx & £E x) &
(: :Ix) (DN X & ~ £b'x), that is, "some detectives
exist, and some don't. "
Now a certain amount of care is needed in sym­
bolizing English here. For sometimes we don't say
literally quite all that we mean. For example, for­
getting nonexistent objects for the moment, if I tell
someone "Every dish is broken, " it would be
wrong to symbolize this as (x) (Dx: :: ) Bx); because
that says that every dish in the universe is broken,
and I certainly didn't mean that. I only had certain
dishes in mind. We can capture this by using a
special predicate to symbolize my use of "dish, "
or else we can display what's going on by "expand­
ing" the symbolization, something like this:
(x) (Dx & Ox: :: ) Bx, which says "Every dish that
we own is broken. " Now we sometimes have to do
something like this with respect to existence. For
example, we are sometimes inclined to say "There
are winged horses (Pegasus for example), " and this
is easy to symbolize; it's: (: :Ix)(WN x & HN x). But
we're also sometimes inclined to say "There are no
winged horses, " and I don't think that we then
contradict what we said earlier. We use the same
words, but we mean something different. We
mean, I suppose, that there are no existent winged
horses: ~ (: :Ix)(£Ex & W N X & HN x).
Well now let me turn to definite descriptions.
I'm going to write them just like everybody else,
namely, if you have a formula, 0, then you can put
an LX in front of it like this: (LX )0, and you read it
'the thing such that 0, ' or words to this effect. For
example, you read:
Referring to Nonexistent Objects
(Lx)(Wx&Hx)
as "the thing such that it's winged and it's a horse, "
or just "the winged horse. " And my semantical
account of these definite descriptions is pretty
ordinary: (Lx)0 refers to the unique object that
satisfies 0, if there is one, and otherwise (Lx)0 just
doesn't refer at all.
Now we can make sentences with these things,
and I'm going to do something just slightly
unorthodox here - it's really just heuristic and
not a matter of logic or semantics at all - but I
want to put definite descriptions in front of the
predicates they combine with, as we do it in Eng­
lish. So if we want to write "The man in the door­
way is clever, " we can write:
Now actually that isn't the way I'd be inclined to
symbolize that English sentence if someone used it
in an ordinary real-life situation. Because, if you
remember how big our ontology is, you'll realize
that there are lots of men in the doorway - and this
is partly in answer to Quine's worries about what
he called "the possible man in the doorway, ,; 8
there's no such thing as the possible man in the
doorway, because there are lots of men there.
There are fat men in the doorway, skinny ones,
bald ones, and so on. But probably ifI say, in real
life, "The man in the doorway is clever, " I'm not
talking about, them - they're all nonexistent men,
and I'm talking about an existing one. So the right
way to symbolize the most natural use of the sen­
tence is like we did with the winged horses earlier,
namely:
that is, "The existing man in the doorway is cle­
ver, " but I don't say "existing" when I talk, because
content makes it clear that that's what I mean. And
now ifI'm lucky, my definite description will refer
to someone, and that will happen if there's an
existing man there, and if he's alone there (except
for the unreal men who are there). And then maybe
what I say will be true. When will it be true? Well
this much is clear: if (Lx)0 refers to an object, then a
sentence of the form (LX )0F will be true if the
object referred to has property F, and false if it
lacks property F. (It doesn't matter here whether F
is nuclear or extranuclear. ) But what if the definite
description fails to refer? Well, for sure the \nTerence Parsons
sentence is untrue, but is it untrue because it's
false, or untrue because it lacks truth-value alto­
gether? Oh, I don't know. The data doesn't seem to
tell us. I've said that the linguistic data tell us this:
that if we believe that "the 0" fails to refer, and if
someone asks us whether the 0 is F, then we gen­
erally regard the question as spurious; we won't
answer it. But there are two ways this might be
explained. First, maybe simple sentences with non­
referring definite descriptions lack truth-value;
that would explain why the question is spurious -
it has no true or false answer. But maybe instead of
lacking truth-value such sentences are false, auto­
matically false, because of the failure of reference.
Then literally the question has an answer - the
answer is "no" - but the speaker will be reluctant
to say this, for fear of encouraging the impression
that the 0 has some property incompatible with F.
In the first conversation I gave you, maybe speaker
A won't say 'no' when speaker B asks if the man in
the doorway looks like A's department chairman
for fear of conveying the impression that the man
in the doorway looks different from his department
chairman. If this explanation were correct, it would
be OK for A to precede his answer with the word
"no, " just as long as he went on to explain that
there was no such man. And I think it would be
natural for him to do this, but that doesn't show he
thinks there literally is an answer to B's question,
because we often say "no" just as a kind of general­
ized protest reaction.
So I don't know what the right thing is to say
here, but for present purposes I think I can remain
neutral on this issue. So let me just stick with
saying that when (Lx)0 fails to refer, then (Lx)0F
is automatically untrue, without committing
myself to which sort of untruth is in question.
And that's really all I need to illustrate how failing
to refer is different from referring to something
nonexistent, because, for example, we can truly
say that the fictional detective who lived at 22lB
Baker Street was clever, but we can't ever say truly
that the man in the doorway (i. e. , the existing man
in the doorway) is clever, when there exists no man
in the doorway. (We can't even truly say that "he"
is a man. )
Before moving on to names, I should say one
more thing about descriptions. Suppose that we
have in our language some verbs of propositional
attitude, such as believes or wonders whether. Then,
as lots of people have pointed out, a sentence like:
Agatha believes the tallest spy is a spy
is ambiguous. It has a de dicto reading, which can be
symbolized:
aB{(Lx)0S}
where (Lx)0 stands for "the tallest spy" (I don't
really have the resources in this monadic fragment
to represent the superlative construction, so just
suppose it's done somehow). But the sentence also
has a de re reading; Agatha believes of the tallest spy
that he or she is a spy. So how is this to be written?
Well, I'll use a technique here that Ron Scales has
made much of. 9 First, we use abstraction to sym­
bolize the de re property of being believed by
Agatha to be a spy:
[AxaB{Sx}]
and then we say that the tallest spy has that prop­
erty:
(Lx)0[AxaB{ Sx }].
This gives us the effect of descriptions having
scope, but without forcing us to consider them to
be incomplete symbols. And that in turn lets us
solve one of Russell's problems, a problem that
Russell himself failed to solve; namely, we can
symbolize the de dicto reading of "George IV won­
dered whether the author of Waverley was such­
and-such" as:
g wondered whether {( LX) (X authored Waver­
ley) was such-and-such}
without insisting that this means the same as
"George IV wondered whether one and only one
person authored Waverley", and was such-and­
such. ,10
Finally, what about proper names? Let me sym­
bolize them with capital letters: A, B, C, .. ., and
put them in sentences in the same places where
definite descriptions go, just as in English. So we
write "Pegasus flies" just as PF. Semantically,
some names refer, and some don't; of those that
refer, some refer to existing objects, and some to
nonexistent objects. The rest of their semantics is
just like definite descriptions.
Now I want to deny some of the popular things
that have been said recently about proper names.
Well first I'll say (I've already said) that, contrary
to popular opinion, names like "Pegasus" and
"Sherlock Holmes" do refer; they refer to non-\nexistent objects. The former refers to a certain
winged horse that appears in Greek mythology,
and the latter to a certain fictional detective.
My second denial: I deny that whether or not a
name refers depends on whether our use of it can
be traced back by means of a causal chain to some­
thing like a dubbing that takes place in the presence
of its referent. I'm denying a popular version of the
causal theory of names. Though in fact I think that
the causal theory may come very close to being
right in these cases; it only makes a small mistake
(maybe) that isn't really relevant to the spirit of the
theory. The mistake is to suppose that the referent
of a name must itself be a causal agent in the chain.
I don't think that's right even in the case of certain
existing things. For example, the novel The Wind in
the Willows has a certain name (namely, "The Wind
in the Willows"); but if we trace back our present
use of that name causal~y, we don't come to the
novel, but rather to a copy of the novel. The novel
itself is not a physical object, and doesn't enter into
causal relations. But coming to a copy of the novel
is good enough; we need one more link in the chain,
but it's not a causal one; rather it consists of some­
thing like exemplification, or tokening. I think that
reference to Sherlock Holmes is like this. We trace
the name back causally to the Conan Doyle novels,
but then instead of encountering what Keith Don­
nellan! ! calls a "block, " which is sort oflike a break
in the chain, we make one more non-causal step to
Sherlock Holmes. !2 If we couldn't reach Holmes
through the novels in this way, probably we
couldn't refer to him.
Third, I have heard some people recently say
that proper names do not manifest de rei de dicto
ambiguities. This is thought to follow from the
Notes
Work on this paper was supported by the University of
Massachusetts and by a grant from the National Endow­
ment for the Humanities. I am indebted to the University
of California at Irvine for providing office facilities, and to
Karel Lambert, Kit Fine, and David Woodruff Smith for
criticism. A draft of this paper was read at a conference at
Arizona State University, Tempe.
Preliminary work on such a theory is found in my "A
prolegomenon to Meinongian semantics, " Journal of
Philosophy 71116 (1974), pp. 561-80, hereafter PMS;
"A Meinongian analysis of fictional objects, " Grazer
Philosophische Studien 1 (1975), pp. 73-86, hereafter
MAFO; and "Nuclear and extranuclear properties,
Referring to Nonexistent Objects
claim that they are rigid designators. But it doesn't
follow. A rigid designator is a name that names the
same object in every possible world. But all that
follows from this is that proper names do not
manifest de rei de dicto ambiguities with respect to
modal operators. It says nothing about what they
do in the presence of, say, epistemic words. Agatha
can believe de dicto that Plato is a famous philoso­
pher without having any de re beliefs about Plato at
all. Conversely, she can believe of Tully (i. e. , de re)
that he did such and such without believing de dicto
that Tully did such and such.
Lastly, I want to say that proper names have
sense. Or at least they're as good candidates for
having sense as any other kind of word in our
language. Their having sense would explain how
it's possible for Agatha to believe (de dicto) that
Cicero did such and such without her believing
(again de dicto) that Tully did. The reason people
have thought that proper names lacked sense is that
they seem to think that if proper names do have
sense, then they must be synonymous with certain
definite descriptions. But there's no good reason to
think this, any more than you should think that if
definite descriptions have sense, then they must be
synonymous with certain names. I know that both
Frege and Russell suggested this - that names are
synonymous with descriptions - and recently this
has been rejected. And the view that names have
sense has been maligned by being associated with
this view. But it's a classic case of guilt by associa­
tion. I think that people have failed to notice
the need for senses because of their preoccupation
with modalities, and the view that names are rigid
designators.
Meinong and Leibniz, " Nous 12 (1978), pp. 147-51.
A more comprehensive treatment is being developed
in a book entitled Nonexistent Objects (New Haven:
Yale University Press, 1980), hereafter NO. In none
of these works are objects taken to be sets of properties.
2 Many of Meinong's views can be found in A. Mei­
nong, "The theory of objects, " in R. Chisholm (ed. )
Realism and the Background of Phenomenology (Glen­
coe, III. : Free Press, 1960), and in J. Findlay, Mei­
nong's Theory of Objects and Values (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1963). For purposes of comparing
my views with Meinong's, interpret my "exists" as
his "exists or subsists".
3 Cf. MAFO and NO, 3 and 7. \nTerence Parsons
4 Perhaps for this reason I shouldn't use the term
"negation, " but should use something like "comple­
ment. " It isn't certain that "the" negation of p is
unique, but the discussion of incomplete objects in
the text doesn't suffer from this. Cf. NO, chs 5 and 6.
5 Many other notions may have an equal right to the
title "possible. " E. g. , we might want to reserve the
term for objects which are both possible in the sense
defined and also complete. Or we might use it to
denote those objects which are such that they might
have existed (in a de re sense of "might have"). Cf.
NO, chs I and 5.
6 By "is mythical" I mean "occurs in an actual myth";
similarly for "is fictional. " For certain of the predi­
cates we might have to appeal to the stronger, mod­
alized principle:
('lX) (X is a set of nuclear properties & F fi X &
possibly (x) (x has every member of X ~ x lacks
F)).
Ultimately the distinction between nuclear and extra­
nuclear properties should gain viability by being
incorporated into a general theory of objects and
properties; that is the task of most of NO.
7 Relations are very important; they, together with the
other constructions discussed below in the text, are
developed throughout NO.
S In W. V. Quine, From a Logical Point o{ View (New
York: Harper & Row, 1961), p. 4.
9 R. Scales, "Attribution and existence" (Ph. D. diss. ,
University of California, Irvine, 1969).
10 Cf. L. Linsky, Referring (London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1967).
II K. Donnellan, "Speaking of nothing, " Philosophital
Reriew 83 (1974), pp. 3-32, sect. 6.
12 The nature of the noncausal step from the story to
Sherlock Holmes is discussed tersely in MAFO and in
somewhat more detail in NO, ch. 7. \nW. V. Quine
I
I listened to Dewey on Art as Experience when I
was a graduate student in the spring of 1931.
Dewey was then at Harvard as the first William
James Lecturer. I am proud now to be at Columbia
as the first John Dewey Lecturer.
Philosophically I am bound to Dewey by the
naturalism that dominated his last three decades.
With Dewey I hold that knowledge, mind, and
meaning are part of the same world that they have
to do with, and that they are to be studied in the
same empirical spirit that animates natural science.
There is no place for a prior philosophy.
When a naturalistic philosopher addresses him­
self to the philosophy of mind, he is apt to talk of
language. Meanings are, first and foremost, mean­
ings of language. Language is a social art which we
all acquire on the evidence solely of other people's
overt behavior under publicly recognizable circum­
stances. Meanings, therefore, those very models of
mental entities, end up as grist for the behaviorist's
mill. Dewey was explicit on the point: "Meaning. .. is not a psychic existence; it is primarily a prop­
erty ofbehavior. "J
Once we appreciate the institution oflanguage in
these terms, we see that there cannot be, in any
useful sense, a private language. This point was
Originally published in W. V. Quine Ontological Relativity
and other Essays (1969), pp. 26-68. Copyright © by
W. V. Quine. Reprinted by permission of Columbia Uni­
versity Press.
stressed by Dewey in the twenties. "Soliloquy, "
he wrote, "is the product and reflex of converse
with others. ,, 2 Further along he expanded the point
thus: "Language is specifically a mode of interac­
tion of at least two beings, a speaker and a hearer; it
presupposes an organized group to which these
creatures belong, and from whom they have
acquired their habits of speech. It is therefore a
relationship. ,, 3 Years later, Wittgenstein likewise
rejected private language. When Dewey was writ­
ing in this naturalistic vein, Wittgenstein still held
his copy theory of language.
The copy theory in its various forms stands
closer to the main philosophical tradition, and to
the attitude of common sense today. Uncritical
semantics is the myth of a museum in which the
exhibits are meanings and the words are labels. To
switch languages is to change the labels. Now the
naturalist's primary objection to this view is not an
objection to meanings on account of their being
mental entities, though that could be objection
enough. The primary objection persists even if we
take the labeled exhibits not as mental ideas but as
Platonic ideas or even as the denoted concrete
objects. Semantics is vitiated by a pernicious ment­
alism as long as we regard a man's semantics as
somehow determinate in his mind beyond what
might be implicit in his dispositions to overt behav­
ior. It is the very facts about meaning, not the
entities meant, that must be construed in terms of
behavior.
There are two parts to knowing a word. One part
is being familiar with the sound of it and being able \nW. V. Quine
to reproduce it. This part, the phonetic part, is
achieved by observing and imitating other people's
behavior, and there are no important illusions
about the process. The other part, the semantic
part, is knowing how to use the word. This part,
even in the paradigm case, is more complex than
the phonetic part. The word refers, in the para­
digm case, to some visible object. The learner has
now not only to learn the word phonetically, by
hearing it from another speaker; he also has to see
the object; and in addition to this, in order to
capture the relevance of the object to the word, he
has to see that the speaker also sees the object.
Dewey summed up the point thus: "The character­
istic theory about B's understanding of A's sounds
is that he responds to the thing from the standpoint
of A. "4 Each of us, as he learns his language, is a
student of his neighbor's behavior; and conversely,
insofar as his tries are approved or corrected, he is a
subject of his neighbor's behavioral study.
The semantic part of learning a word is more
complex than the phonetic part, therefore, even in
simple cases: we have to see what is stimulating the
other speaker. In the case of words not directly
ascribing observable traits to things, the learning
process is increasingly complex and obscure; and
obscurity is the breeding place of mentalistic
semantics. What the naturalist insists on is that,
even in the complex and obscure parts of language
learning, the learner has no data to work with but
the overt behavior of other speakers.
When with Dewey we turn thus toward a natur­
alistic view of language and a behavioral view of
meaning, what we give up is not just the museum
figure of speech. We give up an assurance of deter­
minacy. Seen according to the museum myth, the
words and sentences of a language have their deter­
minate meanings. To discover the meanings of the
native's words, we may have to observe his behav­
ior, but still the meanings of the words are sup­
posed to be determinate in the native's mind, his
mental museum, even in cases where behavioral
criteria are powerless to discover them for us.
When on the other hand we recognize with
Dewey that "meaning. .. is primarily a property
of behavior, " we recognize that there are no mean­
ings, nor likenesses nor distinctions of meaning,
beyond what are implicit in people's dispositions
to overt behavior. For naturalism the question
whether two expressions are alike or unlike in
meaning has no determinate answer, known or
unknown, except insofar as the answer is settled
in principle by people's speech dispositions, known
or unknown. If by these standards there are inde­
terminate cases, so much the worse for the termi­
nology of meaning and likeness of meaning.
To see what such indeterminacy would be like,
suppose there were an expression in a remote lan­
guage that could be translated into English equally
defensibly in either of two ways, unlike in meaning
in English. I am not speaking of ambiguity within
the native language. I am supposing that one and
the same native use of the expression can be given
either of the English translations, each being
accommodated by compensating adjustments in
the translation of other words. Suppose both trans­
lations, along with these accommodations in each
case, accord equally well with all observable beha­
vior on the part of speakers of the remote language
and speakers of English. Suppose they accord per­
fectly not only with behavior actually observed, but
with all dispositions to behavior on the part of all
the speakers concerned. On these assumptions it
would be forever impossible to know of one of these
translations that it was the right one, and the other
wrong. Still, if the museum myth were true, there
would be a right and wrong of the matter; it is just
that we would never know, not having access to the
museum. See language naturalistically, on the
other hand, and you have to see the notion of
likeness of meaning in such a case simply as non­
sense.
I have been keeping to the hypothetical. Turning
now to examples, let me begin with a disappointing
one and work up. In the French construction
"ne. .. rien" you can translate "rien" into English
as "anything' or as "nothing" at will, and then
accommodate your choice by translating "ne" as
"not" or by construing it as pleonastic. This ex­
ample is disappointing because you can object that
I have merely cut the French units too small. You
can believe the mentalistic myth of the meaning
museum and still grant that "rien" of itself has no
meaning, being no whole label; it is part of
"ne. .. rien, " which has its meaning as a whole.
I began with this disappointing example because
I think its conspicuous trait - its dependence on
cutting language into segments too short to carry
meanings - is the secret of the more serious cases as
well. What makes other cases more serious is that
the segments they involve are seriously long: long
enough to be predicates and to be true of things and
hence, you would think, to carry meanings.
An artificial example which I have used else­
where5 depends on the fact that a whole rabbit is \npresent when and only when an undetached part of
a rabbit is present; also when and only when a
temporal stage of a rabbit is present. If we are
wondering whether to translate a native expression
"gavagai" as "rabbit" or as "undetached rabbit
part" or as "rabbit stage, " we can never settle the
matter simply by ostension - that is, simply by
repeatedly querying the expression "gavagai" for
the native's assent or dissent in the presence of
assorted stimulations.
Before going on to urge that we cannot settle the
matter by non-ostensive means either, let me bela­
bor this ostensive predicament a bit. I am not
worrying, as Wittgenstein did, about simple cases
of ostension. The color word "sepia, " to take one of
his examples, 6 can certainly be learned by an ordin­
ary process of conditioning, or induction. One need
not even be told that sepia is a color and not a shape
or a material or an article. True, barring such hints,
many lessons may be needed, so as to eliminate
wrong generalizations based on shape, material,
etc. , rather than color, and so as to eliminate
wrong notions as to the intended boundary of an
indicated example, and so as to delimit the admis­
sible variations of color itself. Like all conditioning,
or induction, the process will depend ultimately
also on one's own inborn propensity to find one
stimulation qualitatively more akin to a second
stimulation than to a third; otherwise there can
never be any selective reinforcement and extinction
of responses. 7 Still, in principle nothing more is
needed in learning "sepia" than in any condition­
ing or induction.
But the big difference between "rabbit" and
"sepia" is that whereas "sepia" is a mass term like
"water, " "rabbit" is a term of divided reference. As
such it cannot be mastered without mastering its
principle of individuation: where one rabbit leaves
off and another begins. And this cannot be mas­
tered by pure ostension, however persistent.
Such is the quandary over "gavagai": where one
gavagai leaves off and another begins. The only
difference between rabbits, undetached rabbit
parts, and rabbit stages is in their individuation.
If you take the total scattered portion of the spatio­
temporal world that is made up of rabbits, and that
which is made up of undetached rabbit parts, and
that which is made up of rabbit stages, you come
out with the same scattered portion of the world
each of the three times. The only difference is in
how you slice it. And how to slice it is what osten­
sion or simple conditioning, however persistently
repeated, cannot teach.
Ontological Relativity
Thus consider specifically the problem of decid­
ing between "rabbit" and "undetached rabbit
part" as translation of "gavagai. " No word of the
native language is known, except that we have
settled on some working hypothesis as to what
native words or gestures to construe as assent and
dissent in response to our pointings and queryings.
Now the trouble is that whenever we point to
different parts of the rabbit, even sometimes
screening the rest of the rabbit, we are pointing
also each time to the rabbit. When, conversely, we
indicate the whole rabbit with a sweeping gesture,
we are still pointing to a multitude of rabbit parts.
And note that we do not have even a native analo­
gue of our plural ending to exploit, in asking "gava­
gai? " It seems clear that no even tentative decision
between "rabbit" and "undetached rabbit part" is
to be sought at this level.
How would we finally decide? My passing men­
tion of plural endings is part of the answer. Our
individuating of terms of divided reference, in
English, is bound up with a cluster of interrelated
grammatical particles and constructions: plural
endings, pronouns, numerals, the "is" of identity,
and its adaptations "same" and "other. " It is the
cluster of interrelated devices in which quantifica­
tion becomes central when the regimentation of
symbolic logic is imposed. If in his language we
could ask the native "Is this gavagai the same as
that one? " while making appropriate multiple
ostensions, then indeed we would be well on our
way to deciding between "rabbit, " "undetached
rabbit part, " and "rabbit stage. " And of course
the linguist does at length reach the point where
he can ask what purports to be that question. He
develops a system for translating our pluralizations,
pronouns, numerals, identity, and related devices
contextually into the native idiom. He develops
such a system by abstraction and hypothesis. He
abstracts native particles and constructions from
observed native sentences and tries associating
these variously with English particles and con­
structions. Insofar as the native sentences and the
thus associated English ones seem to match up in
respect of appropriate occasions of use, the linguist
feels confirmed in these hypotheses of translation -
what I call analytical hypotheses. 8
But it seems that this method, though laudable
in practice and the best we can hope for, does not in
principle settle the indeterminancy between "rab­
bit, " "undetached rabbit part, " and "rabbit stage. "
For if one workable overall system of analytical
hypotheses provides for translating a given native \nw. V. Quine
expression into "is the same as, " perhaps another
equally workable but systematically different sys­
tem would translate that native expression rather
into something like "belongs with. " Then, when in
the native language we try to ask, "Is this gavagai
the same as that? ," we could as well be asking
"Does this gavagai belong with that? " Insofar,
the native's assent is no objective evidence for
translating "gavagai" as "rabbit" rather than
"undetached rabbit part" or "rabbit stage. "
This artificial example shares the structure of
the trivial earlier example "ne. .. rien. " We were
able to translate "rien" as "anything" or as "noth­
ing, " thanks to a compensatory adjustment in the
handling of "ne. " And I suggest that we can trans­
late "gavagai" as "rabbit" or "undetached rabbit
part" or "rabbit stage, " thanks to compensatory
adjustments in the translation of accompanying
native locutions. Other adjustments still might
accommodate translation of "gavagai" as "rabbit­
hood, " or in further ways. I find this plausible
because of the broadly structural and contextual
character of any considerations that could guide
us to native translations of the English cluster of
interrelated devices of individuation. There seem
bound to be systematically very different choices,
all of which do justice to all dispositions to verbal
behaviour on the part of all concerned.
An actual field linguist would of course be sen­
sible enough to equate "gavagai" with "rabbit, "
dismissing such perverse alternatives as "unde­
tached rabbit part" and "rabbit stage" out of
hand. This sensible choice and others like it would
help in turn to determine his subsequent hypoth­
eses as to what native locutions should answer to the
English apparatus of individuation, and thus every­
thing would come out all right. The implicit maxim
guiding his choice of "rabbit, " and similar choices
for other native words, is that an enduring and
relatively homogeneous object, moving as a whole
against a contrasting background, is a likely refer­
ence for a short expression. If he were to become
conscious of this maxim, he might celebrate it as
one of the linguistic universals, or traits of all
languages, and he would have no trouble pointing
out its psychological plausibility. But he would be
wrong; the maxim is his own imposition, toward
settling what is objectively indeterminate. It is a
very sensible imposition, and I would recommend
no other. But I am making a philosophical point.
It is philosophically interesting, moreover, that
what is indeterminate in this artificial example is
not just meaning, but extension; reference. My
remarks on indeterminacy began as a challenge to
likeness of meaning. I had us imagining "an
expression that could be translated into English
equally defensibly in either of two ways, unlike in
meaning in English. " Certainly likeness of mean­
ing is a dim notion, repeatedly challenged. Of two
predicates which are alike in extension, it has never
been clear when to say that they are alike in mean­
ing and when not; it is the old matter of featherless
bipeds and rational animals, or of equiangular and
equilateral triangles. Reference, extension, has
been the firm thing; meaning, intension, the
infirm. The indeterminacy of translation now con­
fronting us, however, cuts across extension and
intension alike. The terms "rabbit, " "undetached
rabbit part, " and "rabbit stage" differ not only in
meaning; they are true of different things. Refer­
ence itself proves behaviorally inscrutable.
Within the parochial limits of our own language,
we can continue as always to find extensional talk
clearer than intensional. For the indeterminacy
between "rabbit, " "rabbit stage, " and the rest
depended only on a correlative indeterminacy of
translation of the English apparatus of individua­
tion ~ the apparatus of pronouns, pluralization,
identity, numerals, and so on. No such indetermi­
nacy obtrudes so long as we think of this apparatus
as given and fixed. Given this apparatus, there is no
mystery about extension; terms have the same
extension when true of the same things. At the
level of radical translation, on the other hand,
extension itself goes inscrutable.
My example of rabbits and their parts and stages
is a contrived example and a perverse one, with
which, as I said, the practicing linguist would have
no patience. But there are also cases, less bizarre
ones, that obtrude in practice. In Japanese there
are certain particles, called "classifiers, " which
may be explained in either oftwo ways. Commonly
they are explained as attaching to numerals, to form
compound numerals of distinctive styles. Thus
take the numeral for 5. If you attach one classifier
to it, you get a style of "5" suitable for counting
animals; if you attach a different classifier, you get a
style of "5" suitable for counting slim things like
pencils and chopsticks; and so on. But another way
of viewing classifiers is to view them not as consti­
tuting part of the numeral, but as constituting part
of the term ~ the term for "chopsticks" or "oxen"
or whatever. On this view the classifier does the
individuative job that is done in English by "sticks
of" as applied to the mass term "wood, " or "head
of" as applied to the mass term "cattle. " \nWhat we have on either view is a Japanese phrase
tantamount say to "five oxen, " but consisting of
three words; 9 the first is in effect the neutral
numeral "5, " the second is a classifier of the animal
kind, and the last corresponds in some fashion to
"ox. " On one view the neutral numeral and the
classifier go together to constitute a declined
numeral in the "animal gender, " which then modi­
fies "ox" to give, in effect, "five oxen. " On the other
view the third Japanese word answers not to the
individuative term "ox" but to the mass term "cat­
tle"; the classifier applies to this mass term to pro­
duce a composite individuative term, in effect "head
of cattle"; and the neutral numeral applies directly
to all this without benefit of gender, giving "five
head of cattle, " hence again in effect "five oxen. "
If so simple an example is to serve its expository
purpose, it needs your connivance. You have to
understand "cattle" as a mass term covering only
bovines, and "ox" as applying to all bovines. That
these usages are not the invariable usages is beside
the point. The point is that the Japanese phrase
comes out as "five bovines, " as desired, when parsed
in either of two ways. The one way treats the third
Japanese word as an individuative term true of each
bovine, and the other way treats that word rather as
a mass term covering the un individuated totality of
beef on the hoof. These are two very different ways
of treating the third Japanese word; and the three­
word phrase as a whole turns out all right in both
cases only because of compensatory differences in
our account of the second word, the classifier.
This example is reminiscent in a way of our
trivial initial example, "ne. .. rien. " We were able
to represent "rien" as "anything" or as "nothing, "
by compensatorily taking "ne" as negative or as
vacuous. We are able now to represent a Japanese
word either as an individuative term for bovines or
as a mass term for live beef, by compensatorily
taking the classifer as declining the numeral or as
individuating the mass term. However, the trivial­
ity of the one example does not quite carryover to
the other. The early example was dismissed on the
ground that we had cut too small; "rien" was to
short for significant translation on its own, "and
'ne. .. rien" was the significant unit. But you can­
not dismiss the Japanese example by saying that the
third word was too short for significant translation
on its own and that only the whole three-word
phrase, tantamount to "five oxen, " was the signifi­
cant unit. You cannot take this line unless you are
prepared to call a word too short for significant
translation even when it is long enough to be a
Ontological Relativity
term and carry denotation. For the third Japanese
word is, on either approach, a term: on one
approach a term of divided reference, and on the
other a mass term. If you are indeed prepared thus
to call a word too short for significant translation
even when it is a denoting term, then in a back­
handed way you are granting what I wanted to
prove: the inscrutability of reference.
Between the two accounts of Japanese classifiers
there is no question of right and wrong. The one
account makes for more efficient translation into
idiomatic English; the other makes for more of a
feeling for the Japanese idiom. Both fit all verbal
behavior equally well. All whole sentences, and
even component phrases like "five oxen, " admit
of the same net overall English translations on
either account. This much is invariant. But what
is philosophically interesting is that the reference
or extension of shorter terms can fail to be invar­
iant. Whether that third Japanese word is itself true
of each ox, or whether on the other hand it is a mass
term which needs to be adjoined to the classifier to
make a term which is true of each ox - here is a
question that remains undecided by the totality of
human dispositions to verbal behavior. It is inde­
terminate in principle; there is no fact of the mat­
ter. Either answer can be accommodated by an
account of the classifier. Here again, then, is the
inscrutability of reference - illustrated this time by
a humdrum point of practical translation.
The inscrutability of reference can be brought
closer to home by considering the word "alpha, " or
again the word "green. " In our use of these words
and others like them there is a systematic ambigu­
ity. Sometimes we use such words as concrete
general terms, as when we say the grass is green,
or that some inscription begins with an alpha.
Sometimes, on the other hand, we use them as
abstract singular terms, as when we say that green
is a color and alpha is a letter. Such ambiguity is
encouraged by the fact that there is nothing in
ostension to distinguish the two uses. The pointing
that would be done in teaching the concrete general
term "green" or "alpha" differs none from the
pointing that would be done in teaching the
abstract singular term "green" or "alpha. " Yet
the objects referred to by the word are very differ­
ent under the two uses; under the one use the word
is true of many concrete objects, and under the
other use it names a single abstract object.
We can of course tell the two uses apart by seeing
how the word turns up in sentences: whether it
takes an indefinite article, whether it takes a plural \nW. V. Quine
ending, whether it stands as singular subject,
whether it stands as modifier, as predicate comple­
ment, and so on. But these criteria appeal to our
special English grammatical constructions and par­
ticles, our special English apparatus of individu­
ation, which, I already urged, is itself subject to
indeterminacy of translation. So, from the point of
view of translation into a remote language, the
distinction between a concrete general and an
abstract singular term is in the same predicament
as the distinction between "rabbit, " "rabbit part, "
and "rabbit stage. " Here then is another example
of the inscrutability of reference, since the differ­
ence between the concrete general and the abstract
singular is a difference in the objects referred to.
Incidentally we can concede this much indeter­
minacy also to the "sepia" example, after all. But
this move is not evidently what was worrying Witt­
genstein.
The ostensive indistinguishability of the abstract
singular from the concrete general turns upon what
may be called "deferred ostension, " as opposed to
direct ostension. First let me define direct osten­
sion. The ostended point, as I shall call it, is the point
where the line of the pointing finger first meets an
opaque surface. What characterizes direct ostension,
then, is that the term which is being ostensively
explained is true of something that contains the
ostended point. Even such direct ostension has its
uncertainties, of course, and these are familiar.
There is the question how wide an environment
of the ostended point is meant to be covered by the
term that is being ostensively explained. There is
the question how considerably an absent thing or
substance might be allowed to differ from what is
now ostended, and still be covered by the term that
is now being ostensively explained. Both of these
questions can in principle be settled as well as need
be by induction from multiple ostensions. Also, if
the term is a term of divided reference like "apple, "
there is the question of individuation: the question
where one of its objects leaves off and another
begins. This can be settled by induction from multi­
ple ostensions of a more elaborate kind, accompa­
nied by expressions like "same apple" and
"another, " if an equivalent of this English apparatus
of individuation has been settled on; otherwise the
indeterminacy persists that was illustrated by "rab­
bit, " "undetached rabbit part, " and "rabbit stage. "
Such, then, is the way of direct ostension. Other
os tension I call deferred. It occurs when we point at
the gauge, and not the gasoline, to show that there
is gasoline. Also it occurs when we explain the
abstract singular term "green" or "alpha" by
pointing at grass or a Greek inscription. Such
pointing is direct ostension when used to explain
the concrete general term "green" or "alpha, " but
it is deferred ostension when used to explain the
abstract singular terms; for the abstract object
which is the color green or the letter alpha does
not contain the ostended point, nor any point.
Deferred ostension occurs very naturally when,
as in the case of the gasoline gauge, we have a
correspondence in mind. Another such example is
afforded by the GOdel numbering of expressions.
Thus if7 has been assigned as Godel number of the
letter alpha, a man conscious of the Godel number­
ing would not hesitate to say "Seven" on pointing
to an inscription of the Greek letter in question.
This is, on the face of it, a doubly deferred osten­
sion: one step of deferment carries us from the
inscription to the letter as abstract object, and a
second step carries us thence to the number.
By appeal to our apparatus of individuation, if it
is available, we can distinguish between the con­
crete general and the abstract singular use of the
word "alpha"; this we saw. By appeal again to that
apparatus, and in particular to identity, we can
evidently settle also whether the word "alpha" in
its abstract singular use is being used really to name
the letter or whether, perversely, it is being used to
name the Godel number of the letter. At any rate
we can distinguish these alternatives if also we have
located the speaker's equivalent of the numeral "7"
to our satisfaction; for we can ask him whether
alpha is 7.
These considerations suggest that deferred
ostension adds no essential problem to those pres­
ented by direct ostension. Once we have settled
upon analytical hypotheses of translation covering
identity and the other English particles relating to
individuation, we can resolve not only the indeci­
sion between "rabbit" and "rabbit stage" and the
rest, which came of direct ostension, but also any
indecision between concrete general and abstract
singular, and any indecision between expression
and Godel number, which come of deferred osten­
sion. However, this conclusion is too sanguine.
The inscrutability of reference runs deep, and it
persists in a subtle form even if we accept identity
and the rest of the apparatus of individuation as
fixed and settled; even, indeed, if we forsake radical
translation and think only of English.
Consider the case of a thoughtful protosyntacti­
ciano He has a formalized system of first-order \nproof theory, or protosyntax, whose universe com­
prises just expressions, that is, strings of signs of a
specified alphabet. Now just what sorts of things,
more specifically, are these expressions? They are
types, not tokens. So, one might suppose, each of
them is the set of all its tokens. That is, each
expression is a set of inscriptions which are var­
iously situated in space-time but are classed
together by virtue of a certain similarity in shape.
The concatenate x ~ y of two expressions x and y,
in a given order, will be the set of all inscriptions
each of which has two parts which are tokens
respectively of x and y and follow one upon the
other in that order. But x ~ y may then be the null
set, though x and yare not null; for it may be that
inscriptions belonging to x andy happen to turn up
head to tail nowhere, in the past, present, or future.
This danger increases with the lengths of x and y.
But it is easily seen to violate a law of proto syntax
which says that x = z whenever x ~ y = z ~ y.
Thus it is that our thoughtful protosyntactician
will not construe the things in his universe as sets
of inscriptions. He can still take his atoms, the
single signs, as sets of inscriptions, for there is no
risk of nullity in these cases. And then, instead of
taking his strings of signs as sets of inscriptions, he
can invoke the mathematical notion of sequence
and take them as sequences of signs. A familiar
way of taking sequences, in turn, is as a mapping
of things on numbers. On this approach an expres­
sion or string of signs becomes a finite set of pairs
each of which is the pair of a sign and a number.
This account of expressions is more artificial and
more complex than one is apt to expect who simply
says he is letting his variables range over the strings
of such and such signs. Moreover, it is not the
inevitable choice; the considerations that motivated
it can be met also by alternative constructions. One
of these constructions is GOdel numbering itself,
and it is temptingly simple. It uses just natural
numbers, whereas the foregoing construction
used sets of one-letter inscriptions and also natural
numbers and sets of pairs of these. How clear is it
that at just this point we have dropped expressions
in favor of numbers? What is clearer is merely that
in both constructions we were artificially devising
models to satisfy laws that expressions in an unex­
plicated sense had been meant to satisfy.
So much for expressions. Consider now the
arithmetician himself, with his elementary number
theory. His universe comprises the natural num­
bers outright. Is it clearer than the protosyntacti­
cian's? What, after all, is a natural number? There
Ontological Relativity
are Frege's version, Zermelo's, and von Neu­
mann's, and countless further alternatives, all
mutually incompatible and equally correct. What
we are doing in anyone of these explications of
natural number is to devise set-theoretic models to
satisfy laws which the natural numbers in an unex­
plicated sense had been meant to satisfy. The case
is quite like that of protosyntax.
It will perhaps be felt that any set-theoretic
explication of natural number is at best a case of
obscurum per obscurius; that all explications must
assume something, and the natural numbers them­
selves are an admirable assumption to start with. I
must agree that a construction of sets and set theory
from natural numbers and arithmetic would be far
more desirable than the familiar opposite. On the
other hand, our impression of the clarity even of
the notion of natural number itself has suffered
somewhat from Gbdel's proof of the impossibility
of a complete proof procedure for elementary num­
ber theory, or, for that matter, from Skolem's and
Henkin's observations that all laws of natural num­
bers admit nonstandard models. lO
We are finding no clear difference between spe­
cifying a universe of discourse - the range of the
variables of quantification - and reducing that uni­
verse to some other. We saw no significant differ­
ence between clarifying the notion of expression
and supplanting it by that of number. And now to
say more particularly what numbers themselves are
is in no evident way different from just dropping
numbers and assigning to arithmetic one or another
new model, say in set theory.
Expressions are known only by their laws, the
laws of concatenation theory, so that any constructs
obeying those laws - Gbdel numbers, for instance­
are ipso facto eligible as explications of expression.
Numbers in turn are known only by their laws, the
laws of arithmetic, so that any constructs obeying
those laws - certain sets, for instance - are eligible
in turn as explications of number. Sets in turn are
known only by their laws, the laws of set theory.
Russell pressed a contrary thesis, long ago. Writ­
ing of numbers, he argued that for an under­
standing of number the laws of arithmetic are not
enough; we must know the applications, we must
understand numerical discourse embedded in dis­
course of other matters. In applying number, the
key notion, he urged, is Anzahl: there are n so­
and-so's. However, Russell can be answered. First
take, specifically, Anzahl. We can define "there are
n so-and-so's" without ever deciding what num­
bers are, apart from their fulfillment of arithmetic. \nW. V. Quine
That there are n so-and-so's can be explained sim­
ply as meaning that the so-and-so's are in one-to­
one correspondence with the numbers up to n. II
Russell's more general point about application
can be answered too. Always, if the structure is
there, the applications will fall into place. As para­
digm it is perhaps sufficient to recall again this
reflection on expressions and Godel numbers:
that even the pointing out of an inscription is no
final evidence that our talk is of expressions and not
of Godel numbers. We can always plead deferred
ostension.
It is in this sense true to say, as mathematicians
often do, that arithmetic is all there is to number.
But it would be a confusion to express this point by
saying, as is sometimes said, that numbers are any
things fulfilling arithmetic. This formulation is
wrong because distinct domains of objects yield
distinct models of arithmetic. Any progression
can be made to serve; and to identify all progres­
sions with one another, e. g. , to identify the pro­
gression of odd numbers with the progression of
evens, would contradict arithmetic after all.
So, though Russell was wrong in suggesting that
numbers need more than their arithmetical proper­
ties, he was right in objecting to the definition of
numbers as any things fulfilling arithmetic. The
subtle point is that any progression will serve as a
version of number so long and only so long as we
stick to one and the same progression. Arithmetic
is, in this sense, all there is to number: there is no
saying absolutely what the numbers are; there is
only arithmetic. 12
II
I first urged the inscrutability of reference with the
help of examples like the one about rabbits and
rabbit parts. These used direct ostension, and the
inscrutability of reference hinged on the indeter­
minacy of translation of identity and other indivi­
duative apparatus. The setting of these examples,
accordingly, was radical translation: translation
from a remote language on behavioral evidence,
unaided by prior dictionaries. Moving then to
deferred ostension and abstract objects, we found
a certain dimness of reference pervading the home
language itself.
Now it should be noted that even for the earlier
examples the resort to a remote language was not
really essential. On deeper reflection, radical trans­
lation begins at home. Must we equate our neigh-
bor's English words with the same strings of
phonemes in our own mouths? Certainly not; for
sometimes we do not thus equate them. Sometimes
we find it to be in the interests of communication to
recognize that our neighbor's use of some word,
such as "cool" or "square" or "hopefully, " differs
from ours, and so we translate that word of his into
a different string of phonemes in our idiolect. Our
usual domestic rule of translation is indeed the
homophonic one, which simply carries each string
of phonemes into itself; but still we are always
prepared to temper homophony with what Neil
Wilson has called the "principle of charity. ,, 13 We
will construe a neighbor's word heterophonically
now and again if thereby we see our way to making
his message less absurd.
The homophonic rule is a handy one on the
whole. That it works so well is no accident, since
imitation and feedback are what propagate a lan­
guage. We acquired a great fund of basic words and
phrases in this way, imitating our elders and
encouraged by our elders amid external circum­
stances to which the phrases suitably apply. Homo­
phonic translation is implicit in this social method
of learning. Departure from homophonic transla­
tion in this quarter would only hinder communica­
tion. Then there are the relatively rare instances of
opposite kind, due to divergence in dialect or con­
fusion in an individual, where homophonic transla­
tion incurs negative feedback. But what tends to
escape notice is that there is also a vast mid-region
where the homophonic method is indifferent.
Here, gratuitously, we can systematically recon­
strue our neighbor's apparent references to rabbit
stages, and his apparent references to formulas as
really references to Godel numbers, and vice versa.
We can reconcile all this with our neighbor's verbal
behavior, by cunningly readjusting our translations
of his various connecting predicates so as to com­
pensate for the switch of ontology. In short, we can
reproduce the inscrutability of reference at home.
It is of no avail to check on this fanciful version of
our neighbor's meanings by asking him, say,
whether he really means at a certain point to refer
to formulas or to their Godel numbers; for our
question and his answer - "By all means, the num­
bers" - have lost their title to homophonic transla­
tion. The problem at home differs none from
radical translation ordinarily so called except in
the willfulness of this suspension of homophonic
translation.
I have urged in defense of the behavioral philo­
sophy oflanguage, Dewey's, that the inscrutability \nof reference is not the inscrutability of a fact; there
is no fact of the matter. But if there is really no fact
of the matter, then the inscrutability of reference
can be brought even closer to home than the neigh­
bor's case; we can apply it to ourselves. If it is to
make sense to say even of oneself that one is refer­
ring to rabbits and formulas and not to rabbit stages
and Giidel numbers, then it should make sense
equally to say it of someone else. After all, as
Dewey stressed, there is no private language.
We seem to be maneuvering ourselves into the
absurd position that there is no difference on any
terms, inter linguistic or intralinguistic, objective or
subjective, between referring to rabbits and refer­
ring to rabbit parts or stages; or between referring
to formulas and referring to their Giidel numbers.
Surely this is absurd, for it would imply that there
is no difference between the rabbit and each of its
parts or stages, and no difference between a for­
mula and its Giidel number. Reference would seem
now to become nonsense not just in radical transla­
tion but at home.
Toward resolving this quandary, begin by pic­
turing us at home in our language, with all its
predicates and auxiliary devices. This vocabulary
includes "rabbit, " "rabbit part, " "rabbit stage, "
"formula, " "number, " "ox, " "cattle"; also the
two-place predicates of identity and difference,
and other logical particles. In these terms we can
say in so many words that this is a formula and that
a number, this a rabbit and that a rabbit part, this
and that the same rabbit, and this and that different
parts. Injust those words. This network of terms and
predicates and auxiliary devices is, in relativity
jargon, our frame of reference, or coordinate sys­
tem. Relative to it we can and do talk meaningfully
and distinctively of rabbits and parts, numbers and
formulas. Next, as in recent paragraphs, we con­
template alternative denotations for our familiar
terms. We begin to appreciate that a grand and
ingenious permutation of these denotations, along
with compensatory adjustments in the interpreta­
tions of the auxiliary particles, might still accom­
modate all existing speech dispositions. This was
the inscrutability of reference, applied to ourselves;
and it made nonsense of reference. Fair enough;
reference is nonsense except relative to a coordinate
system. In this principle of relativity lies the reso­
lution of our quandary.
It is meaningless to ask whether, in general, our
terms "rabbit, " "rabbit part, " "number, " etc.
really refer respectively to rabbits, rabbit parts,
numbers, etc. , rather than to some ingeniously
Ontological Relativity
permuted denotations. It is meaningless to ask
this absolutely; we can meaningfully ask it only
relative to some background language. When we
ask, "Does 'rabbit' really refer to rabbits? ," some­
one can counter with the question: "Refer to rab­
bits in what sense of 'rabbits'? ," thus launching a
regress; and we need the background language to
regress into. The background language gives the
query sense, if only relative sense; sense relative in
turn to it, this background language. Querying
reference in any more absolute way would be like
asking absolute position, or absolute velocity,
rather than position or velocity relative to a given
frame of reference. Also it is very much like asking
whether our neighbour may not systematically see
everything upside down, or in complementary
color, forever undetectably.
We need a background language, I said, to
regress into. Are we involved now in an infinite
regress? If questions of reference of the sort we are
considering make sense only relative to a back­
ground language, then evidently questions of refer­
ence for the background language make sense in
turn only relative to a further background language.
In these terms the situation sounds desperate, but
in fact it is little different from questions of position
and velocity. When we are given position and velo­
city relative to a given coordinate system, we can
always ask in turn about the placing of origin and
orientation of axes of that system of coordinates;
and there is no end to the succession of further
coordinate systems that could be adduced in
answering the successive questions thus generated.
In practice of course we end the regress of coord­
inate systems by something like pointing. And in
practice we end the regress of background lan­
guages, in discussions of reference, by acquiescing
in our mother tongue and taking its words at face
value.
Very well; in the case of position and velocity, in
practice, pointing breaks the regress. But what of
position and velocity apart from practice? what
of the regress then? The answer, of course, is the
relational doctrine of space; there is no absolute
position or velocity; there are just the relations of
coordinate systems to one another, and ultimately
of things to one another. And I think that the
parallel question regarding denotation calls for a
parallel answer, a relational theory of what the
objects of a theories are. What makes sense is to
say not what the objects of a theory are, absolutely
speaking, but how one theory of objects is inter­
pretable or reinterpretable in another. \nW. V. Quine
The point is not that bare matter is inscrutable:
that things are indistinguishable except by their
properties. That point does not need making. The
present point is reflected better in the riddle about
seeing things upside down, or in complementary
colors; for it is that things can be inscrutably
switched even while carrying their properties with
them. Rabbits differ from rabbit parts and rabbit
stages not just as bare matter, after all, but in
respect of properties; and formulas differ from
numbers in respect of properties. What our present
reflections are leading us to appreciate is that the
riddle about seeing things upside down, or in com­
plementary colors, should be taken seriously and its
moral applied widely. The relativistic thesis to
which we have come is this, to repeat: it makes no
sense to say what the objects of a theory are, beyond
saying how to interpret or reinterpret that theory in
another. Suppose we are working within a theory
and thus treating of its objects. We do so by using
the variables of the theory, whose values those
objects are, though there be no ultimate sense in
which that universe can have been specified. In the
language of the theory there are predicates by
which to distinguish portions of this universe
from other portions, and these predicates differ
from one another purely in the roles they play in
the laws of the theory. Within this background
theory we can show how some subordinate theory,
whose universe is some portion of the background
universe, can by a reinterpretation be reduced to
another subordinate theory whose universe is some
lesser portion. Such talk of subordinate theories
and their ontologies is meaningful, but only relative
to the background theory with its own primitively
adopted and ultimately inscrutable ontology.
To talk thus of theories raises a problem of formu­
lation. A theory, it will be said, is a set of fully
interpreted sentences. (More particularly, it is a
deductively closed set: it includes all its own logical
consequences, insofar as they are couched in the
same notation. ) But if the sentences of a theory are
fully interpreted, then in particular the range of
values of their variables is settled. How then can
there be no sense in saying what the objects of a
theory are?
My answer is simply that we cannot require
theories to be fully interpreted, except in a relative
sense, if anything is to count as a theory. In speci­
fying a theory we must indeed fully specify, in our
own words, what sentences are to comprise the
theory, and what things are to be taken as values
of the variables, and what things are to be taken as
satisfying the predicate letters; insofar we do fully
interpret the theory, relative to our own words and
relative to our overall home theory which lies
behind them. But this fixes the objects of the
described theory only relative to those of the
home theory; and these can, at will, be questioned
in turn.
One is tempted to conclude simply that mean­
inglessness sets in when we try to pronounce on
everything in our universe; that universal predica­
tion takes on sense only when furnished with the
background of a wider universe, where the predi­
cation is no longer universal. And this is even a
familiar doctrine, the doctrine that no proper pre­
dicate is true of everything. We have all heard it
claimed that a predicate is meaningful only by
contrast with what it excludes, and hence that
being true of everything would make a predicate
meaningless. But surely this doctrine is wrong.
Surely self-identity, for instance, is not to be
rejected as meaningless. For that matter, any state­
ment of fact at all, however brutally meaningful,
can be put artificially into a form in which it pro­
nounces on everything. To say merely of Jones that
he sings, for instance, is to say of everything that it
is other than Jones or sings. We had better beware
of repudiating universal predication, lest we be
tricked into repudiating everything there is to say.
Carnap took an intermediate line in his doctrine
of universal words, or Allwijrter, in The Logical
Syntax of Language. He did treat the predicating
of universal words as "quasi-syntactical" - as a
predication only by courtesy, and without empiri­
cal content. But universal words were for him not
just any universally true predicates, like "is other
than Jones or sings. " They were a special breed of
universally true predicates, ones that are univer­
sally true by the sheer meanings of their words and
no thanks to nature. In his later writing this doc­
trine of uni versal words takes the form of a distinc­
tion between "internal" questions, in which a
theory comes to grips with facts about the world,
and "external" questions, in which people come to
grips with the relative merits of theories.
Should we look to these distinctions ofCarnap's
for light on ontological relativity? When we found
there was no absolute sense in saying what a theory
is about, were we sensing the in-factuality of what
Carnap calls "external questions"? When we found
that saying what a theory is about did make sense
against a background theory, were we sensing the
factuality of internal questions of the background \ntheory? I see no hope of illumination in this quar­
ter. Carnap's universal words were not just any
universally true predicates, but, as I said, a special
breed; and what distinguishes this breed is not
clear. What I said distinguished them was that
they were universally true by sheer meanings and
not by nature; but this is a very questionable dis­
tinction. Talking of "internal" and "external" is no
better.
Ontological relativity is not to be clarified by any
distinction between kinds of universal predication
- unfactual and factual, external and internal. It is
not a question of universal predication. When
questions regarding the ontology of a theory are
meaningless absolutely, and become meaningful
relative to a background theory, this is not in gen­
eral because the background theory has a wider
universe. One is tempted, as I said a little while
back, to suppose that it is; but one is then wrong.
What makes ontological questions meaningless
when taken absolutely is not universality but circu­
larity. A question of the form "What is an F? " can
be answered only by recourse to a further term: "An
F is a G. " The answer makes only relative sense:
sense relative to the uncritical acceptance of "G. "
We may picture the vocabulary of a theory as
comprising logical signs such as quantifiers and the
signs for the truth functions and identity, and in
addition descriptive or nonlogical signs, which,
typically, are singular terms, or names, and general
terms, or predicates. Suppose next that in the
statements which comprise the theory, that is, are
true according to the theory, we abstract from the
meanings of the nonlogical vocabulary and from
the range of the variables. We are left with the
logical form of the theory, or, as I shall say, the
theory form. Now we may interpret this theory form
anew by picking a new universe for its variables of
quantification to range over, and assigning objects
from this universe to the names, and choosing
subsets of this universe as extensions of the one­
place predicates, and so on. Each such interpreta­
tion of the theory form is called a model of it, if it
makes it come out true. Which of these models is
meant in a given actual theory cannot, of course, be
guessed from the theory form. The intended refer­
ences of the names and predicates have to be
learned rather by ostension, or else by paraphrase
in some antecedently familiar vocabulary. But the
first of these two ways has proved inconclusive,
since, even apart from indeterminacies of transla­
tion affecting identity and other logical vocabulary,
there is the problem of deferred ostension. Para-
Ontological Relativity
phrase in some antecedently familiar vocabulary,
then, is our only recourse; and such is ontological
relativity. To question the reference of all the terms
of our all-inclusive theory becomes meaningless,
simply for want of further terms relative to which
to ask or answer the question.
It is thus meaningless within the theory to say
which of the various possible models of our theory
form is our real or intended model. Yet even here
we can make sense still of there being many models.
For we might be able to show that for each of the
models, however unspecifiable, there is bound to
be another which is a permutation or perhaps a
diminution of the first.
Suppose, for example, that our theory is purely
numerical. Its objects are just the natural numbers.
There is no sense in saying, from within that the­
ory, just which of the various models of number
theory is in force. But we can observe even from
within the theory that, whatever 0, 1, 2, 3, etc. may
be, the theory would still hold true if the 17 of this
series were moved into the role of 0, and the 18
moved into the role of 1, and so on.
Ontology is indeed doubly relative. Specifying
the universe of a theory makes sense only relative to
some background theory, and only relative to some
choice of a manual of translation of the one theory
into the other. Commonly of course the back­
ground theory will simply be a containing theory,
and in this case no question of a manual of transla­
tion arises. But this is after all just a degenerate case
of translation still - the case where the rule of
translation is the homophonic one.
We cannot know what something is without
knowing how it is marked off from other things.
Identity is thus of a piece with ontology. Accord­
ingly it is involved in the same relativity, as may be
readily illustrated. Imagine a fragment of economic
theory. Suppose its universe comprises persons,
but its predicates are incapable of distinguishing
between persons whose incomes are equal. The
interpersonal relation of equality of income enjoys,
within the theory, the substitutivity property of the
identity relation itself; the two relations are indis­
tinguishable. It is only relative to a background
theory, in which more can be said of personal
identity than equality of income, that we are able
even to appreciate the above account of the frag­
ment of economic theory, hinging as the account
does on a contrast between persons and incomes.
A usual occasion for ontological talk is reduction,
where it is shown how the universe of some theory
can by a reinterpretation be dispensed with in favor \nw. V. Quine
of some other universe, perhaps a proper part of
the first. I have treated elsewhere14 of the reduction
of one ontology to another with help of a proxy
Junction: a function mapping the one universe into
part or all of the other. For instance, the function
"Gbdel number of" is a proxy function. The uni­
verse of elementary proof theory or protosyntax,
which consists of expressions or strings of signs,
is mapped by this function into the universe of
elementary number theory, which consists of
numbers.
The proxy function used in reducing one onto­
logy to another need not, like Gbdel numbering, be
one-to-one. We might, for instance, be confronted
with a theory treating of both expressions and
ratios. We would cheerfully reduce all this to the
universe of natural numbers, by invoking a proxy
function which enumerates the expressions in the
Gbdel way and enumerates the ratios by the classi­
cal method of short diagonals. This proxy function
is not one-to-one, since it assigns the same natural
number both to an expression and to a ratio. We
would tolerate the resulting artificial convergence
between expressions and ratios, simply because the
original theory made no capital of the distinction
between them; they were so invariably and extra­
vagantly unlike that the identity question did not
arise. Formally speaking, the original theory used a
two-sorted logic.
For another kind of case where we would not
require the proxy function to be one-to-one, con­
sider again the fragment of economic theory lately
noted. We would happily reduce its ontology of
persons to a less numerous one of incomes. The
proxy function would assign to each person his
income. It is not one-to-one; distinct persons give
way to identical incomes. The reason such a reduc­
tion is acceptable is that it merges the images of
only such individuals as never had been distin­
guishable by the predicates of the original theory.
Nothing in the old theory is contravened by the
new identities.
If on the other hand the theory that we are
concerned to reduce or reinterpret is straight pro­
tosyntax, or a straight arithmetic of ratios or of real
numbers, then a one-to-one proxy function is man­
datory. This is because any two elements of such a
theory are distinguishable in terms of the theory.
This is true even for the real numbers, even though
not every real number is uniquely specifiable; any
two real numbers x and yare still distinguishable,
in that x < y or y < x and never x < x. A proxy
function that did not preserve the distinctness of
the elements of such a theory would fail of its
purpose of reinterpretation.
One ontology is always reducible to another
when we are given a proxy functionJthat is one­
to-one. The essential reasoning is as follows.
Where P is any predicate of the old system, its
work can be done in the new system by a new
predicate which we interpret as true of just the
correlates Jx of the old objects x that P was true
of. Thus suppose we take Jx as the Gbdel number
of x, and as our old system we take a syntactical
system in which one of the predicates is "is a
segment of. " The corresponding predicate of the
new or numerical system, then, would be one
which amounts, so far as its extension is concerned,
to the words "is the Gbdel number of a segment of
that whose Gbdel number is. " The numerical
predicate would not be given this devious form,
of course, but would be rendered as an appropriate
purely arithmetical condition.
Our dependence upon a background theory
becomes especially evident when we reduce our
universe U to another V by appeal to a proxy
function. For it is only in a theory with an inclusive
universe, embracing U and V, that we can make
sense of the proxy function. The function maps U
into Vand hence needs all the old objects of U as
well as their new proxies in V.
The proxy function need not exist as an object in
the universe even of the background theory. It may
do its work merely as what I have called a "virtual
class, " 15 and Gbdel has called a "notion. ,, 16 That is
to say, all that is required toward a function is an
open sentence with two free variables, provided
that it is fulfilled by exactly one value of the first
variable for each object of the old universe as value
of the second variable. But the point is that it is
only in the background theory, with its inclusive
universe, that we can hope to write such a sentence
and have the right values at our disposal for its
variables.
If the new objects happen to be among the old,
so that Vis a subclass of U, then the old theory with
universe U can itself sometimes qualify as the back­
ground theory in which to describe its own onto­
logical reduction. But we cannot do better than
that; we cannot declare our new ontological econo­
mies without having recourse to the uneconomical
old ontology.
This sounds, perhaps, like a predicament: as if
no ontological economy is justifiable unless it is a
false economy and the repudiated objects really
exist after all. But actually this is wrong; there is \nno more cause for worry here than there is in
reductio ad absurdum, where we assume a falsehood
that we are out to disprove. If what we want to
show is that the universe U is excessive and that
only a part exists, or need exist, then we are quite
within our rights to assume all of U for the space of
the argument. We show thereby that if all of U
were needed, then not all of U would be needed;
and so our ontological reduction is sealed by reduc­
tio ad absurdum.
Toward further appreciating the bearing of onto­
logical relativity on programs of ontological reduc­
tion, it is worthwhile to reexamme the
philosophical bearing of the Liiwenheim-Skolem
theorem. I shall use the strong early form of the
theorem, 17 which depends on the axiom of choice.
It says that if a theory is true and has an indenu­
merable universe, then all but a denumerable part
of that universe is dead wood, in the sense that it
can be dropped from the range of the variables
without falsifying any sentences.
On the face of it, this theorem declares a reduc­
tion of all acceptable theories to denumerable
ontologies. Moreover, a denumerable ontology is
reducible in turn to an ontology specifically of
natural numbers, simply by taking the enumeration
as the proxy function, if the enumeration is expli­
citly at hand. And even if it is not at hand, it exists;
thus we can still think of all our objects as natural
numbers, and merely reconcile ourselves to not
always knowing, numerically, which number an
otherwise given object is. May we not thus settle
for an all-purpose Pythagorean ontology outright?
Suppose, afterward, someone were to offer us
what would formerly have qualified as an ontolo­
gical reduction - a way of dispensing in future
theory with all things of a certain sort S, but still
leaving an infinite universe. Now in the new Pytha­
gorean setting his discovery would still retain its
essential content, though relinquishing the form of
an ontological reduction; it would take the form
merely of a move whereby some numerically
unspecified numbers were divested of some prop­
erty of numbers that corresponded to S.
Blanket Pythagorean ism on these terms is unat­
tractive, for it merely offers new and obscurer
accounts of old moves and old problems. On this
score again, then, the relativistic proposition seems
reasonable: that there is no absolute sense in speak­
ing of the ontology of a theory. It very creditably
brands this Pythagorean ism itself as meaningless.
For there is no absolute sense in saying that all the
Ontological Relativity
objects of a theory are numbers, or that they are
sets, or bodies, or something else; this makes no
sense unless relative to some background theory.
The relevant predicates - "number, " "set, "
"body, " or whatever - would be distinguished
from one another in the background theory by the
roles they play in the laws of that theory.
Elsewhere I urged in answer to such Pythagor­
eanism that we have no ontological reduction in an
interesting sense unless we can specify a proxy
function. Now where does the strong Liiwen­
heim-Skolem theorem leave us in this regard? If
the background theory assumes the axiom of choice
and even provides a notation for a general selector
operator, can we in these terms perhaps specify an
actual proxy function embodying the Lowenheim­
Skolem argument?
The theorem is that all but a denumerable part
of an ontology can be dropped and not be missed.
One could imagine that the proof proceeds by
partitioning the universe into denumerably many
equivalence classes of indiscriminable objects, such
that all but one member of each equivalence class
can be dropped as superfluous; and one would then
guess that where the axiom of choice enters the
proof is in picking a survivor from each equivalence
class. If this were so, then with help of Hilbert's
selector notation we could indeed express a proxy
function. But in fact the Liiwenheim-Skolem
proof has another structure. I see in the proof
even of the strong Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem
no reason to suppose that a proxy function can be
formulated anywhere that will map an indenumer­
able ontology, say the real numbers, into a denu­
merable one.
On the face of it, of course, such a proxy func­
tion is out of the question. It would have to be one­
to-one, as we saw, to provide distinct images of
distinct real numbers; and a one-to-one mapping
of an indenumerable domain into a denumerable
one is a contradiction. In particular it is easy to
show in the Zermelo-Fraenkel system of set theory
that such a function would neither exist nor admit
even of formulation as a virtual class in the notation
of the system.
The discussion of the ontology of a theory can
make variously stringent demands upon the back­
ground theory in which the discussion is couched.
The stringency of these demands varies with what
is being said about the ontology of the object the­
ory. We are now in a position to distinguish three
such grades of stringency. \nW. V. Quine
The least stringent demand is made when, with
no view to reduction, we merely explain what
things a theory is about, or what things its terms
denote. This amounts to showing how to translate
part or all of the object theory into the background
theory. It is a matter really of showing how we
propose, with some arbitrariness, to relate terms of
the object theory to terms of the background the­
ory; for we have the inscrutability of reference to
allow for. But there is here no requirement that the
background theory have a wider universe or a
stronger vocabulary than the object theory. The
theories could even be identical; this is the case
when some terms are clarified by definition on
the basis of other terms of the same language.
A more stringent demand was observed in the
case where a proxy function is used to reduce an
ontology. In this case the background theory
needed the unreduced universe. But we saw, by
considerations akin to reductio ad absurdum, that
there was little here to regret.
The third grade of stringency has emerged now
in the kind of ontological reduction hinted at by the
Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem. If a theory has by its
own account an indenumerable universe, then even
by taking that whole unreduced theory as back­
ground theory we cannot hope to produce a proxy
function that would be adequate to reducing the
ontology to a denumerable one. To find such a
proxy function, even just a virtual one, we would
need a background theory essentially stronger than
the theory we were trying to reduce. This demand
cannot, like the second grade of stringency above,
be accepted in the spirit of reductio ad absurdum. It
is a demand that simply discourages any general
argument for Pythagoreanism from the Liiwen­
heim-Skolem theorem.
A place where we see a more trivial side of
ontological relativity is in the case of a finite uni­
verse of named objects. Here there is no occasion
for quantification, except as an inessential abbre­
viation; for we can expand quantifications into
finite conjunctions and alternations. Variables
thus disappear, and with them the question of a
universe of values of variables. And the very dis­
tinction between names and other signs lapses in
turn, since the mark of a name is its admissibility in
positions of variables. Ontology thus is emphat­
ically meaningless for a finite theory of named
objects, considered in and of itself. Yet we are
now talking meaningfully of such finite ontologies.
We are able to do so precisely because we are
talking, however vaguely and implicitly, within a
broader containing theory. What the objects of the
finite theory are, makes sense only as a statement of
the background theory in its own referential idiom.
The answer to the question depends on the
background theory, the finite foreground theory,
and, of course, the particular manner in which
we choose to translate or embed the one in the
other.
Ontology is internally indifferent also, I think, to
any theory that is complete and decidable. Where
we can always settle truth values mechanically,
there is no evident internal reason for interest in
the theory of quantifiers nor, therefore, in values of
variables. These matters take on significance only
as we think of the decidable theory as embedded in
a richer background theory in which the variables
and their values are serious business.
Ontology may also be said to be internally indif­
ferent even to a theory that is not decidable and
does not have a finite universe, if it happens still
that each of the infinitely numerous objects of the
theory has a name. We can no longer expand quan­
tifications into conjunctions and alternations, bar­
ring infinitely long expressions. We can, however,
revise our semantical account of the truth condi­
tions of quantification, in such a way as to turn our
backs on questions of reference. We can explain
universal quantifications as true when true under
all substitutions; and correspondingly for existen­
tial. Such is the course that has been favored by
Lesniewski and by Ruth Marcus. ls Its nonreferen­
tial orientation is seen in the fact that it makes no
essential use of namehood. That is, additional
quantifications could be explained whose variables
are place-holders for words of any syntactical cate­
gory. Substitutional quantification, as I call it, thus
brings no way of distinguishing names from other
vocabulary, nor any way of distinguishing between
genuinely referential or value-taking variables and
other place-holders. Ontology is thus meaningless
for a theory whose only quantification is substitu­
tionally construed; meaningless, that is, insofar as
the theory is considered in and of itself. The ques­
tion of its ontology makes sense only relative to
some translation of the theory into a background
theory in which we use referential quantification.
The answer depends on both theories and, again,
on the chosen way of translating the one into the
other.
A final touch of relativity can in some cases cap
this, when we try to distinguish between substitu­
tional and referential quantification. Suppose again
a theory with an infinite lot of names, and suppose \nthat, by Giidel numbering or otherwise, we are
treating of the theory's notations and proofs within
the terms of the theory. If we succeed in showing
that every result of substituting a name for the
variable in a certain open sentence is true in the
theory, but at the same time we disprove the uni­
versal quantification of the sentence/9 then cer­
tainly we have shown that the universe of the
theory contained some nameless objects. This is a
case where an absolute decision can be reached in
favor of referential quantification and against sub­
stitutional quantification, without ever retreating
to a background theory.
But consider now the opposite situation, where
there is no such open sentence. Imagine on the
contrary that, whenever an open sentence is such
that each result of substituting a name in it can be
proved, its universal quantification can be proved
in the theory too. Under these circumstances we
can construe the universe as devoid of nameless
objects and hence reconstrue the quantifications
as substitutional, but we need not. We could still
construe the universe as containing nameless
objects. It could just happen that the nameless
ones are inseparable from the named ones, in this
sense: it could happen that all properties of name­
less objects that we can express in the notation of
the theory are shared by named objects.
We could construe the universe of the theory as
containing, e. g. , all real numbers. Some of them are
nameless, since the real numbers are indenumer­
able while the names are denumerable. But it could
still happen that the nameless reals are inseparable
from the named reals. This would leave us unable
within the theory to prove a distinction between
referential and substitutional quantification. 2o
E very expressible quantification that is true when
referentially construed remains true when substi­
tutionally construed, and vice versa.
We might still make the distinction from the
vantage point of a background theory. In it we
might specify some real number that was nameless
in the object theory; for there are always ways of
strengthening a theory so as to name more real
numbers, though never all. Further, in the back­
ground theory, we might construe the universe of
the object theory as exhausting the real numbers.
In the background theory we could, in this way,
clinch the quantifications in the object theory as
referential. But this clinching is doubly relative: it
is relative to the background theory and to the
interpretation or translation imposed on the object
theory from within the background theory.
Ontological Relativity
One might hope that this recourse to a back­
ground theory could often be avoided, even when
the nameless reals are inseparable from the named
reals in the object theory. One might hope by
indirect means to show within the object theory
that there are nameless reals. For we might prove
within the object theory that the reals are indenu­
merable and that the names are denumerable and
hence that there is no function whose arguments
are names and whose values exhaust the real num­
bers. Since the relation of real numbers to their
names would be such a function if each real num­
ber had a name, we would seem to have proved
within the object theory itself that there are name­
less reals and hence that quantification must be
taken referentially.
However, this is wrong; there is a loophole. This
reasoning would prove only that a relation of all
real numbers to their names cannot exist as an
entity in the universe of the theory. This reasoning
denies no number a name in the notation of the
theory, as long as the name relation does not belong
to the universe of the theory. And anyway we
should know better than to expect such a relation,
for it is what causes Berry's and Richard's and
related paradoxes.
Some theories can attest to their own nameless
objects and so claim referential quantification on
their own; other theories have to look to background
theories for this service. We saw how a theory might
attest to its own nameless objects, namely, by show­
ing that some open sentence became true under all
constant substitutions but false under universal
quantification. Perhaps this is the only way a theory
can claim referential import for its own quantifica­
tions. Perhaps, when the nameless objects happen
to be inseparable from the named, the quantifica­
tion used in a theory cannot meaningfully be
declared referential except through the medium
of a background theory. Yet referential quantifica­
tion is the key idiom of ontology.
Thus ontology can be multiply relative, multiply
meaningless apart from a background theory.
Besides being unable to say in absolute terms
just what the objects are, we are sometimes unable
even to distinguish objectively between referential
quantification and a substitutional counterfeit.
When we do relativize these matters to a back­
ground theory, moreover, the relativization itself
has two components: relativity to the choice of
background theory and relativity to the choice
of how to translate the object theory into the back-\nW. V. Quine
ground theory. As for the ontology in turn of the
background theory, and even the referentiality of
its quantification - these matters can call for a
background theory in turn.
There is not always a genuine regress. We saw
that, if we are merely clarifying the range of the
variables of a theory or the denotations of its terms,
and are taking the referentiality of quantification
itself for granted, we can commonly use the object
theory itself as background theory. We found that
when we undertake an ontological reduction, we
must accept at least the unreduced theory in order
to cite the proxy function; but this we were able
cheerfully to accept in the spirit of reductio ad
absurdum arguments. And now in the end we have
found further that if we care to question quantifi­
cation itself, and settle whether it imports a uni­
verse of discourse or turns merely on substitution
at the linguistic level, we in some cases have genu­
inely to regress to a background language endowed
with additional resources. We seem to have to do
this unless the nameless objects are separable from
the named in the object theory.
Regress in ontology is reminiscent of the now
familiar regress in the semantics of truth and kin­
dred notions - satisfaction, naming. We know from
Notes
1 J. Dewey, Experience and Nature (La Salle, Ill. : Open
Court, 1925; repro 1958), p. 179.
2 Ibid. , p. 170.
3 Ibid. , p. 185.
4 Ibid. , p. 178.
5 W. V. Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass. :
MIT Press, 1960), sect. 12.
6 L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (New
York: Macmillan, 1953), p. 14.
7 Cf. Quine, Word and Object, sect. 17.
8 Quine, Word and Object, sect. 15. For a summary of
the general point of view see also sect. 1 of "Speaking
of objects, " in W. V. Quine, Ontological Relativity and
Other Essays (New York: Columbia University Press,
1969).
9 To keep my account graphic, I am counting a certain
postpositive particle as a suffix rather than a word.
10 See Leon Henkin, "Completeness in the theory of
types, " Journal of Symbolic Logic 15 (1950), pp. 81-
91, and references therein.
11 For more on this theme see W. V. Quine, Set Theory
and its Logic (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University
Press, 1963, repro 1969), sect. II.
12 Paul Benacerraf, "What numbers cannot be, " Philo­
sophical Review 74 (1965), pp. 47-73, develops this
Tarski's work how the semantics, in this sense, of a
theory regularly demands an in some way more
inclusive theory. This similarity should perhaps
not surprise us, since both ontology and satisfac­
tion are matters of reference. In their elusiveness,
at any rate - in their emptiness now and again
except relative to a broader background - both
truth and ontology may in a suddenly rather clear
and even tolerant sense be said to belong to trans­
cendental metaphysics. 21
Note added in proof Besides such ontological
reduction as is provided by proxy functions (cf.
pp. 55-7), there is that which consists simply in
dropping objects whose absence will not falsify any
truths expressible in the notation. Commonly this
sort of deflation can be managed by proxy func­
tions, but R. E. Grandy has shown me that some­
times it cannot. Let us by all means recognize it
then as a further kind of reduction. In the back­
ground language we must, of course, be able to say
what class of objects is dropped, just as in other
cases we had to be able to specify the proxy func­
tion. This requirement seems sufficient still to
stem any resurgence of Pythagoreanism on the
strength of the Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem.
point. His conclusions differ in some ways from those
I shall come to.
l3 N. L. Wilson, "Substances without substrata, "
Review (if Metaphysics 12 (1959), pp. 521-39, at p. 532.
14 W. V. Quine, The Ways of Paradox (New York: Ran­
dom House, 1966), pp. 204ff; or see "Ontological
reduction and the world of numhers, " this volume,
ch. 38.
15 Quine, Set Theory and its Logic, sects 2f.
16 Kurt Giidel, The Consistency oflhe Continuum Hypoth­
esis (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1940),
p. 11.
17 ThoralfSkolem, "Logisch-komhinatorische Untersu­
chungen ilber die Erfilllharkeit oder Beweisharkeit
mathematischer Satze nehst cinem Theorem ilber
dichte Mengen, " Skrifter utgit av Videnskapsselskapel
i Kristiania (1919); trans. in Jean van Heijenoort (cd. )
From Frege to Gilde! : Source Book in the History (if'
Mathematical Logic (Camhridge, Mass. : Harvard
University Press, 1967), pp. 252-63.
18 Ruth B. Marcus, "Modalities and intensional lan­
guages, ". ~ynthese 13 (1961), pp. 303-22. I cannot
locate an adequate statement of Stanislaw Lesniews­
ki's philosophy of quantification in his writings;
I have it from his conversations. E. C. Luschei, in \nThe Lo! !. iwl Systems of Lesniewski (Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1962), pp. 108f, confirms my attribu­
tion but still cites no passage. On this version of
quantification see further "Existence and quantifica­
tion, " in Quine, Ontolo! !. ical Relativity and Other
Essays.
19 Such is the typical way of a numerically in segregative
system, misleadingly called "w-inconsistent. " See W.
Ontological Relativity
v. Quine, Selected Lo! !. ic Papers (New York: Random
House, 1966), pp. 118f, or "w-inconsistency and a so­
called axiom of infinity, " Journal of Symbolic Logic 18
(1953), pp. 122f.
20 This possibility was suggested by Saul Kripke.
21 In developing these thoughts I have been helped by
discussions with Saul Kripke, Thomas Nagel, and
especially Burton Dreben. \n\nPART II \n\nIntroduction
On the face of it, identity seems like the simplest of
concepts: everything is identical with itself and
with nothing else. But, as philosophers have long
been aware, the concept of identity gives rise to
some complex and difficult problems. One of these
is the so-called Leibniz' law, or the identity of
indiscernibles: Things with the same properties
are one and the same. (The converse of this prin­
ciple, also sometimes called "Leibniz' law, " is
uncontroversial: Identical things have the same
properties. ) In his "The Identity ofIndiscernibles"
(chapter 6), Max Black presents a possible objec­
tion to Leibniz' law, by presenting a by-now
famous counterexample involving two distinct
spheres that nonetheless appear to have exactly
the same properties. (Black's example is discussed
further by A. ]. Ayer and D. ]. O'Connor; see
Further reading, below. )
Another question that has recently been much
discussed is whether all statements of identity are
metaphysically necessary or whether they can be
contingent. The Evening Star is identical with the
Morning Star. Given this, could or might the Eve­
ning Star not have been the Morning Star? It was
long assumed that some identities, especially those
that can be known only empirically, were only
contingently true or contingently false, not neces­
sarily true or necessarily false. Saul Kripke's chal­
lenge to this assumption, in "Identity and
Necessity" (chapter 7), is among the more impor­
tant developments in contemporary metaphysics,
and has generated much discussion.
Further reading
Ayer, A. J. , "The identity of indiscernibles, " in Philoso­
phical Essays (New York: St Martin's Press; London:
Macmillan, 1954).
Cartwright, Richard, "Identity and substitutivity, " in
Philosophical Essays (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press,
1987).
Feldman, Fred, "Geach and relative identity, " Review of
Metaphysics 22 (1968/9), pp. 547-55.
Geach, Peter, "Identity" and "Identity - a reply, " in
Logic Matters (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1972).
Introduction
In "The Same F" (chapter 8), John Perry
explores the claim, due to Peter Geach (see Further
reading), that identities are relative to a sortal. That
is, it is not proper to say simply 'x is identical with
y'; one should rather say 'x is the same F as y, "
where 'F' is a sortal term denoting a kind. The
following sort of example has been used in support
of the doctrine of 'relative identity': although the
chairman of the school board is not the same official
as the postmaster, they are the same person. (This
issue is further discussed in works by Fred
Feldman and David Wiggins; see Further reading. )
In "Contingent Identity" (chapter 9), Allan
Gibbard makes a case for contingent identities,
and carefully and systematically investigates some
complex issues involved in allowing identities that
are not necessary. The issue of sortal relativity of
identity reappears in this context. Stephen Yablo,
too, is concerned, in his "Identity, Essence, and
Indiscernibility" (chapter 10), with the problem of
making sense of identities and related relations that
are not necessary, and develops a scheme that is
interestingly different from that of Gibbard. The
distinction between essential and contingent pro­
perties of an object plays a large role in Yablo, and
his distinctions between "categorical" and
"hypothetical" properties, and between "coinci­
dence" and "identity, " are worthy of note.
(Modal concepts, such as necessity and contin­
gency, which are used prominently in some of the
chapters in this section, are treated more fully in
Part III, "Modalities and Possible Worlds. ")
Kripke, Saul, Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press, 1980).
Lowe, E. J. , "What is a criterion of identity? ," Philoso­
phical QJ<arterly 39 (1989), pp. 1-21.
O'Connor, D. J. , "The identity of indiscernibles, "
Analysis 14 (1954), pp. 102-10.
Salmon, Nathan, Frege's Puzzle (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT
Press, 1986).
Wiggins, David, Sameness and Substance (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1980). \nMax Black
A: The principle of the Identity ofIndiscernibles
seems to me obviously true. And I don't see how we
are going to define identity or establish the con­
nection between mathematics and logic without
using it.
B: It seems to me obviously false. And your trou­
bles as a mathematical logician are beside the point.
If the principle is false, you have no right to use it.
A: You simply say it's false ~ and even if you said
so three times, that wouldn't make it so.
B: Well, you haven't done anything more your­
self than assert the principle to be true. As Bradley
once said, 'assertion can demand no more than
counter-assertion; and what is affirmed on the
one side, we on the other can simply deny. '
A: How will this do for an argument? If two
things, a and b, are given, the first has the property
of being identical with a. Now b cannot have this
property, for else b would be a, and we should have
only one thing, not two as assumed. Hence a has at
least one property, which b does not have, that is to
say the property of being identical with a.
B: This is a roundabout way of saying nothing,
for 'a has the property of being identical with a'
means no more than 'a is a'. When you begin to say
'a is. .. ' I am supposed to know what thing you are
referring to as 'a', and I expect to be told something
about that thing. But when you end the sentence
Originally published in Mind 51 (1952), and reprinted in
Max Black, Problems of Analysis (1954), pp. 204-16.
Copyright © N. Black and by Cornell University. Re­
printed here by permission of the Cornell University
Press.
with the words'. .. is a', I am left still waiting. The
sentence 'a is a' is a useless tautology.
A: Are you as scornful about difference as about
identity? For a also has, and b does not have, the
property of being different from b. This is a second
property that the one thing has but not the other.
B: All you are saying is that b is different from a.
I think the form of words 'a is different from b'
does have the advantage over 'a is a' that it might
be used to give information. I might learn from
hearing it used that 'a' and 'b' were applied to
different things. But this is not what you want to
say, since you are trying to use the names, not
mention them. When I already know what 'a' and
'b' stand for, 'a is different from b' tells me nothing.
It, too, is a useless tautology.
A: I wouldn't have expected you to treat 'tauto­
logy' as a term of abuse. Tautology or not, the
sentence has a philosophical use. It expresses the
necessary truth that different things have at least
one property not in common. Thus different things
must be discernible; and hence, by contraposition,
indiscernible things must be identical. QE. O.
B: Why obscure matters by this old-fashioned
language? By 'indiscernible' I suppose you mean
the same as 'having all properties in common' Do
you claim to have proved that two things having all
their properties in common are identical?
A: Exactly.
B: Then this is a poor way of stating your con­
clusion. If a and b are identical, there is just one
thing having the two names 'a' and 'b'; and in that
case it is absurd to say that a and b are two. Con­
versely, once you have supposed there are two \nthings having all their properties in common, you
can't without contradicting yourself say that they
are 'identical'.
A: I can't believe you were really misled. I simply
meant to say it is logically impossible for two things
to have all their properties in common. I showed
that a must have at least two properties - the
property of being identical with a and the property
of being different from b - neither of which can be a
property of b. Doesn't this prove the principle of
identity of indiscernibles?
B: Perhaps you have proved something. If so, the
nature of your proof should show us exactly what
you have proved. If you want to call 'being identical
with a' a 'property' I suppose I can't prevent you.
But you must then accept the consequences of this
way of talking. All you mean when you say 'a has
the property of being identical with a' is that a is a.
And all you mean when you say 'b does not have the
property of being identical with a' is that b is not a.
So what you have 'proved' is that a is a and b is not
a; that is to say, b and a are different. Similarly,
when you said that a, but not b, had the property of
being different from b, you were simply saying that
a and b were different. In fact you are merely
redescribing the hypothesis that a and b are differ­
ent by calling it a case of 'difference of properties'.
Drop the misleading description and your famous
principle reduces to the truism that different things
are different. How true! And how uninteresting!
A: Well, the properties of identity and difference
may be uninteresting, but they are properties. If I
had shown that grass was green, I suppose you
would say I hadn't shown that grass was coloured.
B: You certainly would not have shown that grass
had any colour other than green.
A: What it comes to is that you object to the
conclusion of my argument following from the pre­
miss that a and b are different.
B: No, I object to the triviality of the conclusion.
If you want to have an interesting principle to
defend, you must interpret 'property' more nar­
rowly - enough so, at any rate, for 'identity' and
'difference' not to count as properties.
A: Your notion of an interesting principle seems
to be one which I shall have difficulty in establish­
ing. Will you at least allow me to include among
'properties' what are sometimes called 'relational
characteristics' - like being married to Caesar or
being at a distance from London?
B: Why not? If you are going to defend the prin­
ciple, it is for you to decide what version you wish
to defend.
The Identity of Indiscernibles
A: In that case, I don't need to count identity and
difference as properties. Here is a different argu­
ment that seems to me quite conclusive. The only
way we can discover that two different things exist
is by finding out that one has a quality not pos­
sessed by the other or else that one has a relational
characteristic that the other hasn't.
If both are blue and hard and sweet and so on,
and have the same shape and dimensions and are in
the same relations to everything in the universe, it
is logically impossible to tell them apart. The sup­
position that in such a case there might really be
two things would be unverifiable in principle.
Hence it would be meaningless.
B: You are going too fast for me.
A: Think of it this way. If the principle were
false, the fact that I can see only two of your
hands would be no proof that you had just two.
And even if every conceivable test agreed with the
supposition that you had two hands, you might all
the time have three, four, or any number. You
might have nine hands, different from one another
and all indistinguishable from your left hand, and
nine more all different from each other but indis­
tinguishable from your right hand. And even if you
really did have just two hands, and no more,
neither you nor I nor anybody else could ever
know that fact. This is too much for me to swallow.
This is the kind of absurdity you get into, as soon as
you abandon verifiability as a test of meaning.
B: Far be it from me to abandon your sacred cow.
Before I give you a direct answer, let me try to
describe a counter-example.
Isn't it logically possible that the universe should
have contained nothing but two exactly similar
spheres? We might suppose that each was made
of chemically pure iron, had a diameter of one mile,
that they had the same temperature, colour, and so
on, and that nothing else existed. Then every qual­
ity and relational characteristic of the one would
also be a property of the other. Now if what I am
describing is logically possible, it is not impossible
for two things to have all their properties in com­
mon. This seems to me to refute the Principle.
A: Your supposition, I repeat, isn't verifiable and
therefore can't be regarded as meaningful. But
supposing you have described a possible world, I
still don't see that you have refuted the principle.
Consider one of the spheres, a, .. .
B: How can I, since there is no way of telling
them apart? Which one do you want me to consider?
A: This is very foolish. I mean either of the two
spheres, leaving you to decide which one you \nMax Black
wished to consider. If I were to say to you 'Take
any book off the shelP, it would be foolish on your
part to reply 'Which? '
B: It's a poor analogy. I know how to take a book
off a shelf, but I don't know how to identify one of
two spheres supposed to be alone in space and so
symmetrically placed with respect to each other
that neither has any quality or character the other
does not also have.
A: All of which goes to show as I said before, the
unverifiability of your supposition. Can't you ima­
gine that one sphere has been designated as 'a'?
B: I can imagine only what is logically possible.
Now it is logically possible that somebody should
enter the universe I have described, see one of the
spheres on his left hand and proceed to call it 'a'. I
can imagine that all right, if that's enough to satisfy
you.
A: Very well, now let me try to finish what I
began to say about a. ..
B: I still can't let you, because you, in your pres­
ent situation, have no right to talk about a. All I
have conceded is that if something were to happen
to introduce a change into my universe, so that an
observer entered and could see the two spheres,
one of them could then have a name. But this
would be a different supposition from the one I
wanted to consider. My spheres don't yet have
names. If an observer were to enter the scene, he
could perhaps put a red mark on one of the spheres.
You might just as well say 'By "a" I mean the
sphere which would be the first to be marked by a
red mark if anyone were to arrive and were to
proceed to make a red mark! ' You might just as
well ask me to consider the first daisy in my lawn
that would be picked by a child, if a child were to
come along and do the picking. This doesn't now
distinguish any daisy from the others. You are just
pretending to use a name.
A: And I think you are just pretending not to
understand me. All I am asking you to do is to
think of one of your spheres, no matter which, so
that I may go on to say something about it when
you give me a chance.
B: You talk as if naming an object and then
thinking about it were the easiest thing in the
world. But it isn't so easy. Suppose I tell you to
name any spider in my garden: if you can catch one
first or describe one uniquely, you can name it
easily enough. But you can't pick one out, let
alone 'name' it, by just thinking. You remind me
of the mathematicians who thought that talking
about an Axiom of Choice would really allow
them to choose a single member of a collection
when they had no criterion of choice.
A: At this rate you will never give me a chance to
say anything. Let me try to make my point without
using names. Each of the spheres will surely differ
from the other in being at some distance from that
other one, but at no distance from itself - that is to
say, it will bear at least one relation to itself - being
at no distance from, or being in the same place as - that
it does not bear to the other. And this will serve to
distinguish it from the other.
B: Not at all. Each will have the relational char­
acteristic being at a distance ~(two miles, say, from
the centre of a sphere one mile in diameter, etc. And
each will have the relational characteristic (if you
want to call it that) of being in the same place as itself.
The two are alike in this respect as in all others.
A: But look here. Each sphere occupies a differ­
ent place; and this at least will distinguish them
from one another.
B: This sounds as if you thought the places had
some independent existence, though I don't sup­
pose you really think so. To say the spheres are in
'different places' is just to say that there is a dis­
tance between the two spheres; and we have already
seen that that will not serve to distinguish them.
Each is at a distance - indeed the same distance -
from the other.
A: When I said they were at different places, I
didn't mean simply that they were at a distance
from one another. That one sphere is in a certain
place does not entail the existence of any other
sphere. So to say that one sphere is in its place,
and the other in its place, and then to add that these
places are different seems to me different from
saying the spheres are at a distance from one
another.
B: What does it mean to say 'a sphere is in its
place'? Nothing at all, so far as I can see. Where else
could it be? All you are saying is that the spheres
are in different places.
A: Then my retort is, What does it mean to say
'Two spheres are in different places'? Or, as you so
neatly put it, 'Where else could they be? '
B: You have a point. What I should have said was
that your assertion that the spheres occupied dif­
ferent places said nothing at all, unless you were
drawing attention to the necessary truth that dif­
ferent physical objects must be in different places.
Now if two spheres must be in different places, as
indeed they must, to say that the spheres occupy
different places is to say no more than they are two
spheres. \nA: This is like a point you made before. You
won't allow me to deduce anything from the sup­
position that there are two spheres.
B: Let me put it another way. In the two-sphere
universe, the only reason for saying that the places
occupied were different would be that different
things occupied them. So in order to show the
places were different, you would first have to
show, in some other way, that the spheres were
different. You will never be able to distinguish the
spheres by means of the places they occupy.
A: A minute ago, you were willing to allow that
somebody might give your spheres different
names. Will you let me suppose that some traveller
has visited your monotonous 'universe' and has
named one sphere 'Castor' and the other 'Pollux'?
B: All right - provided you don't try to use those
names yourself.
A: Wouldn't the traveller, at least, have to
recognize that being at a distance of two miles from
Castor was not the same property as being at a
distance of two miles from Pollux?
B: I don't see why. If he were to see that Castor
and Pollux had exactly the same properties, he
would see that 'being at a distance of two miles
from Castor' meant exactly the same as 'being at a
distance of two miles from Pollux'.
A: They couldn't mean the same. If they did,
'being at a distance (If two miles from Castor and at
the same time not being at a distance of two miles from
Pollux' would be a self-contradictory description.
But plenty of bodies could answer to this descrip­
tion. Again, if the two expressions meant the same,
anything which was two miles from Castor would
have to be two miles from Pollux - which is clearly
false. So the two expressions don't mean the same,
and the two spheres have at least two properties not
III common.
B: Which?
A: Being at a distance of two miles from Castor and
being at a distance of two miles from Pollux.
B: But now you are using the words 'Castor' and
'Pollux' as if they really stood for something. They
are just our old friends 'a' and 'b' in disguise.
A: You surely don't want to say that the arrival of
the name-giving traveller creates spatial proper­
ties? Perhaps we can't name your spheres and
therefore can't name the corresponding properties;
but the properties must be there.
B: What can this mean? The traveller has not
visited the spheres, and the spheres have no
names - neither 'Castor', nor 'Pollux', nor 'a', nor
'b', nor any others. Yet you still want to say they
The Identity of Indiscernibles
have certain properties which cannot be referred to
without using names for the spheres. You want to
say 'the property of being at a distance from Cas­
tor', though it is logically impossible for you to talk
in this way. You can't speak, but you won't be
silent.
A: How eloquent, and how unconvincing! But
since you seem to have convinced yourself, at
least, perhaps you can explain another thing that
bothers me: I don't see that you have a right to talk
as you do about places or spatial relations in con­
nection with your so-called universe. So long as we
are talking about our own universe - the universe -
I know what you mean by 'distance', 'diameter',
'place' and so on. But in what you want to call a
universe, even though it contains only two objects,
I don't see what such words could mean. So far as I
can see, you are applying these spatial terms in their
present usage to a hypothetical situation which
contradicts the presuppositions of that usage.
B: What do you mean by 'presupposition'?
A: Well, you spoke of measured distances, for
one thing. Now this presupposes some means of
measurement. Hence your 'universe' must contain
at least a third thing - a ruler or some other mea­
suring device.
B: Are you claiming that a universe must have at
least three things in it? What is the least number of
things required to make a world?
A: No, all I am saying is that you cannot describe
a configuration as spatial unless it includes at least
three objects. This is part of the meaning of 'spa­
tial' - and it is no more mysterious than saying you
can't have a game of chess without there existing at
least thirty-five things (thirty-two pieces, a chess­
board, and two players).
B: If this is all that bothers you, I can easily
provide for three or any number of things without
changing the force of my counter-example. The
important thing, for my purpose, was that the
configuration of two spheres was symmetrical. So
long as we preserve this feature of the imaginary
universe, we can now allow any number of objects
to be found in it.
A: You mean any even number of objects.
B: Quite right. Why not imagine a plane running
clear through space, with everything that happens
on one side of it always exactly duplicated at an
equal distance in the other side.
A: A kind of cosmic mirror producing real
images.
B: Yes, except that there wouldn't be any mirror!
The point is that in this world we can imagine any \nMax Black
degree of complexity and change to occur. No
reason to exclude rulers, compasses and weighing
machines. No reason, for that matter, why the
Battle of Waterloo shouldn't happen.
A: Twice over, you mean - with Napoleon sur­
rendering later in two different places simultan­
eously!
B: Provided you wanted to call both of them
'Napoleon'.
A: So your point is that everything could be
duplicated on the other side of the non-existent
Looking Glass. I suppose whenever a man got
married, his identical twin would be marrying the
identical twin of the first man's fiancee?
B: Exactly.
A: Except that 'identical twins' wouldn't be
numerically identical?
B: You seem to be agreeing with me.
A: Far from it. This is just a piece of gratuitous
metaphysics. If the inhabitants of your world had
enough sense to know what was sense and what
wasn't, they would never suppose all the events in
their world were duplicated. It would be much
more sensible for them to regard the 'second'
Napoleon as a mere mirror image - and similarly
for all the other supposed 'duplicates'.
B: But they could walk through the 'mirror' and
find water just as wet, sugar just as sweet, and grass
just as green on the other side.
A: You don't understand me. They would not
postulate 'another side'. A man looking at the
'mirror' would be seeing himself, not a duplicate.
If he walked in a straight line toward the 'mirror',
he would eventually find himself back at his
starting point, not at a duplicate of his starting
point. This would involve their having a different
geometry from ours - but that would be preferable
to the logician's nightmare of the reduplicated uni­
verse.
B: They might think so - until the twins really
began to behave differently for the first time!
A: Now it's you who are tinkering with your
supposition. You can't have your universe and
change it too.
B: All right, I retract.
A: The more I think about your 'universe', the
queerer it seems. What would happen when a man
crossed your invisible 'mirror'? While he was
actually crossing, his body would have to change
shape, in order to preserve the symmetry. Would
it gradually shrink to nothing and then expand
again?
B: I confess I hadn't thought of that.
A: And here is something that explodes the
whole notion. Would you say that one of the two
Napoleons in your universe had his heart in the
right place - literally, I mean?
B: Why, of course.
A: In that case his 'mirror-image' twin would
have the heart on the opposite side of the body.
One Napoleon would have his heart on the left of
his body, and the other would have it on the right
of his body.
B: It's a good point, though it would still make
objects like spheres indistinguishable. But let me
try again. Let me abandon the original idea of a
plane of symmetry and suppose instead that we
have only a centre of symmetry. I mean that every­
thing that happened at any place would be exactly
duplicated at a place an equal distance on the
opposite side of the centre of symmetry. In short,
the universe would be what the mathematicians call
'radially symmetrical'. And to avoid complications,
we could suppose that the centre of symmetry itself
was physically inaccessible, so that it would be
impossible for any material body to pass through
it. Now in this universe, identical twins would have
to be either both right-handed or both left-handed.
A: Your universes are beginning to be as plentiful
as blackberries. You are too ingenuous to see the
force of my argument about verifiability. Can't you
see that your supposed description of a universe in
which everything has its 'identical twin' doesn't
describe anything verifiably different from a
corresponding universe without such duplication?
This must be so, no matter what kind of symmetry
your universe manifested.
B: You are assuming that in order to verify that
there are two things of a certain kind, it must be
possible to show that one has a property not pos­
sessed by the other. But this is not so. A pair of very
close but similar magnetic poles produce a charac­
teristic field of force which assures me that there
are two poles, even if I have no way of examining
them separately. The presence of two exactly simi­
lar stars at a great distance might be detected by
some resultant gravitational effect or by optical
interference - or in some such similar way - even
though we had no way of inspecting one in isolation
from the other. Don't physicists say something like
this about the electrons inside an atom? We can
verify that there are two, that is to say a certain
property of the whole configuration, even though
there is no way of detecting any character that
uniquely characterises any element of the config­
uration. \nA: But if you were to approach your two stars one
would have to be on your left and one on the right'.
And this would distinguish them.
B: I agree. Why shouldn't we say that the two
stars are distinguishable - meaning that it would be
possible for an observer to see one on his left and
the other on his right, or more generally, that it
would be possible for one star to come to have a
relation to a third object that the second star would
not have to that third object.
A: So you agree with me after all.
B: Not if you mean that the two stars do not have
all their properties in common. All I said was that it
was logically possible for them to enter into differ­
ent relationships with a third object. But this would
be a change in the universe.
A: If you are right, nothing unobserved would be
observable. For the presence of an observer would
always change it, and the observation would always
be an observation of something else.
B: I don't say that every observation changes
what is observed. My point is that there isn't any
being to the right or being to the left in the two-sphere
universe until an observer is introduced, that is to
say until a real change is made.
A: But the spheres themselves wouldn't have
changed.
B: Indeed they would: they would have acquired
new relational characteristics. In the absence of any
asymmetric observer, I repeat, the spheres would
The Identity of Indiscernibles
have all their properties in common (including, if
you like, the power to enter into different relations
with other objects). Hence the principle of identity
of indiscernibles is false.
A: So perhaps you really do have twenty hands
after all?
B: Not a bit of it. Nothing that I have said prev­
ents me from holding that we can verify that there
are exactly two. But we could know that two things
existed without there being any way to distinguish
one from the other. The Principle is false.
A: I am not surprised that you ended in this way,
since you assumed it in the description of your
fantastic 'universe'. Of course, if you began by
assuming that the spheres were numerically differ­
ent though qualitatively alike, you could end by
'proving' what you first assumed.
B: But I wasn't 'proving' anything. I tried to
support my contention that it is logically possible
for two things to have all their properties in com­
mon by giving an illustrative description. (Simil­
arly, if I had to show it is logically possible for
nothing at all to be seen, I would ask you to imagine
a universe in which everybody was blind. ) It was
for you to show that my description concealed
some hidden contradiction. And you haven't done
so.
A: All the same I am not convinced.
B: Well, then, you ought to be. \nSaul Kripke
A problem which has arisen frequently in contem­
porary philosophy is: "How are contingent identity
statements possible? " This question is phrased by
analogy with the way Kant phrased his question
"How are synthetic a priori judgments possible? "
In both cases, it has usually been taken for granted
in the one case by Kant that synthetic a priori
judgments were possible, and in the other case in
contemporary philosophical literature that con­
tingent statements of identity are possible. I do
not intend to deal with the Kantian question except
to mention this analogy: After a rather thick book
was written trying to answer the question how
synthetic a priori judgments were possible, others
came along later who claimed that the solution to
the problem was that synthetic a priori judgments
were, of course, impossible and that a book trying
to show otherwise was written in vain. I will not
discuss who was right on the possibility of syn­
thetic a priori judgments. But in the case of con­
tingent statements of identity, most philosophers
have felt that the notion of a contingent identity
statement ran into something like the following
paradox. An argument like the following can be
given against the possibility of contingent identity
statements: 1
First, the law of the substitutivity of identity says
that, for any objects x and y, if x is identical to y,
then if x has a certain property F, so does y:
Originally published in Milton K. Munitz (ed. ), Identity and
Individuation (1971), pp. 135-64. Reprinted by permis­
sion of New York University Press © Copyright by
New York University.
(I) (x)(y)[(x =y): :: > (Fx: :: > fy)]
On the other hand, every object surely is necessa­
rily self-identical:
(2) (x)[] (x = x)
But
(3) (x)(y)(x = y): :: > [[](x = x): :: > [](x = y)]
is a substitution instance of (I), the substitutivity
law. From (2) and (3), we can conclude that, for
every x andy, if x equalsy, then, it is necessary that
x equalsy:
(4) (x)(y)((x =y): :: > [](x =y))
This is because the clause [] (x = x) of the condi­
tional drops out because it is known to be true.
This is an argument which has been stated many
times in recent philosophy. Its conclusion, how­
ever, has often been regarded as highly paradoxical.
For example, David Wiggins, in his paper, "Ident­
ity-Statements, " says:
Now there undoubtedly exist contingent ident­
ity-statements. Let a = b be one of them. From
its simple truth and (5) [=(4) above] we can
derive "[](a = b)". But how then can there
be any contingent identity-statements? 2
He then says that five various reactions to this
argument are possible, and rejects all of these reac-\ntions, and reacts himself. I do not want to discuss
all the possible reactions to this statement, except
to mention the second of those Wiggins rejects.
This says:
We might accept the result and plead that pro­
vided 'a' and 'b' are proper names nothing is
amiss. The consequence of this is that no con­
tingent identity-statements can be made by
means of proper names.
And then he says that he is discontented with this
solution, and many other philosophers have been
discontented with this solution, too, while still
others have advocated it.
What makes the statement (4) seem surprising?
It says, for any objects x and y, if x is y, then it is
necessary that x isy. I have already mentioned that
someone might object to this argument on the
grounds that premise (2) is already false, that it is
not the case that everything is necessarily self­
identical. Well, for example, am I myself necessa­
rily self-identical? Someone might argue that in
some situations which we can imagine I would
not even have existed, and therefore the statement
"Saul Kripke is Saul Kripke" would have been
false, or it would not be the case that I was self­
identical. Perhaps, it would have been neither true
nor false, in such a world, to say that Saul Kripke is
self-identical. Well, that may be so, but really it
depends on one's philosophical view of a topic
that I will not discuss: that is, what is to be said
about truth-values of statements mentioning
objects that do not exist in the actual world or any
given possible world or counterfactual situation.
Let us interpret necessity here weakly. We can
count statements as necessary if, whenever the
objects mentioned therein exist, the statement
would be true. If we wished to be very careful
about this, we would have to go into the question
of existence as a predicate and ask if the statement
can be reformulated in the form: For every x it is
necessary that, if x exists, then x is self-identical. I
will not go into this particular form of subtlety here
because it is not going to be relevant to my main
theme. Nor am I really going to consider formula
(4). Anyone who believes formula (2) is, in my
opinion, committed to formula (4). If x and yare
the same things and we can talk about modal prop­
erties of an object at all, that is, in the usual par­
lance, we can speak of modality de re and an object
necessarily having certain properties as such, then
formula (I), I think, has to hold. Where x is any
Identity and Necessity
property at all, including a property involving
modal operators, and if x and yare the same object
and x had a certain property F, then y has to have
the same property F. And this is so even if the
property F is itself of the form of necessarily having
some other property G, in particular that of neces­
sarily being identical to a certain object. Well, I will
not discuss the formula (4) itself because by itself it
does not assert, of any particular true statement of
identity, that it is necessary. It does not say any­
thing about statements at all. It says for every object
x and objecty, if x andy are the same object, then it
is necessary that x and yare the same object. And
this, I think, if we think about it (anyway, if some­
one does not think so, I will not argue for it here),
really amounts to something very little different
from the statement (2). Since x, by definition of
identity, is the only object identical with x,
"(y)(y = x ~ Fy)" seems to me to be little more
than a garrulous way of saying "Fx, " and thus
(x) (y) (y = x ~ Fx) says the same as (x)Fx no
matter what "F" is - in particular, even if "F"
stands for the property of necessary identity with x.
So if x has this property (of necessary identity with
x), trivially everything identical with x has it, as (4)
asserts. But, from statement (4) one may apparently
be able to deduce that various particular statements
of identity must be necessary, and this is then
supposed to be a very paradoxical consequence.
Wiggins says, "Now there undoubtedly exist
contingent identity-statements. " One example of
a contingent identity statement is the statement
that the first Postmaster General of the United
States is identical with the inventor of bifocals, or
that both of these are identical with the man
claimed by the Saturday Evening Post as its founder
(falsely claimed, I gather, by the way). Now some
such statements are plainly contingent. It plainly is
a contingent fact that one and the same man both
invented bifocals and took on the job of Postmaster
General of the United States. How can we recon­
cile this with the truth of statement (4)? Well, that,
too, is an issue I do not want to go into in detail
except to be very dogmatic about it. It was, I think,
settled quite well by Bertrand Russell in his notion
of the scope of a description. According to Russell,
one can, for example, say with propriety that the
author of Hamlet might not have written Hamlet, or
even that the author of Hamlet might not have been
the author of Hamlet. Now here, of course, we do
not deny the necessity of the identity of an object
with itself; but we say it is true concerning a certain
man that he in fact was the unique person to have \nSaul Kripke
written Hamlet and secondly that the man, who in
fact was the man who wrote Hamlet, might not have
written Hamlet. In other words, if Shakespeare had
decided not to write tragedies, he might not have
written Hamlet. Under these circumstances, the
man who in fact wrote Hamlet would not have
written Hamlet. Russell brings this out by saying
that in such a statement, the first occurrence of the
description "the author of Hamlet" has large
scope. 3 That is, we say, "The author of Hamlet
has the following property: that he might not have
written Hamlet. " We do not assert that the follow­
ing statement might have been the case, namely
that the author of Hamlet did not write Hamlet,
for that is not true. That would be to say that it
might have been the case that someone wrote Ham­
let and yet did not write Hamlet, which would be a
contradiction. Now, aside from the details of Rus­
sell's particular formulation of it, which depends on
his theory of descriptions, this seems to be the
distinction that any theory of descriptions has to
make. For example, if someone were to meet the
President of Harvard and take him to be a Teaching
Fellow, he might say: "I took the President of
Harvard for a Teaching Fellow. " By this he does
not mean that he took the proposition "The Pre­
sident of Harvard is a Teaching Fellow" to be true.
He could have meant this, for example, had he
believed that some sort of democratic system had
gone so far at Harvard that the President of it
decided to take on the task of being a Teaching
Fellow. But that probably is not what he means.
What he means instead, as Russell points out, is
"Someone is President of Harvard and I took him
to be a Teaching Fellow. " In one of Russell's
examples someone says, "I thought your yacht is
much larger than it is. " And the other man replies,
"No, my yacht is not much larger than it is. "
Provided that the notion of modality de re, and
thus of quantifying into modal contexts, makes any
sense at all, we have quite an adequate solution to
the problem of avoiding paradoxes if we substitute
descriptions for the universal quantifiers in (4)
because the only consequence we will draw, 4 for
example, in the bifocals case, is that there is a man
who both happened to have invented bifocals and
happened to have been the first Postmaster Gen­
eral of the United States, and is necessarily self­
identical. There is an object x such that x invented
bifocals, and as a matter of contingent fact an object. y, such that'y is the first Postmaster General of the
United States, and finally, it is necessary, that x is. y. What are x and. y here? Here, x and 'yare both
Benjamin Franklin, and it can certainly be neces­
sary that Benjamin Franklin is identical with him­
self. So, there is no problem in the case of
descriptions if we accept Russell's notion of
scope. 5 And I just dogmatically want to drop that
question here and go on to the question about
names which Wiggins raises. And Wiggins says
he might accept the result and plead that, provided
a and b are proper names, nothing is amiss. And
then he reject this.
Now what is the special problem about proper
names? At least if one is not familiar with the phi­
losophicalliterature about this matter, one naively
feels something like the following about proper
names. First, if someone says "Cicero was an ora­
tor, " then he uses the name "Cicero" in that state­
ment simply to pick out a certain object and then to
ascribe a certain property to the object, namely, in
this case, he ascribes to a certain man the property of
having been an orator. If someone else uses another
name, such as, say, "Tully, " he is still speaking
about the same man. One ascribes the same prop­
erty, if one says "Tully is an orator, " to the same
man. So to speak, the fact, or state of affairs, repre­
sented by the statement is the same whether one
says "Cicero is an orator" or one says "Tully is an
orator. " It would, therefore, seem that the function
of names is simply to refer, and not to describe the
objects so named by such properties as "being the
inventor of bifocals" or "being the first Postmaster
General. " It would seem that Leibniz' law and the
law (I) should not only hold in the universally
quantified form, but also in the form "if a = band
Fa, then Fb, " wherever "a" and "b" stand in place
of names and "F" stands in place of a predicate
expressing a genuine property of the object:
(a = b· Fa) ~ Fb
We can run the same argument through again to
obtain the conclusion where "a" and "b" replace
any names, "If a = b, then necessarily a = b. " And
so, we could venture this conclusion: that when­
ever "a" and "b" are proper names, if a is b, that it
is necessary that a is b. Identity statements between
proper names have to be necessary if they are going
to be true at all. This view in fact has been advo­
cated, for example, by Ruth Barcan Marcus in a
paper of hers on the philosophical interpretation of
modallogic. 6 According to this view, whenever, for
example, someone makes a correct statement of
identity between two names, such as, for example,
that Cicero is Tully, his statement has to be neces­
sary if it is true. But such a conclusion seems plainly \nto be false. (I, like other philosophers, have a habit
of understatement in which "it seems plainly false"
means "it is plainly false. " Actually, I think the
view is true, though not quite in the form defended
by Mrs Marcus. ) At any rate, it seems plainly false.
One example was given by Professor Quine in his
reply to Professor Marcus at the symposium: "I
think I see trouble anyway in the contrast between
proper names and descriptions as Professor Mar­
cus draws it. The paradigm of the assigning of
proper names is tagging. We may tag the planet
Venus some fine evening with the proper name
'Hesperus'. We may tag the same planet again
someday before sunrise with the proper name
'Phosphorus'. " (Quine thinks that something like
that actually was done once. ) "When, at last, we
discover that we have tagged the same planet twice,
our discovery is empirical, and not because the
proper names were descriptions. " According to
what we are told, the planet Venus seen in the
morning was originally thought to be a star and
was called "the Morning Star, " or (to get rid of any
question of using a description) was called "Phos­
phorus. " One and the same planet, when seen in
the evening, was thought to be another star, the
Evening Star, and was called "Hesperus. " Later
on, astronomers discovered that Phosphorus and
Hesperus were one and the same. Surely no
amount of a priori ratiocination on their part
could conceivably have made it possible for them
to deduce that Phosphorus is Hesperus. In fact,
given the information they had, it might have
turned out the other way. Therefore, it is argued,
the statement "Hesperus is Phosphorus" has to be
an ordinary contingent, empirical truth, one which
might have come out otherwise, and so the view
that true identity statements between names are
necessary has to be false. Another example which
Quine gives in Word and Object is taken from Pro­
fessor Schriidinger, the famous pioneer of quan­
tum mechanics: A certain mountain can be seen
from both Tibet and Nepal. When seen from one
direction, it was called "Gaurisanker"; when seen
from another direction, it was called "Everest";
and then, later on, the empirical discovery was
made that Gaurisanker is Everest. (Quine further
says that he gathers the example is actually
geographically incorrect. I guess one should not
rely on physicists for geographical information. )
Of course, one possible reaction to this argument
is to deny that names like "Cicero, " "Tully, "
"Gaurisanker, " and "Everest" really are proper
names. Look, someone might say (someone has
Identity and Necessity
said it: his name was "Bertrand Russell"), just
because statements like "Hesperus is Phosphorus"
and "Gaurisanker is Everest" are contingent, we
can see that the names in question are not really
purely referential. You are not, in Mrs Marcus's
phrase, just "tagging" an object; you are actually
describing it. What does the contingent fact that
Hesperus is Phosphorus amount to? Well, it
amounts to the fact that the star in a certain portion
of the sky in the evening is the star in a certain
portion of the sky in the morning. Similarly, the
contingent fact that Guarisanker is Everest
amounts to the fact that the mountain viewed
from such and such an angle in Nepal is the moun­
tain viewed from such and such another angle in
Tibet. Therefore, such names as "Hesperus" and
"Phosphorus' can only be abbreviations for
descriptions. The term "Phosphorus" has to
mean "the star seen. .. ," or (let us be cautious
because it actually turned out not to be a star),
"the heavenly body seen from such and such a
position at such and such a time in the morning, "
and the name "Hesperus" has to mean "the hea­
venly body seen in such and such a position at such
and such a time in the evening. " So, Russell con­
cludes, if we want to reserve the term "name" for
things which really just name an object without
describing it, the only real proper names we can
have are names of our own immediate sense-data,
objects of our own "immediate acquaintance. " The
only such names which occur in language are
demonstratives like "this" and "that. " And it is
easy to see that this requirement of necessity of
identity, understood as exempting identities
between names from all imaginable doubt, can
indeed be guaranteed only for demonstrative
names of immediate sense-data; for only in such
cases can an identity statement between two differ­
ent names have a general immunity from Cartesian
doubt. There are some other things Russell has
sometimes allowed as objects of acquaintance,
such as one's self; we need not go into details
here. Other philosophers (for example, Mrs Mar­
cus in her reply, at least in the verbal discussion as I
remember it - I do not know if this got into print,
so perhaps this should not be "tagged" on her7)
have said, "If names are really just tags, genuine
tags, then a good dictionary should be able to tell us
that they are names of the same object. " You have
an object a and an object b with names "John" and
"Joe. " Then, according to Mrs Marcus, a diction­
ary should be able to tell you whether or not
"John" and "Joe" are names of the same object. \nSaul Kripke
Of course, I do not know what ideal dictionaries
should do, but ordinary proper names do not seem
to satisfy this requirement. You certainly can, in
the case of ordinary proper names, make quite
empirical discoveries that, let's say, Hesperus is
Phosphorus, though we thought otherwise. We
can be in doubt as to whether Gaurisanker is Ever­
est or Cicero is in fact Tully. Even now, we could
conceivably discover that we were wrong in sup­
posing that Hesperus was Phosphorus. Maybe the
astronomers made an error. So it seems that this
view is wrong and that if by a name we do not mean
some artificial notion of names such as Russell's,
but a proper name in the ordinary sense, then there
can be contingent identity statements using proper
names, and the view to the contrary seems plainly
wrong.
In recent philosophy a large number of other
identity statements have been emphasized as ex­
amples of contingent identity statements, different,
perhaps, from either of the types I have mentioned
before. One of them is, for example, the statement
"Heat is the motion of molecules. " First, science is
supposed to have discovered this. Empirical scient­
ists in their investigations have been supposed to
discover (and, I suppose, they did) that the external
phenomenon which we call "heat" is, in fact, mo­
lecular agitation. Another example of such a dis­
covery is that water is H 20, and yet other examples
are that gold is the element with such and such an
atomic number, that light is a stream of photons,
and so on. These are all in some sense of "identity
statement" identity statements. Second, it is
thought, they are plainly contingent identity state­
ments, just because they were scientific discoveries.
After all, heat might have turned out not to have
been the motion of molecules. There were other
alternative theories of heat proposed, for example,
the caloric theory of heat. If these theories of heat
had been correct, then heat would not have been the
motion of molecules, but instead, some substance
suffusing the hot object, called "caloric. " And it was
a matter of course of science and not of any logical
necessity that the one theory turned out to be cor­
rect and the other theory turned out to be incorrect.
So, here again, we have, apparently, another
plain example of a contingent identity statement.
This has been supposed to be a very important
example because of its connection with the mind
-body problem. There have been many philoso­
phers who have wanted to be materialists, and to be
materialists in a particular form, which is known
today as "the identity theory. " According to this
theory, a certain mental state, such as a person's
being in pain, is identical with a certain state of his
brain (or, perhaps, of his entire body, according to
some theorists), at any rate, a certain material or
neural state of his brain or body. And so, according
to this theory, my being in pain at this instant, ifI
were, would be identical with my body's being or
my brain's being in a certain state. Others have
objected that this cannot be because, after all, we
can imagine my pain existing even if the state of the
body did not. We can perhaps imagine my not
being embodied at all and still being in pain, or,
conversely, we could imagine my body existing and
being in the very same state even if there were no
pain. In fact, conceivably, it could be in this state
even though there were no mind "back of it, " so to
speak, at all. The usual reply has been to concede
that all of these things might have been the case,
but to argue that these are irrelevant to the question
of the identity of the mental state and the physical
state. This identity, it is said, is just another con­
tingent scientific identification, similar to the iden­
tification of heat with molecular motion, or water
with H 20. Just as we can imagine heat without any
molecular motion, so we can imagine a mental state
without any corresponding brain state. But, just as
the first fact is not damaging to the identification of
heat and the motion of molecules, so the second
fact is not at all damaging to the identification of a
mental state with the corresponding brain state.
And so, many recent philosophers have held it to
be very important for our theoretical understand­
ing of the mind-body problem that there can be
contingent identity statements of this form.
To state finally what I think, as opposed to what
seems to be the case, or what others think, I think
that in both cases, the case of names and the case of
the theoretical identifications, the identity state­
ments are necessary and not contingent. That is
to say, they are necessary if true; of course, false
identity statements are not necessary. How can one
possibly defend such a view? Perhaps I lack a
complete answer to this question, even though I
am convinced that the view is true. But to begin an
answer, let me make some distinctions that I want
to use. The first is between a rigid and a nonrigid
designator. What do these terms mean? As an ex­
ample of a nonrigid designator, I can give an
expression such as "the inventor of bifocals. " Let
us suppose it was Benjamin Franklin who invented
bifocals, and so the expression, "the inventor of
bifocals, " designates or refers to a certain man,
namely, Benjamin Franklin. However, we can \neasily imagine that the world could have been dif­
ferent, that under different circumstances someone
else would have come upon this invention before
Benjamin Franklin did, and in that case, he would
have been the inventor of bifocals. So, in this sense,
the expression "the inventor of bifocals' is non­
rigid: Under certain circumstances one man would
have been the inventor of bifocals; under other
circumstances, another man would have. In con­
trast, consider the expression "the square root of
25. " Independently of the empirical facts, we can
give an arithmetical proof that the square root of 25
is in fact the number 5, and because we have proved
this mathematically, what we have proved is neces­
sary. If we think of numbers as entities at all, and let
us suppose, at least for the purpose of this lecture,
that we do, then the expression "the square root of
25" necessarily designates a certain number,
namely 5. Such an expression I call "a rigid desig­
nator. " Some philosophers think that anyone who
even uses the notions of rigid or nonrigid designator
has already shown that he has fallen into a certain
confusion or has not paid attention to certain facts.
What do I mean by "rigid designator"? I mean a
term that designates the same object in all possible
worlds. To get rid of one confusion, which certainly
is not mine, I do not use "might have designated a
different object" to refer to the fact that language
might have been used differently. For example, the
expression "the inventor of bifocals" might have
been used by inhabitants of this planet always to
refer to the man who corrupted Hadleyburg. This
would have been the case, if, first, the people on this
planet had not spoken English, but some other
language, which phonetically overlapped with Eng­
lish; and if, second, in that language the expression
"the inventor of bifocals" meant the "man who
corrupted Hadleyburg. " Then it would refer, of
course, in their language, to whoever in fact cor­
rupted Hadleyburg in this counterfactual situation.
That is not what I mean. What I mean by saying
that a description might have referred to something
different, I mean that in our language as we use it in
describing a counterfactual situation, there might
have been a different object satisfying the descrip­
tive conditions we give for reference. So, for exam­
ple, we use the phrase "the inventor of bifocals, "
when we are talking about another possible world or
a counter factual situation, to refer to whoever in
that counterfactual situation would have invented
bifocals, not to the person whom people in that
counterfactual situation would have called "the
inventor of bifocals. " They might have spoken a
Identity and Necessity
different language which phonetically overlapped
with English in which "the 'inventor of bifocals" is
used in some other way. I am not concerned with
that question here. For that matter, they might
have been deaf and dumb, or there might have
been no people at all. (There still could have been
an inventor of bifocals even if there were no people
- God, or Satan, will do. )
Second, in talking about the notion of a rigid
designator, I do not mean to imply that the object
referred to has to exist in all possible worlds, that is,
that it has to necessarily exist. Some things, per­
haps mathematical entities such as the positive
integers, if they exist at all, necessarily exist.
Some people have held that God both exists and
necessarily exists; others, that he contingently
exists; others, that he contingently fails to exist;
and others, that he necessarily fails to exist: 8 all
four options have been tried. But at any rate, when
I use the notion of rigid designator, I do not imply
that the object referred to necessarily exists. All I
mean is that in any possible world where the object
in question does exist, in any situation where the
object would exist, we use the designator in ques­
tion to designate that object. In a situation where
the object does not exist, then we should say that
the designator has no referent and that the object in
question so designated does not exist.
As I said, many philosophers would find the very
notion of rigid designator objectionable per se. And
the objection that people make may be stated as
follows: Look, you're talking about situations
which are counterfactual, that is to say, you're
talking about other possible worlds. Now these
worlds are completely disjoint, after all, from the
actual world which is not just another possible
world; it is the actual world. So, before you talk
about, let us say, such an object as Richard Nixon
in another possible world at all, you have to say
which object in this other possible world would be
Richard Nixon. Let us talk about a situation in
which, as you would say, Richard Nixon would
have been a member of SDS. Certainly the mem­
ber of SDS you are talking about is someone very
different in many of his properties from Nixon.
Before we even can say whether this man would
have been Richard Nixon or not, we have to set up
criteria of identity across possible worlds. Here are
these other possible worlds. There are all kinds of
objects in them with different properties from
those of any actual object. Some of them resemble
Nixon in some ways, some of them resemble Nixon
in other ways. Well, which of these objects is \nSaul Kripke
Nixon? One has to give a criterion of identity. And
this shows how the very notion of rigid designator
runs in a circle. Suppose we designate a certain
number as the number of planets. Then, if that is
our favorite way, so to speak, of designating this
number, then in any other possible worlds we will
have to identify whatever number is the number of
planets with the number 9, which in the actual
world is the number of planets. So, it is argued by
various philosophers, for example, implicitly by
Q! Iine, and explicitly by many others in his wake,
we cannot really ask whether a designator is rigid or
nonrigid because we first need a criterion of ident­
ity across possible worlds. An extreme view has
even been held that, since possible worlds are so
disjoint from our own, we cannot really say that any
object in them is the same as an object existing now
but only that there are some objects which resem­
ble things in the actual world, more or less. We,
therefore, should not really speak of what would
have been true of Nixon in another possible world
but, only of what "counterparts" (the term which
David Lewis uses9) of Nixon there would have
been. Some people in other possible worlds have
dogs whom they call "Checkers. " Others favor the
ABM but do not have any dog called Checkers.
There are various people who resemble Nixon
more or less, but none of them can really be said
to be Nixon; they are only counterparts of Nixon,
and you choose which one is the best counterpart
by noting which resembles Nixon the most closely,
according to your favorite criteria. Such views are
widespread, both among the defenders of quanti­
fied modal logic and among its detractors.
All of this talk seems to me to have taken the
metaphor of possible worlds much too seriously in
some way. It is as if a "possible world" were like a
foreign country, or distant planet way out there. It
is as if we see dimly through a telescope various
actors on this distant planet. Actually David
Lewis's view seems the most reasonable if one
takes this picture literally. No one far away on
another planet can be strictly identical with some­
one here. But, even if we have some marvelous
methods of transportation to take one and the
same person from planet to planet, we really need
some epistemological criteria of identity to be able
to say whether someone on this distant planet is the
same person as someone here.
All of this seems to me to be a totally misguided
way of looking at things. What it amounts to is the
view that counterfactual situations have to be
described purely qualitatively. So, we cannot say,
for example, "If Nixon had only given a sufficient
bribe to Senator X, he would have gotten Carswell
through, " because that refers to certain people,
Nixon and Carswell, and talks about what things
would be true of them in a counterfactual situation.
We must say instead "If a man who has a hairline
like such and such, and holds such and such polit­
ical opinions had given a bribe to a man who was a
senator and had such and such other qualities, then
a man who was a judge in the South and had many
other qualities resembling Carswell would have
been confirmed. " In other words, we must describe
counterfactual situations purely qualitatively and
then ask the question, "Given that the situation
contains people or things with such and such qual­
ities, which of these people is (or is a counterpart
of) Nixon, which is Carswell, and so on? " This
seems to me to be wrong. Who is to prevent us
from saying "Nixon might have gotten Carswell
through had he done certain things"? We are
speaking of Nixon and asking what, in certain coun­
terfactual situations, would have been true of him.
We can say that if Nixon had done such and such,
he would have lost the election to Humphrey.
Those I am opposing would argue, "Yes, but how
do you find out if the man you are talking about is
in fact Nixon? " It would indeed be very hard to
find out, if you were looking at the whole situation
through a telescope, but that is not what we are
doing here. Possible worlds are not something to
which an epistemological question like this applies.
And if the phrase "possible worlds" is what makes
anyone think some such question applies, he should
just drop this phrase and use some other expression,
say "counterfactual situation, " which might be less
misleading. If we say "If Nixon had bribed such
and such a senator, Nixon would have gotten Cars­
well through, " what is given in the very description
of that situation is that it is a situation in which we
are speaking of Nixon, and of Carswell, and of such
and such a senator. And there seems to be no less
objection to stipulating that we are speaking of
certain people than there can be objection to stipul­
ating that we are speaking of certain qualities. Advo­
cates of the other view take speaking of certain
qualities as unobjectionable. They do not say,
"How do we know that this quality (in another
possible world) is that of redness? " But they do
find speaking of certain people objectionable. But I
see no more reason to object in the one case than in
the other. I think it really comes from the idea of
possible worlds as existing out there, but very far
off, viewable only through a special telescope. Even \nmore objectionable is the view of David Lewis.
According to Lewis, when we say "Under certain
circumstances Nixon would have gotten Carswell
through, " we really mean "Some man, other than
Nixon but closely resembling him, would have
gotten some judge, other than Carswell but closely
resembling him, through. " Maybe that is so, that
some man closely resembling Nixon could have
gotten some man closely resembling Carswell
through. But that would not comfort either Nixon
or Carswell, nor would it make Nixon kick himself
and say "/ should have done such and such to get
Carswell through. " The question is whether under
certain circumstances Nixon himself could have
gotten Carswell through. And I think the objection
is simply based on a misguided picture.
Instead, we can perfectly well talk about rigid
and nonrigid designators. Moreover, we have a
simple, intuitive test for them. We can say, for
example, that the number of planets might have
been a different number from the number it in fact
is. For example, there might have been only seven
planets. We can say that the inventor of bifocals
might have been someone other than the man who
in fact invented bifocals. lO We cannot say, though,
that the square root of 81 might have been a dif­
ferent number from the number it in fact is, for
that number just has to be 9. If we apply this
intuitive test to proper names, such as for example
"Richard Nixon, " they would seem intuitively to
come out to be rigid designators. First, when we
talk even about the counter factual situation in
which we suppose Nixon to have done different
things, we assume we are still talking about Nixon
himself. We say, "If Nixon had bribed a certain
senator, he would have gotten Carswell through, "
and we assume that by "Nixon" and "Carswell" we
are still referring to the very same people as in the
actual world. And it seems that we cannot say
"Nixon might have been a different man from the
man he in fact was, " unless, of course, we mean it
metaphorically: He might have been a different sort
of person (if you believe in free will and that people
are not inherently corrupt). You might think the
statement true in that sense, but Nixon could not
have been in the other literal sense a different
person from the person he, in fact, is, even though
the thirty-seventh President of the United States
might have been Humphrey. So the phrase "the
thirty-seventh President" IS nonrigid, but
"Nixon, " it would seem, is rigid.
Let me make another distinction before I go back
to the question of identity statements. This dis-
Identity and Necessity
tinction is very fundamental and also hard to see
through. In recent discussion, many philosophers
who have debated the meaningfulness of various
categories of truths, have regarded them as ident­
ical. Some of those who identify them are vocifer­
ous defenders of them, and others, such as Quine,
say they are all identically meaningless. But usually
they're not distinguished. These are categories
such as "analytic, " "necessary, " "a priori, " and
sometimes even "certain. " I will not talk about all
of these but only about the notions of aprioricity
and necessity. Very often these are held to be
synonyms. (Many philosophers probably should
not be described as holding them to be synonyms;
they simply use them interchangeably. ) I wish to
distinguish them. What do we mean by calling a
statement necessary? We simply mean that the
statement in question, first, is true, and, second,
that it could not have been otherwise. When we say
that something is contingently true, we mean that,
though it is in fact the case, it could have been the
case that things would have been otherwise. If we
wish to assign this distinction to a branch of philo­
sophy, we should assign it to metaphysics. To the
contrary, there is the notion of an a priori truth. An
a priori truth is supposed to be one which can be
known to be true independently of all experience.
Notice that this does not in and of itself say any­
thing about all possible worlds, unless this is put
into the definition. All that it says is that it can be
known to be true of the actual world, independ­
ently of all experience. It may, by some philo­
sophical argument, follow from our knowing,
independently of experience, that something is
true of the actual world, that it has to be known
to be true also of all possible worlds. But if this is to
be established, it requires some philosophical argu­
ment to establish it. Now, this notion, if we were to
assign it to a branch of philosophy, belongs, not to
metaphysics, but to epistemology. It has to do with
the way we can know certain things to be in fact
true. Now, it may be the case, of course, that any­
thing which is necessary is something which can be
known a priori. (Notice, by the way, the notion a
priori truth as thus defined has in it another mod­
ality: it can be known independently of all experi­
ence. It is a little complicated because there is a
double modality here. ) I will not have time to
explore these notions in full detail here, but one
thing we can see from the outset is that these two
notions are by no means trivially the same. If they
are coextensive, it takes some philosophical argu­
ment to establish it. As stated, they belong to \nSaul Kripke
different domains of philosophy. One of them has
something to do with knowledge, of what can be
known in certain ways about the actual world. The
other one has to do with metaphysics, how the world
could have been; given that it is the way it is, could
it have been otherwise, in certain ways? Now I
hold, as a matter of fact, that neither class of state­
ments is contained in the other. But all we need to
talk about here is this: Is everything that is neces­
sary knowable a priori or known a priori? Consider
the following example: the Goldbach conjecture.
This says that every even number is the sum of two
primes. It is a mathematical statement, and if it is
true at all, it has to be necessary. Certainly, one
could not say that though in fact every even num­
ber is the sum of two primes, there could have been
some extra number which was even and not the
sum of two primes. What would that mean? On the
other hand, the answer to the question whether
every even number is in fact the sum of two primes
is unknown, and we have no method at present for
deciding. So we certainly do not know, a priori or
even a posteriori, that every even number is the
sum of two primes. (Well, perhaps we have some
evidence in that no counterexample has been
found. ) But we certainly do not know a priori any­
way, that every even number is, in fact, the sum of
two primes. But, of course, the definition just says
"can be known independently of experience, " and
someone might say that if it is true, we could know
it independently of experience. It is hard to see
exactly what this claim means. It might be so.
One thing it might mean is that if it were true we
could prove it. This claim is certainly wrong if it is
generally applied to mathematical statements and
we have to work within some fixed system. This is
what Godel proved. And even if we mean an
"intuitive proof in general, " it might just be the
case (at least, this view is as clear and as probable as
the contrary) that though the statement is true,
there is just no way the human mind could ever
prove it. Of course, one wayan infinite mind might
be able to prove it is by looking through each
natural number one by one and checking. In this
sense, of course, it can, perhaps, be known a priori,
but only by an infinite mind, and then this gets into
other complicated questions. I do not want to dis­
cuss questions about the conceivability of perform­
ing an infinite number of acts like looking through
each number one by one. A vast philosophical
literature has been written on this: Some have
declared it is logically impossible; others that it is
logically possible; and some do not know. The
main point is that it is not trivial that just because
such a statement is necessary it can be known a
priori. Some considerable clarification is required
before we decide that it can be so known. And so
this shows that even if everything necessary is a
priori in some sense, it should not be taken as a
trivial matter of definition. It is a substantive phi­
losophical thesis which requires some work.
Another example that one might give relates to
the problem of essentialism. Here is a lectern. A
question which has often been raised in philosophy
is: What are its essential properties? What proper­
ties, aside from trivial ones like self-identity, are
such that this object has to have them if it exists at
all, II are such that if an object did not have it, it
would not be this object? 12 For example, being
made of wood, and not of ice, might be an essential
property of this lectern. Let us just take the weaker
statement that it is not made of ice. That will
establish it as strongly as we need it, perhaps as
dramatically. Supposing this lectern is in fact made
of wood, could this very lectern have been made
from the very beginning of its existence from ice,
say frozen from water in the Thames? One has a
considerable feeling that it could not, though in fact
one certainly could have made a lectern of water
from the Thames, frozen it into ice by some pro­
cess, and put it right there in place of this thing. If
one had done so, one would have made, of course, a
different object. It would not have been this very
lectern, and so one would not have a case in which
this very lectern here was made of ice, or was made
from water from the Thames. The question of
whether it could afterward, say in a minute from
now, turn into ice is something else. So, it would
seem, if an example like this is correct - and this is
what advocates of essentialism have held - that this
lectern could not have been made of icc, that is in
any counterfactual situation of which we would say
that this lectern existed at all, we would have to say
also that it was not made from water from the
Thames frozen into ice. Some have rejected, of
course, any such notion of essential property as
meaningless. Usually, it is because (and I think
this is what Quine, for example, would say) they
have held that it depends on the notion of identity
across possible worlds, and that this is itself mean­
ingless. Since I have rejected this view already, I
will not deal with it again. We can talk about this
very object, and whether it could have had certain
properties which it does not in fact have. For
example, it could have been in another room from
the room it in fact is in, even at this very time, but it \ncould not have been made from the very beginning
from water frozen into ice.
If the essentialist view is correct, it can only be
correct if we sharply distinguish between the
notions of a posteriori and a priori truth on the
one hand, and contingent and necessary truth on
the other hand, for although the statement that this
table, if it exists at all, was not made of ice, is
necessary, it certainly is not something that we
know a priori. What we know is that first, lecterns
usually are not made of ice, they are usually made
of wood. This looks like wood. It does not feel cold,
and it probably would if it were made of ice. There­
fore, I conclude, probably this is not made of ice.
Here my entire judgment is a posteriori. I could
find out that an ingenious trick has been played
upon me and that, in fact, this lectern is made of
ice; but what I am saying is, given that it is in fact
not made of ice, in fact is made of wood, one cannot
imagine that under certain circumstances it could
have been made of ice. So we have to say that
though we cannot know a priori whether this
table was made of ice or not, given that it is not
made of ice, it is necessarily not made of ice. In
other words, if P is the statement that the lectern is
not made of ice, one knows by a priori philosoph­
ical analysis, some conditional of the form "if P,
then necessarily P. " If the table is not made of ice,
it is necessarily not made of ice. On the other hand,
then, we know by empirical investigation that P,
the antecedent of the conditional, is true - that this
table is not made of ice. We can conclude by modus
ponens:
P~ OP
P
OP
The conclusion - "OP" - is that it is necessary
that the table not be made of ice, and this conclu­
sion is known a posteriori, since one of the premises
on which it is based is a posteriori. So, the notion of
essential properties can be maintained only by dis­
tinguishing between the notions of a priori and
necessary truth, and I do maintain it.
Let us return to the question of identities. Con­
cerning the statement "Hesperus is Phosphorus"
or the statement "Cicero is Tully, " one can find all
of these out by empirical investigation, and we
might turn out to be wrong in our empirical beliefs.
So, it is usually argued, such statements must
therefore be contingent. Some have embraced the
other side of the coin and have held "Because of
Identity and Necessity
this argument about necessity, identity statements
between names have to be knowable a priori, so,
only a very special category of names, possibly,
really works as names; the other things are bogus
names, disguised descriptions, or something of the
sort. However, a certain very narrow class of state­
ments of identity are known a priori, and these are
the ones which contain the genuine names. " If one
accepts the distinctions that I have made, one need
not jump to either conclusion. One can hold that
certain statements of identity between names,
though often known a posteriori, and maybe not
knowable a priori, are in fact necessary, if true. So,
we have some room to hold this. But, of course, to
have some room to hold it does not mean that we
should hold it. So let us see what the evidence is.
First, recall the remark that I made that proper
names seem to be rigid designators, as when we
use the name "Nixon" to talk about a certain man,
even in counterfactual situations. If we say, "If
Nixon had not written the letter to Sax be, maybe
he would have gotten Carswell through, " we are in
this statement talking about Nixon, Saxbe, and
Carswell, the very same men as in the actual
world, and what would have happened to them
under certain counterfactual circumstances. If
names are rigid designators, then there can be no
question about identities being necessary, because
"a" and "b" will be rigid designators of a certain
man or thing x. Then even in every possible world,
a and b will both refer to this same object x, and to
no other, and so there will be no situation in which
a might not have been b. That would have to be
a situation in which the object which we are also
now calling "x" would not have been identical
with itself. Then one could not possibly have a
situation in which Cicero would not have
been Tully or Hesperus would not have been
Phosphorus. 1. 1
Aside from the identification of necessity with
a priority, what has made people feel the other way?
There are two things which have made people feel
the other way. I4 Some people tend to regard ident­
ity statements as metalinguistic statements, to
identify the statement "Hesperus is Phosphorus"
with the metalinguistic statement" 'Hesperus' and
'Phosphorus' are names of the same heavenly
body. " And that, of course, might have been false.
We might have used the terms "Hesperus" and
"Phosphorus" as names of two different heavenly
bodies. But, of course, this has nothing to do with
the necessity of identity. In the same sense
"2 + 2 = 4" might have been false. The phrases \nSaul Kripke
"2 + 2" and "4" might have been used to refer to
two different numbers. One can imagine a language,
for example, in which "+, " "2, " and "="wereused
in the standard way, but "4" was used as the name
of, say, the square root of minus I, as we should call
it, "i. " Then "2 + 2 = 4" would be false, for 2 plus
2 is not equal to the square root of minus I. But this
is not what we want. We do not want just to say that a
certain statement which we in fact use to express
something true could have expressed something
false. We want to use the statement in our way and
see if it could have been false. Let us do this. What is
the idea people have? They say, 'Look, Hesperus
might not have been Phosphorus. Here a certain
planet was seen in the morning, and it was seen in
the evening; and it just turned out later on as a
matter of empirical fact that they were one and the
same planet. If things had turned out otherwise,
they would have been two different planets, or two
different heavenly bodies, so how can you say that
such a statement is necessary? '
Now there are two things that such people can
mean. First, they can mean that we do not know a
priori whether Hesperus is Phosphorus. This I
have already conceded. Second, they may mean
that they can actually imagine circumstances that
they would call circumstances in which Hesperus
would not have been Phosphorus. Let us think
what would be such a circumstance, using these
terms here as names of a planet. For example, it
could have been the case that Venus did indeed rise
in the morning in exactly the position in which we
saw it, but that on the other hand, in the position
which is in fact occupied by Venus in the evening,
Venus was not there, and Mars took its place. This
is all counterfactual because in fact Venus is there.
Now one can also imagine that in this counter­
factual other possible world, the Earth would
have been inhabited by people and that they should
have used the names "Phosphorus" for Venus in
the morning and "Hesperus" for Mars in the even­
ing. Now, this is all very good, but would it be a
situation in which Hesperus was not Phosphorus?
Of course, it is a situation in which people would
have been able to say, truly, "Hesperus is not
Phosphorus"; but we are supposed to describe
things in our language, not in theirs. So let us
describe it in our language. Well, how could it
actually happen that Venus would not be in that
position in the evening? For example, let us say
that there is some comet that comes around every
evening and yanks things over a little bit. (That
would be a very simple scientific way of imagining
it: not really too simple - that is very hard to
imagine actually. ) It just happens to come around
every evening, and things get yanked over a bit.
Mars gets yanked over to the very position where
Venus is, then the comet yanks things back to their
normal position in the morning. Thinking of this
planet which we now call "Phosphorus, " what
should we say? Well, we can say that the comet
passes it and yanks Phosphorus over so that it is not
in the position normally occupied by Phosphorus
in the evening. If we do say this, and really use
"Phosphorus" as the name of a planet, then we
have to say that, under such circumstances, Phos­
phorus in the evening would not be in the position
in where we, in fact, saw it; or alternatively,
Hesperus in the evening would not be in the posi­
tion in which we, in fact, saw it. We might say that
under such circumstances, we would not have
called Hesperus "Hesperus" because Hesperus
would have been in a different position. But that
still would not make Phosphorus different from
Hesperus; what would then be the case instead is
that Hesperus would have been in a different posi­
tion from the position it in fact is and, perhaps, not
in such a position that people would have called it
"Hesperus. " But that would not be a situation in
which Phosphorus would not have been Hesperus.
Let us take another example which may be
clearer. Suppose someone uses "Tully" to refer
to the Roman orator who denounced Cataline and
uses the name 'Cicero' to refer to the man whose
works he had to study in third-year Latin in high
school. Of course, he may not know in advance that
the very same man who denounced Cataline wrote
these works, and that is a contingent statement. But
the fact that this statement is contingent should not
make us think that the statement that Cicero is
Tully, if it is true, and it is in fact true, is contin­
gent. Suppose, for example, that Cicero actually
did denounce Cataline, but thought that this polit­
ical achievement was so great that he should not
bother writing any literary works. Would we say
that these would be circumstances under which he
would not have been Cicero? It seems to me that
the answer is no, that instead we would say that,
under such circumstances, Cicero would not have
written any literary works. It is not a necessary
property of Cicero - the way the shadow follows
the man - that he should have written certain
works; we can easily imagine a situation in which
Shakespeare would not have written the works of
Shakespeare, or one in which Cicero would not
have written the works of Cicero. What may be \nthe case is that we fix the reference of the term
"Cicero" by use of some descriptive phrase, such
as "the author of these works. " But once we have
this reference fixed, we then use the name "Cicero"
rigidzy to designate the man who in fact we have
identified by his authorship of these works. We do
not use it to designate whoever would have written
these works in place of Cicero, if someone else
wrote them. It might have been the case that the
man who wrote these works was not the man who
denounced Cataline. Cassius might have written
these works. But we would not then say that Cicero
would have been Cassius, unless we were speaking
in a very loose and metaphorical way. We would
say that Cicero, whom we may have identified and
come to know by his works, would not have written
them, and that someone else, say Cassius, would
have written them in his place.
Such examples are not grounds for thinking that
identity statements are contingent. To take them as
such grounds is to misconstrue the relation
between a name and a description used to fix its
reference, to take them to be synonyms. Even if we
fix the reference of such a name as "Cicero" as the
man who wrote such and such works, in speaking
of counterfactual situations, when we speak of
Cicero, we do not then speak of whoever in such
counter factual situations would have written such
and such works, but rather of Cicero, whom we
have identified by the contingent property that he
is the man who in fact, that is, in the actual world,
wrote certain works. IS
I hope this is reasonably clear in a brief compass.
Now, actually I have been presupposing something
I do not really believe to be, in general, true. Let us
suppose that we do fix the reference of a name by a
description. Even if we do so, we do not then make
the name synonymous with the description, but
instead we use the name rigidry to refer to the object
so named, even in talking about counterfactual
situations where the thing named would not satisfy
the description in question. Now, this is what I
think in fact is true for those cases of naming
where the reference is fixed by description. But,
in fact, I also think, contrary to most recent theor­
ists, that the reference of names is rarely or almost
never fixed by means of description. And by this I
do not just mean what Searle says: "It's not a single
description, but rather a cluster, a family of proper­
ties which fixes the reference. " I mean that pro­
perties in this sense are not used at all. But I do not
have the time to go into this here. So, let us suppose
that at least one half of prevailing views about
Identity and Necessity
naming is true, that the reference is fixed by
descriptions. Even were that true, the name
would not be synonymous with the description,
but would be used to name an object which we
pick out by the contingent fact that it satisfies a
certain description. And so, even though we can
imagine a case where the man who wrote these
works would not have been the man who
denounced Cataline, we should not say that that
would be a case in which Cicero would not have
been Tully. We should say that it is a case in which
Cicero did not write these works, but rather that
Cassius did. And the identity of Cicero and Tully
still holds.
Let me turn to the case of heat and the motion of
molecules. Here, surely, is a case that is contingent
identity! Recent philosophy has emphasized this
again and again. So, if it is a case of contingent
identity, then let us imagine under what circum­
stances it would be false. Now, concerning this
statement I hold that the circumstances philoso­
phers apparently have in mind as circumstances
under which it would have been false are not in
fact such circumstances. First, of course, it is
argued that "Heat is the motion of molecules" is
an a posteriori judgment; scientific investigation
might have turned out otherwise. As I said before,
this shows nothing against the view that it is neces­
sary - at least if! am right. But here, surely, people
had very specific circumstances in mind under
which, so they thought, the judgment that heat is
the motion of molecules would have been false.
What were these circumstances? One can distill
them out of the fact that we found out empirically
that heat is the motion of molecules. How was this?
What did we find out first when we found out that
heat is the motion of molecules? There is a certain
external phenomenon which we can sense by the
sense of touch, and it produces a sensation which
we call "the sensation of heat. " We then discover
that the external phenomenon which produces this
sensation, which we sense, by means of our sense of
touch, is in fact that of molecular agitation in the
thing that we touch, a very high degree of molecu­
lar agitation. So, it might be thought, to imagine a
situation in which heat would not have been the
motion of molecules, we need only imagine a situa­
tion in which we would have had the very same
sensation and it would have been produced by
something other than the motion of molecules.
Similarly, if we wanted to imagine a situation in
which light was not a stream of photons, we could
imagine a situation in which we were sensitive to \nSaul Kripke
something else in exactly the same way, producing
what we call visual experiences, though not
through a stream of photons. To make the case
stronger, or to look at another side of the coin, we
could also consider a situation in which we are
concerned with the motion of molecules but in
which such motion does not give us the sensation
of heat. And it might also have happened that we,
or, at least, the creatures inhabiting this planet,
might have been so constituted that, let us say, an
increase in the motion of molecules did not give us
this sensation but that, on the contrary, a slowing
down of the molecules did give us the very same
sensation. This would be a situation, so it might be
thought, in which heat would not be the motion of
molecules, or, more precisely, in which tempera­
ture would not be mean molecular kinetic energy.
But I think it would not be so. Let us think about
the situation again. First, let us think about it in the
actual world. Imagine right now the world invaded
by a number of Martians, who do indeed get the
very sensation that we call "the sensation of heat"
when they feel some ice which has slow molecular
motion, and who do not get a sensation of heat - in
fact, maybe just the reverse - when they put their
hand near a fire which causes a lot of molecular
agitation. Would we say, "Ah, this casts some
doubt on heat being the motion of molecules,
because there are these other people who don't
get the same sensation"? Obviously not, and no
one would think so. We would say instead that
the Martians somehow feel the very sensation we
get when we feel heat when they feel cold, and that
they do not get a sensation of heat when they feel
heat. But now let us think of a counterfactual
situation. 16 Suppose the earth had from the very
beginning been inhabited by such creatures. First,
imagine it inhabited by no creatures at all: then
there is no one to feel any sensations of heat. But
we would not say that under such circumstances it
would necessarily be the case that heat did not
exist; we would say that heat might have existed,
for example, if there were fires that heated up the
air.
Let us suppose the laws of physics were not very
different: Fires do heat up the air. Then there
would have been heat even though there were no
creatures around to feel it. Now let us suppose
evolution takes place, and life is created, and
there are some creatures around. But they are not
like us, they are more like the Martians. Now
would we say that heat has suddenly turned to
cold, because of the way the creatures of this planet
sense it? No, I think we should describe this situ­
ation as a situation in which, though the creatures
on this planet got our sensation of heat, they did
not get it when they were exposed to heat. They got
it when they were exposed to cold. And that is
something we can surely well imagine. We can
imagine it just as we can imagine our planet being
invaded by creatures of this sort. Think of it in two
steps. First there is a stage where there are no
creatures at all, and one can certainly imagine the
planet still having both heat and cold, though no
one is around to sense it. Then the planet comes
through an evolutionary process to be peopled with
beings of different neural structure from ourselves.
Then these creatures could be such that they were
insensitive to heat; they did not feel it in the way we
do; but on the other hand, they felt cold in much
the same way that we feel heat. But still, heat would
be heat, and cold would be cold. And particularly,
then, this goes in no way against saying that in this
counter factual situation heat would still be the
molecular motion, be that which is produced by
fires, and so on, just as it would have been if there
had been no creatures on the planet at all. Simi­
larly, we could imagine that the planet was inhab­
ited by creatures who got visual sensations when
there were sound waves in the air. We should not
therefore say, "Under such circumstances, sound
would have been light. " Instead we should say,
"The planet was inhabited by creatures who were
in some sense visually sensitive to sound, and may
be even visually sensitive to light. " Ifthis is correct,
it can still be and will still be a necessary truth that
heat is the motion of molecules and that light is a
stream of photons.
To state the view succinctly: we use both the
terms "heat" and "the motion of molecules" as
rigid designators for a certain external phenom­
enon. Since heat is in fact the motion of molecules,
and the designators are rigid, by the argument I
have given here, it is going to be necessa~y that heat
is the motion of molecules. What gives us the
illusion of contingency is the fact we have identi­
fied the heat by the contingent fact that there
happen to be creatures on this planet - (namely,
ourselves) who are sensitive to it in a certain way,
that is, who are sensitive to the motion of molecules
or to heat - these are one and the same thing. And
this is contingent. So we use the description, 'that
which causes such and such sensations, or that
which we sense in such and such a way, ' to identify
heat. But in using this fact we use a contingent
property of heat, just as we use the contingent \nproperty of Cicero as having written such and such
works to identify him. We then use the terms
"heat" in the one case and "Cicero" in the other
rigidzv to designate the objects for which they
stand. And of course the term "the motion of mo­
lecules" is rigid; it always stands for the motion of
molecules, never for any other phenomenon. So, as
Bishop Butler said, "everything is what it is and
not another thing. " Therefore, "Heat is the motion
of molecules" will be necessary, not contingent,
and one only has the illusion of contingency in the
way one could have the illusion of contingency in
thinking that this table might have been made of
ice. We might think one could imagine it, but if we
try, we can see on reflection that what we are really
imagining is just there being another lectern in this
very position here which was in fact made of ice.
The fact that we may identify this lectern by being
the object we see and touch in such and such a
position is something else.
Now how does this relate to the problem of mind
and body? It is usually held that this is a contingent
identity statement just like "Heat is the motion of
molecules. " That cannot be. It cannot be a con­
tingent identity statement just like "Heat is the
motion of molecules" because, if I am right,
"Heat is the motion of molecules" is not a contin­
gent identity statement. Let us look at this state­
ment. For example, "My being in pain at such and
such a time is my being in such and such a brain
state at such and such a time, " or "Pain in general
is such and such a neural (brain) state. "
This is held to be contingent on the following
grounds. First, we can imagine the brain state
existing though there is no pain at all. It is only a
scientific fact that whenever we are in a certain
brain state we have a pain. Second, one might
imagine a creature being in pain, but not being in
any specified brain state at all, maybe not having a
brain at all. People even think, at least prima facie,
though they may be wrong, that they can imagine
totally disembodied creatures, at any rate certainly
not creatures with bodies anything like our own. So
it seems that we can imagine definite circumstances
under which this relationship would have been
false. Now, if these circumstances are circum­
stances, notice that we cannot deal with them sim­
ply by saying that this is just an illusion, something
we can apparently imagine, but in fact cannot in the
way we thought erroneously that we could imagine
a situation in which heat was not the motion of
molecules. Because although we can say that we
pick out heat contingently by the contingent prop-
Identity and Necessity
erty that it affects us in such and such a way, we
cannot similarly say that we pick out pain contin­
gently by the fact that it affects us in such and such
a way. On such a picture there would be the brain
state, and we pick it out by the contingent fact that
it affects us as pain. Now that might be true of the
brain state, but it cannot be true of the pain. The
experience itself has to be this experience, and I
cannot say that it is a contingent property of the
pain I now have that it is a pain. 17 In fact, it would
seem that the terms "my pain" and "my being in
such and such a brain state" are, first of all, both
rigid designators. That is, whenever anything is
such and such a pain, it is essentially that very
object, namely, such and such a pain, and wherever
anything is such and such a brain state, it is essen­
tially that very object, namely, such and such a
brain state. So both of these are rigid designators.
One cannot say this pain might have been some­
thing else, some other state. These are both rigid
designators.
Second, the way we would think of picking them
out - namely, the pain by its being an experience of
a certain sort, and the brain state by its being the
state of a certain material object, being of such and
such molecular configuration - both of these pick
out their objects essentially and not accidentally,
that is, they pick them out by essential properties.
Whenever the molecules are in this configuration,
we do have such and such a brain state. Whenever
you feel this, you do have a pain. So it seems that
the identity theorist is in some trouble, for, since
we have two rigid designators, the identity state­
ment in question is necessary. Because they pick
out their objects essentially, we cannot say the case
where you seem to imagine the identity statement
false is really an illusion like the illusion one gets in
the case of heat and molecular motion, because that
illusion depended on the fact that we pick out heat
by a certain contingent property. So there is very
little room to maneuver; perhaps none. 18 The
identity theorist, who holds that pain is the brain
state, also has to hold that it necessarily is the brain
state. He therefore cannot concede, but has to
deny, that there would have been situations under
which one would have had pain but not the corre­
sponding brain state. Now usually in arguments on
the identity theory, this is very far from being
denied. In fact, it is conceded from the outset by
the materialist as well as by his opponent. He says,
"Of course, it could have been the case that we had
pains without the brain states. It is a contingent
identity. " But that cannot be. He has to hold that \nSaul Kripke
we are under some illusion in thinking that we can
imagine that there could have been pains without
brain states. And the only model I can think of for
what the illusion might be, or at least the model
given by the analogy the materialists themselves
suggest, namely, heat and molecular motion, sim­
ply does not work in this case. So the materialist is
up against a very stiff challenge. He has to show
that these things we think we can see to be possible
are in fact not possible. He has to show that these
things which we can imagine are not in fact things
we can imagine. And that requires some very dif-
Notes
This paper was presented orally, without a written
text, to the New York University lecture series on
identity which makes up the volume Identity and
Individuation. The lecture was taped, and the present
paper represents a transcription of these tapes, edited
only slightly with no attempt to change the style of the
original. If the reader imagines the sentences of this
paper as being delivered, extemporaneously, with
proper pauses and emphases, this may facilitate his
comprehension. Nevertheless, there may still be pas­
sages which are hard to follow, and the time allotted
necessitated a condensed presentation of the argu­
ment. (A longer version of some of these views, still
rather compressed and still representing a transcript
of oral remarks, has appeared in Donald Davidson and
Gilbert Harman (eds), Semantics o[Natural Language
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972). ) Occasionally, reserva­
tions, amplifications, and gratifications of my remarks
had to be repressed, especially in the discussion of
theoretical identification and the mind~body prob­
lem. The notes, which were added to the original,
would have become even more unwieldly if this had
not been done.
2 R. ]. Butler (ed. ), Ana~ytical Philosophy, Second Series
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1965), p. 41.
3 The second occurrence of the description has small
scope.
4 In Russell's theory, F(zxGx) follows from (x)Fx and
(3! x) Gx, provided that the description in F(zxGx)
has the entire context for its scope (in Russell's 1905
terminology, has a "primary occurrence"). Only then
is F(zxGx) "about" the denotation of"zxGx. " Apply­
ing this rule to (4), we get the results indicated in the
text. Notice that, in the ambiguous form
O(zxGx = zxHx), if one or both of the descriptions
have "primary occurrences, " the formula does not
assert the necessity of zxGx = zxHx; if both have
secondary occurrences, it does. Thus in a language
without explicit scope indicators, descriptions must
be construed with the smallest possible scope ~ only
ferent philosophical argument from the sort which
has been given in the case of heat and molecular
motion. And it would have to be a deeper and
subtler argument than I can fathom and subtler
than has ever appeared in any materialist literature
that I have read. So the conclusion of this investi­
gation would be that the analytical tools we are
using go against the identity thesis and so go
against the general thesis that mental states are
just physical states. 19
The next topic would be my own solution to the
mind~body problem, but that I do not have.
then will ~ A be the negation of A, OA the necessita­
tion of A, and the like.
5 An earlier distinction with the same purpose was, of
course, the medieval one of de dicto~de re. That Rus­
sell's distinction of scope eliminates model paradoxes
has been pointed out by many logicians, especially
Smullyan.
So as to avoid misunderstanding, let me emphasize
that I am of course not asserting that Russell's notion
of scope solves Quine's problem of "essentialism",
what it does show, especially in conjunction with
modern model-theoretic approaches to modal logic,
is that quantified modal logic need not deny the truth
of all instances of (x)(y)(x = y. :J. Fx: J Fy), nor of
all instances of "(x)(Gx: J Ga)" (where "a" is to be
replaced by a non vacuous definite description whose
scope is all of "Ga"), in order to avoid making it a
necessary truth that one and the same man invented
bifocals and headed the original Postal Department.
Russell's contextual definition of description need not
be adopted in order to ensure these results; but other
logical theories, Fregean or other, which take descrip­
tions as primitive must somehow express the same
logical facts. Frege showed that a simple, non-iterated
context containing a definite description with small
scope, which cannot be interpreted as being "about"
the denotation of the description, can be interpreted
as about its "sense. " Some logicians have been inter­
ested in the question of the conditions under which, in
an intensional context, a description with small scope
is equivalent to the same one with large scope. One of
the virtues of a Russellian treatment of descriptions in
modal logic is that the answer (roughly that the
description be a "rigid designator" in the sense of
this lecture) then often follows from the other postu­
lates for quantified modal logic: no special postulates
are needed, as in Hintikka's treatment. Even if
descriptions are taken as primitive, special postulation
of when scope is irrelevant can often be deduced from
more basic axioms. \n6 R. B. Marcus, "Modalities and intensional lan­
guages, " in Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
vol. I (New York: Humanities Press, 1963), pp. 71ff.
See also the "Comments" by Quine and the ensuing
discussion.
7 It should. See her remark in Boston Studies in the
Philosophy of Science, vol. I, p. liS, in the discussion
following the papers.
8 If there is no deity, and especially if the nonexistence
of a deity is necessary, it is dubious that we can use
"he" to refer to a deity. The use in the text must be
taken to be non literal.
9 David K. Lewis, "Counterpart theory and quantified
modal logic, " Journal of Philosophy 65 (1968), pp.
113ff.
to Some philosophers think that definite descriptions, in
English, are ambiguous, that sometimes "the inventor
of bifocals" rigidly designates the man who in fact
invented bif()cals. I am tentatively inclined to reject
this view, construed as a thesis about English (as
opposed to a possible hypothetical language), but I
will not argue the question here.
What I do wish to note is that, contrary to some
opinions, this alleged ambiguity cannot replace the
Russellian notion of the scope of a description. Con­
sider the sentence "The number of planets might
have been necessarily even. " This sentence plainly
can be read so as to express a truth; had there been
eight planets, the number of planets would have been
necessarily even. Yet without scope distionctions,
both a "referential" (rigid) and a nonrigid reading of
the description will make the statement false. (Since
the number of planets is the rigid reading amounts
to the falsity that 9 might have been necessarily even. )
The "rigid" reading is equivalent to the Russellian
primary occurrence; the nonrigid, to innermost scope
- some, following Donnellan, perhaps loosely, have
called this reading the "attributive" use. The possi­
bility of intermediate scopes is then ignored. In the
present instance, the intended reading of 0 D (the
number of planets is even) makes the scope of
the description D (the number of planets is even),
neither the largest nor the smallest possible.
II This definition is the usual formulation of the notion
of essential property, but an exception must be made
for existence itself: on the definition given, existence
would be trivially essential. We should regard exist­
ence as essential to an object only if the object neces­
sarily exists. Perhaps there are other recherche
properties, involving existence, for which the defini­
tion is similarly objectionable. (I thank Michael Siote
for this observation. )
12 The two clauses of the sentence noted give equivalent
definitions of the notion of essential property, since
D«3x)(x = a): :: J Fa) is equivalent to D(x)(~ Fx: :: J x = a). The second formulation, however, has
served as a powerful seducer in favor of theories of
"identification across possible worlds. " For it sug-
Identity and Necessity
gests that we consider 'an object b in another possible
world' and test whether it is identifiable with a by
asking whether it lacks any of the essential properties
of a. Let me therefore emphasize that, although an
essential property is (trivially) a property without
which an object cannot be a, it by no means follows
that the essential, purely qualitative properties of a
jointly form a sufficient condition for being a, nor that
any purely qualitative conditions are sufficient for an
object to be a. Further, even if necessary and suffi­
cient qualitative conditions for an object to be Nixon
may exist, there would still be little justification for
the demand for a purely qualitative description of all
counterfactual situations. We can ask whether Nixon
might have been a Democrat without engaging in
these subtleties.
13 I thus agree with Quine, that "Hesperus is Phos­
phorus" is (or can be) an empirical discovery; with
Marcus, that it is necessary. Both Quine and Marcus,
according to the present standpoint, err in identifying
the epistemological and the metaphysical issues.
14 The two confusions alleged, especially the second, are
both related to the confusion of the metaphysical
question of the necessity of "Hesperus is Phos­
phorus" with the epistemological question of its
aprioricity. For if Hesperus is identified by its posi­
tion in the sky in the evening, and Phosphorus by its
position in the morning, an investigator may well
know, in advance of empirical research, that Hesperus
is Phosphorus if and only if one and the same body
occupies position x in the evening and position y in
the morning. The a priori material equivalence of the
two statements, however, does not imply their strict
(necessary) equivalence. (The same remarks apply to
the case of heat and molecular motion. ) Similar
remarks apply to some extent to the relationship
between "Hesperus is Phosphorus" and" 'Hesperus'
and 'Phosphorus' name the same thing. " A confusion
that also operates is, of course, the confusion between
what we say of a counterfactual situation and how
people in that situation would have described it; this
confusion, too, is probably related to the confusion
between aprioricity and necessity.
15 If someone protests, regarding the lectern, that it could
after all have turned out to have been made of ice, and
therefore could have been made of ice, I would reply
that what he really means is that a lectern could have
looked just like this one, and have been placed in the
same position as this one, and yet have been made of
ice. In short, I could have been in the same epistemo­
logical situation in relation to a lectern made of ice as I
actually am in relation to this lectern. In the main text,
I have argued that the same reply should be given to
protests that Hesperus could have turned out to be
other than Phosphorus, or Cicero other than Tully.
Here, then, the notion of "counterpart" comes into
its own. For it is not this table, but an epistemic
"counterpart, " which was hewn from ice; not \nSaul Kripke
Hesperus-Phosphorus-Venus, but two distinct coun­
terparts thereof, in two of the roles Venus actually
plays (that of Evening Star and Morning Star), which
are different. Precisely because of this fact, it is not
this table which could have been made of ice. State­
ments about the modal properties of this table never
refer to counterparts. However, if someone confuses
the epistemological and the metaphysical problems,
he will be well on the way to the counterpart theory
Lewis and others have advocated.
16 Isn't the situation I just described also counterfactual?
At least it may well be, if such Martians never in fact
invade. Strictly speaking, the distinction I wish to
draw compares how we would speak in a (possibly
counterfactual) situation, if it obtained, and how we
do speak of a counterfactual situation, knowing that it
does not obtain - i. e. , the distinction between the
language we would have used in a situation and
the language we do use to describe it. (Consider the
description: "Suppose we all spoke German. " This
description is in English. ) The former case can be
made vivid by imagining the counterfactual situation
to be actual.
17 The most popular identity theories advocated today
explicitly fail to satisfy this simple requirement. For
these theories usually hold that a mental state is a
brain state, and that what makes the brain state into
a mental state is its "causal role, " the fact that it tends
to produce certain behavior (as intentions produce
actions, or pain, pain behavior) and to be produced
by certain stimuli (e. g. , pain, by pinpricks). If the
relations between the brain state and its causes and
effects are regarded as contingent, then being such­
and-such-a-mental-state is a contingent property of
the brain state. Let X be a pain. The causal-role
identity theorist holds (I) that X is a brain state, (2)
that the fact that X is a pain is to be analyzed (roughly)
as the fact that X is produced by certain stimuli and
produces certain behavior. The fact mentioned in (2)
is, of course, regarded as contingent; the brain state X
might well exist and not tend to produce the appro­
priate behavior in the absence of other conditions.
Thus (I) and (2) assert that a certain pain X might
have existed, yet not have been a pain. This seems to
me self-evidently absurd. Imagine any pain: is it pos­
sible that it itself could have existed, yet not have been
a pain?
If X = Y, then X and Y share all properties,
including modal properties. If X is a pain and Y the
corresponding brain state, then being a pain is an
essential property of X, and being a brain state is an
essential property of Y. If the correspondence relation
is, in fact, identity, then it must be necessary of Y that
it corresponds to a pain, and necessary of X that it
correspond to a brain state, indeed to this particular
brain state, Y. Both assertions seem false; it seems
clearly possible that X should have existed without
the corresponding brain state; or that the brain state
should have existed without being felt as pain. Ident­
ity theorists cannot, contrary to their almost universal
present practice, accept these intuitions; they must
deny them, and explain them away. This is none too
easy a thing to do.
18 A brief restatement of the argument may be helpful
here. If "pain" and "C-fiber stimulation" are rigid
designators of phenomena, one who identifies them
must regard the identity as necessary. How can this
necessity be reconciled with the apparent fact that C­
fiber stimulation might have turned out not to be
correlated with pain at all? We might try to reply by
analogy to the case of heat and molecular motion; the
latter identity, too, is necessary, yet someone may
believe that, before scientific investigation showed
otherwise, molecular motion might have turned out
not to be heat. The reply is, of course, that what really
is possible is that people (or some rational or sentient
beings) could have been in the same epistemic situation
as we actually are, and identify a phenomenon in the
same way we identify heat, namely, by feeling it by the
sensation we call "the sensation of heat, " without
the phenomenon being molecular motion. Further,
the beings might not have been sensitive to molecular
motion (i. e. , to heat) by any neural mechanism what­
soever. It is impossible to explain the apparent possi­
bility of C-fiber stimulations not having been pain in
the same way. Here, too, we would have to suppose
that we could have been in the same epistemological
situation, and identify something in the same way we
identify pain, without its corresponding to C-fiber
stimulation. But the way we identify pain is by feeling
it, and if a C-fiber stimulation could have occurred
without our feeling any pain, then the C-fiber stimu­
lation would have occurred without there being any
pain, contrary to the necessity of the identity. The
trouble is that although "heat" is a rigid designator,
heat is picked out by the contingent property of its
being felt in a certain way; pain, on the other hand, is
picked out by an essential (indeed necessary and suf­
ficient) property. For a sensation to be felt as pain is
for it to be pain.
19 All arguments against the identity theory which rely
on the necessity of identity, or on the notion of essen­
tial property, are, of course, inspired by Descartes's
argument for his dualism. The earlier arguments
which superficially were rebutted by the analogies of
heat and molecular motion, and the bifocals inventor
who was also Postmaster General, had such an
inspiration: and so does my argument here. R. Albrit­
ton and M. Slote have informed me that they indep­
endently have attempted to give essentialist
arguments against the identity theory, and probably
others have done so as well.
The simplest Cartesian argument can perhaps be
restated as follows: Let "A" be a name (rigid desig­
nator) of Descartes's body. Then Descartes argues
that since he could exist even if A did not, <) (Des-\ncartes 0/ A), hence Descartes 0/ A. Those who have
accused him of a modal fallacy have forgotten that
"A" is rigid. His argument is valid, and his conclusion
is correct, provided its (perhaps dubitable) premise is
accepted. On the other hand, provided that Descartes
is regarded as having ceased to exist upon his death,
"Descartes 0/ A" can be established without the use
of a modal argument; for if so, no doubt A survived
Descartes when A was a corpse. Thus A had a prop-
Identity and Necessity
erty (existing at a certain time) which Descartes did
not. The same argument can establish that a statue is
not the hunk of stone, or the congery, of molecules, of
which it is composed. Mere non-identity, then, may
be a weak conclusion. (See D. Wiggins, Philosophical
Review 77 (1968), pp. 90ff. ) The Cartesian modal
argument, however, surely can be deployed to main­
tain relevant stronger conclusions as well. \nJohn Perry
In several places Peter Geach has put forward
the view that "it makes no sense to judge whether
x and yare 'the same'. .. unless we add or under­
stand some general term - the same F. "j In this
paper I discuss just what Geach's view comes to;
I argue that there are no convincing reasons
for adopting it and quite strong reasons for reject­
ing it.
I agree with criticisms of Geach made by David
Wiggins in his recent book, Identity and Spatio­
Temporal Continuity, 2 some of which are repeated
here. I hope, however, to shed more light than he
has on the motivations for Geach's view, and to
state somewhat more systematically an opposing
one. This is possible in part because of an article
by Geach 3 on this topic which has appeared since
Wiggins's book.
I
Geach generally develops his view of identity in
conscious opposition to Frege; he emphasizes that
his view is the result of noticing an important fact
that he thinks Frege missed:
I am arguing for the thesis that identity is relat­
ive. When one says "x is identical withy, " this,
I hold, is an incomplete expression; it is short
for "x is the same A as y, " where "A" repre-
Originally published in Philosophical Review 79 (1970).
pp. 181-200. Reprinted by permission of Cornell
University.
sents some count noun understood from the
context of utterance - or else, it is just a vague
expression of some half-formed thought. Frege
emphasized that "x is one" is an incomplete way
of saying "x is one A, a single A, " or else has no
clear sense; since the connection of the concepts
one and identity comes out just as much in the
German "ein und dasselbe" as in the English
"one and the same, " it has always surprised
me that Frege did not similarly maintain the
parallel doctrine of relativized identity, which I
have just briefly stated. 4
I maintain it makes no sense to judge whether x
andy are "the same" or whether x remains "the
same" unless we add or understand some gen­
eral term - the same F. That in accordance with
which we thus judge as to the identity, I call a
criterion of identity; .. . Frege sees clearly that
"one" cannot significantly stand as a predicate
of objects unless it is (at least understood as)
attached to a general term; I am surprised he
did not see that this holds for the closely allied
expression "the same. ,, 5
Frege has clearly explained that the predication
of "one endowed with wisdom'. .. does not
split up into predications of "one" and
"endowed with wisdom. ". .. It is surprising
that Frege should on the contrary have con­
stantly assumed that "x is the same A as y"
does split up into "x is an A (and y is an A)"
and "x is the same as. .. y. " We have already by
implication rejected this analysis. 6 \nWe can best see what Geach's view of identity
amounts to, and what considerations might weigh
in favor of it, by seeing just how he disagrees with
Frege. What does Geach mean by denying that, for
example, "being the same horse as" "splits up" into
"being the same as" and "being a horse'? We can
better understand the disagreement if we first list
the points on which Frege and Geach might agree.
First, I think that Frege could agree with Geach
that an utterance of the grammatical from "x andy
are the same" might not have a clear truth-value,
and that this situation might be remedied by add­
ing a general term after the word "same. ,7 For
instance, the utterance "What I bathed in yesterday
and what I bathed in today are the same" might not
have a clear truth-value in a certain situation,
although "What I bathed in yesterday and what
I bathed in today are the same river" or "What I
bathed in yesterday and what I bathed in today are
the same water" do have clear truth-values. And
Frege would further agree, I believe, that the truth­
values of the last two statements might differ: it
might be true that I bathed in the same river on
both days, but false that I bathed in the same water.
Second, I think Frege could agree that in adding
the general term after the word "same, " one could
be said to convey a criterion of identity, and that
the original utterance is deficient in that no criter­
ion of identity is conveyed.
And, finally, I think Frege might agree with
reservations in saying that, in supplying a general
term and conveying a criterion of identity, one is
making clear which relation is asserted to hold
between the referents of the statement. Frege must
admit that the truth-values of "x andy are the same
F" and "x andy are the same G" may differ. For
instance, "Cassius Clay and Muhammed Ali are the
same man" is true, but "Cassius Clay and
Muhammed Ali are the same number" is not true.
This shows that "being the same man as" and
"being the same number as" are not extensionally
equivalent, and therefore do not express the same
relation. But, having admitted this, Frege might add
that, in an important sense, one relation is asserted
in both cases. And this is where Frege and Geach
disagree. To see how the relations might be said to
be the same in each statement after all, let us com­
pare a case Frege might regard as analogous.
Consider "being a left-handed brother of' and
"being a red-haired brother of. " These quite
obviously express different relations, for they are
not extensionally equivalent. But these relations
differ in a way that leaves them intimately con-
The Same F
nected. "Being a left-handed brother of' clearly
splits up into "being a brother of' and "being left­
handed. " To say thatJim is a left-handed brother of
Mike is to say no more or less than that Jim is a
brother of Mike and Jim is left-handed. And the
same thing is true of "being a red-haired brother
of. " The two relations involved do not differ, we
might say, in being two different kinds of brother­
hood, left-handed and red-haired. The job of the
words "red-haired" and "left-handed" is not to tell
us what kind of brotherhood is being asserted.
Rather, they assert something about the first refer­
ent in addition to the relation asserted. In such a case,
itis very natural to say thatthe relations are in a sense
the same, for the words "left-handed brother of'
and "red-haired brother of' express a conjunction
of two conditions, only one of which is relational.
And that condition which is relational is the same in
both cases - namely, being a brother of One import­
ant consequence of this is that it follows from "x is a
left-handed brother ofy" and "x is red-haired" that
"x is a red-haired brother ofy. " We can express this
by saying that "is a red-haired brother of' and "is a
left-handed brother of' express restrictions of the
relation "being a brother of' to, respectively, the
domains of the left-handed and the red-haired.
Now compare with this the difference between
the relations expressed by "being a better golfer
than" and "being a better swimmer than. " These
are different relations. But they do not differ in the
way those just examined differ. "Being a better
golfer than" does not break up into "being better
than" and "being a golfer. " There is no such thing
as just being better than. This is the reason that it does
not follow from "x is a better golfer thany" and "x is
a swimmer" that "x is a better swimmer thany. "
Frege's position is that "being the same F as, "
like "being a red-haired brother of, " splits up into a
general relation and an assertion about the referent;
it breaks up into "being the same as" and "being an
F. '8 This is what Geach denies. He thinks that
"being the same F as, " like "being a better golfer
than, " does not split up. Just as there is no such
thing as being just "better than, " Geach says that
"there is no such thing as being just 'the, ,, 9 same. .. .
This then is the difference of opinion between
Frege and Geach. Geach's succinct statement of
his view is: "it makes no sense to judge whether x
and yare 'the same'. .. unless we add or under­
stand some general term - the same F. " But this
disguises the real nature of the dispute. Frege
would not deny, and I will not deny, that in all \nJohn Perry
significant judgments of identity a general term
that conveys a criterion of identity will be impli­
citly or explicitly available. I shall not try to refute
Geach by producing a case of being the same that is
not a case of being the same F for some general
term "F. " That is not the issue. The issue is the
role of the general term and the criterion of identity
that it conveys.
The view I advocate, and which I believe to be
Frege's, is that the role of the general term is to
identify the referents - not to identify the "kind of
identity" asserted. According to this view, x and y
cannot be the same F, but different G's; if x and y
are the same F, then the relation of identity obtains
between x and y, and any statement that denies this
is false. In particular, no denial of identity of the
form "x and yare different G's" can be true. Frege
cannot allow the possibility that x and yare the
same F but different G'S. lO But, on Geach's view,
there is no objection to such a case. On his view,
just as it does not follow that Jones is a better golfer
than Smith from the fact that he is a better swim­
mer than Smith and is a golfer, so too it does not
follow that x is the same G as y from the fact that x
is the same Fasy and is a G. Thus Geach says, "On
my own view of identity I could not object in
principle to different A's being one and the same
B; .. . as different official personages may be one
and the same man. ,, 11 If we can find an example in
which x and yare the same F but x and yare
different G's, we shall have to admit Geach is
right in rejecting Frege's view, just as if there
were cases of people who are left-handed and
brothers but not left-handed brothers, we should
have to give up the view that "being a left-handed
brother" splits up into "being left-handed" and
"being a brother. "
Before considering some examples that seem to
be of this form, I would like to point out an inter­
esting consequence of Geach's view. Geach's view
differs from Frege's in allowing the possibility of
true statements of the form "x andy are the same F
but x and yare different G's. " But if we can find a
counterexample of this form, we shall have to give
up more than Frege's view. We shall have to give up
some principles about identity that seem very
plausible.
If we are going to view a statement of the form
"x is the same F as y" as asserting some relation
expressed by "is the same F as" of the referents of
"x" and "y, " then this relation should behave, on
Frege's view, as a restriction of the general relation
of identity to a specific kind of object. As such, it
should share some of the properties ordinarily
attributed to identity: transitivity, symmetry, and
substitutivity. Reflexivity is lost: every object need
not be the same F as itself, for all objects are not
F's. But these relations should be at least weakly
reflexive: any object that is the same F as some
object must be the same F as itself. But any coun­
terexample to Frege will also be a counterexample
to some of these principles. Consider any such
counterexample. It is in the form of a conjunction.
The second conjunct says that x andy are different
G's. If we make the substitution in this conjunct
that the first conjunct licenses us to make, the
result is "x and x are different G's. " To accept
this result is to deny that the relation expressed by
"the same G" is even weakly reflective, which
requires either that such relations are not transitive
or not symmetrical. To deny the substitution is to
deny that these relations confer substitutivity. If we
accept Geach's view, we shall have to abandon
some traditional and rather plausible logical doc­
trines.
II
In "Identity, " a recent article from which some of
the earlier quotations were drawn, Geach has
explained his views at greater length than before.
At first glance, the views expressed in that article
may seem difficult to reconcile with those I have
just attributed to him; it is a difficult article.
Although Geach says that "at first sight" his own
view seems to conflict with "classical identity the­
ory" - the view that identity is a reflexive relation
that confers substitutivity - he never points out in
so many words that it will have to be abandoned if
his theory of identity is correct. Nevertheless, the
view Geach expounds does turn out to be, when
carefully examined, just the view I have attributed
to him, and does have the consequences I said it
had.
Geach's view is best understood, I think, by
looking first at his examples, and then considering
the rather involved argument and doctrine those
examples are supposed to illustrate. These ex­
amples, as interpreted by Geach, are of just the
sort we found required to refute Frege's view.
Consider the following list of words:
A. Bull
B. Bull
C. Cow \nHow many words are on the list? It has often been
pointed out that such a question is ambiguous; the
right answer might be "two" or it might be
"three. " One explanation of this ambiguity is that
the answer depends on what kind of object we are
counting, word types or word tokens; there are three
word tokens, but only two word types on the list.
But this is not the way Geach looks at the matter.
According to him, there are not two kinds of
objects to be counted, but two different ways of
counting the same objects. And the reason there are
two ways of counting the objects is that there are
two different "criteria of relative identity. " The
number of words on the list depends on whether
A and B are counted as one and the same word;
they are counted the same according to the criteria
of relative identity expressed by "word type, " but
not according to the one expressed by "word
token. " Geach's claim is then that the conjunction.
(1) A is the same word type as B, but A and Bare
different word tokens
is true. And this conjunction seems to be just the
sort of counterexample required to prove Frege
wrong.
The rather involved and difficult doctrine that
precedes such alleged counterexamples as this in
Geach's article seems to me best viewed as an
attempt to undermine some distinctions implicit
in fairly obvious objections to such an example. I
will now state those objections, and in the next
section explain how Geach seeks to undermine
them.
First, in order to be of the form "x andy are the
same F, but x andy are different G's, " the referring
expressions in the example that correspond to "x"
and "y" will have to refer to the same objects in the
first and second conjuncts. The sameness of
expression is not sufficient. If it were, the true
statement "John Adams was the father of John
Adams" would be of the form "x was the father
of x" and a counterexample to a principle of genea­
logy. It seems a plausible criticism of Geach's pro­
posed counterexample that it fails for just this
reason; in the first conjunct of (1) "A" and "B"
refer to word types, in the second to word tokens.
Indeed, the role of the general terms "word token"
and "word type" is just to tell us what objects - the
types or the tokens - those expressions do refer to.
One might reply to this objection by saying that
the fact expressed by (1) could as well have been
expressed by
The Same F
(2) A and B are different word tokens, but the
same word type.
In (2) the expressions "A" and "B" appear only
once; it might be claimed that it becomes very
dubious, in virtue of this single appearance, to
claim that four references to three referents take
place within (2).
But there is a second criticism. Even if the occur­
rences of "A" and "B" are interpreted as referring
to the same objects in both conjuncts of (1), or as not
being multiply referential in (2), it is still far from
clear that either (1) or (2) is a good counterexample.
There is a further requirement. It is not sufficient,
for a statement to be what Frege, or most other
philosophers, would call an identity statement, that
it contain the word "same, " or be of the verbal form
"x andy are the same F. " For example, "Sarah and
Jimmy are members of the same family" is not an
identity statement; no one would suppose its truth
required that everything true of Sarah be true of
Jimmy. Nor are "The couch and the chair are the
same color" or "Tommy is the same age as Jimmy"
identity statements. These statements are of course
closely related to identity statements; the first two,
for example, are equivalent to "The family of
Jimmy is identical with the family of Sarah" and
"The color of the couch is identical with the color of
the chair. " But as they are, they are not identity
statements: the relation of identity is not asserted to
obtain between the subjects of the statements -
Jimmy and Sarah, the couch and the chair. Yet it
is clearly a further requirement of a counterexample
to Frege that both conjuncts be identity statements
in the relevant sense. That is, the conjunct that says
"x and yare the same G's" must be an assertion of
identity, and the conjunct that says "x and yare
different G's" must be a denial of identity. For
example, no one should suppose that "The couch
and the chair are the same color, but different pieces
of furniture" would be a good counterexample to
Frege.
It seems clear to me that if we assume that "A"
and "B" refer to word tokens throughout (1), then
the first conjunct of (1), is not an assertion of
identity, but merely an assertion that A and Bare
similar in a certain respect, or have some property
in common; they are both tokens of the same type,
they have the same shape, they are "equiform. "
Note that this conjunct could be more naturally
expressed "A and B are of the same type" or "A
and B are tokens of the same type. " In this way the
conjunct resembles the statement "The couch and \nJohn Perry
the chair are the same color" which could more
naturally be put "The couch and the chair have the
same color" or "The couch and the chair are of
the same color. " But identity statements are not
more naturally expressed in such ways; we feel no
temptation to say that Lyndon Johnson and LBJ
are of the same man, or have the same man.
Thus Geach's counterexample seems open to
the following objection. If "A" and "B" refer to
the same objects throughout (I), the first conjunct
of (1) is not an identity statement, and the counter­
example fails. If both conjuncts are identity state­
ments in the required sense, "A" and "B" must
refer to word types in the first conjunct and word
tokens in the second, and the counterexample fails.
III
We find in "Identity" a rather abstract line of
argument which, if correct, will show the criticism
I have just made of Geach's counterexample to be
based on untenable or at least unnecessary notions:
the notion of word types as a kind of object differ­
ent from word tokens and the notion of a statement
of identity ("absolute" identity) as opposed to a
resemblance or common property statement
("relative" identity). The only distinction needed,
according to Geach, is between different kinds of
"relative" identity: 12 being-the-same-word-type
and being-the-same-word-token.
To understand Geach's argument, we must first
notice a rather interesting point. A great many
propositions are about particular things. For
instance, the proposition "The pen I am writing
with is blue" is about a particular object - the pen
in my hand - which is referred to by the subject
term. An assertion of the proposition can be looked
upon as asserting of that pen that it has a certain
property - being blue - which is expressed by the
predicate. Now part of understanding an utterance
that expresses such a proposition is understanding
under what conditions the proposition expressed
would be true. The interesting point to which I
wish to call attention is just that this element in, or
requirement of understanding the utterance, does
not generally require knowing which object the
subject term of the proposition refers to, and
exactly what the predicate asserts of it.
A simple example will establish this. Consider the
sentence "Pa" in the language L. I inform you that
the utterance "Pa" is true if and only if the word in
the box stands for a much misunderstood notion.
You understand the English; you now know the
truth-conditions of "Pa. " But my explanation has
not determined the referent of "a" or the condition
expressed by "P-. " Even if we take the English
sentence
The word in the box stands for a much misun­
derstood notion
as a translation of "Pa, " nothing has been said
about which parts of the English sentence corre­
spond to which parts of "Pa. " Different transla­
tions of the elements seem equally allowable:
a: the word in the box
P-: -stands for a much misunderstood notion
a: the box
P-: the word in-stands for a much misunder­
stood notion.
It is possible, in certain easily imagined cases, to
know the truth-conditions of a great many sen­
tences of some such language, without being clear
about the proper interpretations of their parts.
Suppose "Pa" is true if and only if the type of
which the word in the box is a token is often
misspelled. On the basis of this information, two
interpretations of "P-" and "a" seem allowable:
a: the type of which the word in the box is a
token.
P-: -is often misspelled.
a: the word in the box
P-: -is a token of a type that is often mis­
spelled.
We might be told the truth-conditions of a great
many sentences containing "P-" and "a, " and
still be in the dark as to their proper interpretation.
For example, we might be told that "Fa" is true if
and only if the type of the token in the box is often
capitalized; that "Pc" is true if and only if the first
word on the author's copy of this page is often
misspelled, and so forth. This additional informa­
tion about further sentences would not resolve the
problem of interpretation.
The relation between the referring expressions,
"the token in the box" and "the type of the token in
the box, " is that the latter refers to an object which
is identified by means of a reference to the object
identified by the former. Thus "the type of the
token in the circle" identifies the same type as "the \ntype of the token in the box" - although the tokens
are different.
8
Suppose we were told that "Pb" were true if and
only if the type of the token in the circle were often
misspelled. Then, clearly, "Pb" is equivalent to
"Pa. " But is a identical with b? This is just the
question of the proper interpretation. If "P-"
means "-is often misspelled, " then "a" and "b"
refer to the same word type. If "P-" means "-is
a token of a type that is often misspelled, " then "a"
and "b" refer to different word tokens (of the same
type).
To show that a is not identical with b, it would
be necessary only to establish that a has some
property b lacks; if a and b are identical, they
must share their properties. Suppose there is
some predicate "S-" in L, such that "Sa" has a
different truth-value than "Sb. " Clearly, we could
conclude that a is not identical with b; that a and b
are different tokens, not one and the same type.
Suppose we are told that "R(a, b)" is true if and
only if the token in the circle and the token in the
box are tokens of the same type. Then there seem
to be two possible interpretations of "R(a, b)":
a: the type of the token in the box.
b: the type of the token in the circle.
R (-, -): - and - are identical.
a: the token in the box.
b: the token in the circle.
R (-, -): - and - are equiform.
Which should we choose? Well, if we choose the
first interpretation, then everything true of a will
have to be true of b. So if there is some predicate
"S-" in L such that the truth-values of "Sa" and
"Sb" are different, the second interpretation would
have to be chosen. If not, it would seem that we
were free to choose the first.
Suppose, however, there are no such predicates.
Would that fact be sufficient justification for inter­
preting "R (-, -)" as "is identical with"? In a
sense, it would not force us to do so. Even if there
were no predicate like "S-" in L, it still might be
that "R (-, -)" did not mean identity. It might be
just accidental that there are no such predicates;
perhaps the speakers of L have not yet noticed any
properties that distinguish word tokens, or think
them unworthy of expression in their language.
The Same F
To have the formal properties required to
express identity, an expression "R-, -" in L
need satisfy only the following two conditionsY
(i) for any referring expression a in L, "R a, a" is
true; (ii) for any referring expressions a and /3, and
any predicate <I> in L, if "R a, /3" is true, "<I>a" and
"<I>/3" are materially equivalent. The force of the
last paragraph is that these necessary conditions for
expressing identity are not logically sufficient.
"R-, -" might satisfy these conditions and not
express identity - but just the kind of similarity (or
relative identity) appropriate to the objects in the
domain of L.
Now let us make a rough distinction between an
object of a kind K and an occurrence of a kind K. An
occurrence of a kind K is an object which, although
it is not itself a K, is the sort of object, or one sort of
object, which would ordinarily be employed in
ostensively identifying a K. For example, a word
token is an occurrence of a word type, because we
ostensively identify word types by pointing to a
word token and saying "the type of which that is a
token" or even "that type. " Surfaces or physical
objects are occurrences of colors, because we osten­
sively identify colors by pointing at surfaces and
saying "the color of that" or "that color. '
Our choice in interpreting "R(a, b)" is just this:
to interpret "a" and "b" as references to word
types and "R(-, -)" as "is identical with, " or to
interpret "a" and "b" as references to occurrences of
word types (which is to say, as references to word
tokens), and "R(-, -)" as expressing one kind of
what Geach calls "relative identity" - namely, "is
equiform with. "
Geach's argument, as I understand it, is this. We
might very well have a reason to choose the second
interpretation - for example, that there is in L a
predicate "S-" such that "Sa & ~ Sb" is true.
Moreover, even if we do not have such a predicate
in L, we might choose to add one in the future, and
should not close this option ('limit our ideology').
But no circumstances are conceivable in which we
are forced to choose the first interpretation. We are
always theoretically free to take the second. More­
over, there is a general reason for not choosing the
first: in doing so we multiply the entities to which
we allow references (types now as well as tokens)
and thereby "pollute our ontology. " But then there
is never any good reason to interpret a predicate in
L as expressing identity, rather than some form of
relative identity, and never any good reason to
interpret the references in L to be to things which
have occurrences, rather than to occurrences \nJohn Perry
themselves. But then are not the very notions of
identity, and of a reference to such an object,
suspect? And if this is so, are we not justified in
waiving the criticisms made of the counterexample
to Frege in section II, since those criticisms are
completely based on these notions?
IV
The charges that the interpretation of "R (-, -)"
as "is identical with" would restrict ideology while
polluting the universe are completely unfounded.
Consider the language L+, which contains all of
the sentences of L, plus sentences composed of the
predicate "K (-, -)" and the referring expres­
sions of L. The sentences of L + which are also
sentences of L have the same truth-conditions in L
+ as in L. "K (a, b)" is true if and only if the word
token on page 94 is more legible than the word
token on page 95. Then clearly, "R (-, -)" does
not express identity in L +. "R(a, b)" is true, but
"K(a, b)" and "K(a, a)" are not materially equiva­
lent, or so we shall suppose.
Now all of this does not in the least show that" R
(-, -)" does not express identity in L. The facts
that "R (-, -)" does not express identity in L +,
and that the symbols used in Land L + are largely
the same, and that the truth-conditions of the
shared sentences are the same in each, do not entail
that the shared expressions have the same inter­
pretation.
If, however, we think of Land L+ as successive
states of the same language, actually employed by
humans, then the evidence that "R (-, -)" does
not confer substitutivity in L+ is grounds for
thinking it is only an accident that it did in L -
the earlier state; perhaps no one had conceptualized
the relation being more legible than, or any other
property capable of distinguishing tokens. This
seems to be Geach's view: as our language grows,
what now has the formal properties ascribed by the
classical view to identity (is an "I-predicable" in
Geach's terminology) may cease to have them. To
pick out anyone stage of the language and say that
those expressions that are I-predicable at that point
must always be, are somehow necessarily, in virtue
of their meaning, I-predicable is to "freeze" the
language - to prohibit it from growing in certain
directions.
This argument is confused: Suppose we inter­
pret "R (-, -)" as expressing identity, and take L
to have as its domain word types. We are in no way
blocked from adding the predicate "is more legible
than" to L. It would be a futile gesture unless some
names for word tokens were also added, but there is
also no objection to doing that. In that case we have
not L+, but L + + -L plus "K (--)" plus some
names for word tokens. Nothing in L prevents us
from taking "R (-, -)" as expressing identity; in
so doing we do not block the development of L to
L+ +.
Whatabouttheciaimthatinterpreting"R(-, -)"
as expressing identity will "pollute our ontology"?
To make this point, Geach introduces another
example; a look at it will indicate the sorts of con­
fusion that underlie this charge.
As I remarked years ago when criticizing Quine,
there is a certain set of predicables that are true
of men but do not discriminate between two
men of the same surname. If the ideology of a
theory T is restricted to such predicables, the
ontology of T calls into being a universe of
androids (as science fiction fans say) who differ
from men in just this respect, that two different
ones cannot share the same surname. I call these
androids surmen; a surman is in many ways
very much like a man, e. g. , he has brains in
his skull and a heart in his breast and guts in
his belly. The universe now shows itself as a
baroque Meinongian structure, which hardly
suits Quine's expressed preference for desert
landscapes. 14
Here we have a language fragment whose pre­
dicates are such that all the same predicates apply
to me, my father, my brother, and the rest of the
Perrys, and the same is true of the Smiths and the
Joneses, and so forth. If the words in this language
fragment corresponded to English, then there
would be nothing to stop us, says Geach, from
interpreting "has the same last name" as expres­
sing identity; this would be an I-predicable in the
rump language. Then, he suggests, the names in
the language fragment will have to be reinterpreted
as names of surmen, which are queer and objec­
tionable entities.
But as far as I can see, nothing more objection­
able than families would emerge from this reinter­
pretation. I cannot see why Geach thinks it should
require androids. The entity that has all the per­
sons with a certain last name as occurrences (parts
or members) is clearly something like a family, and
not anything like an android. Moreover, this ex­
ample is not analogous to the theoretical descrip-\ntions Geach gives in his abstract arguments; here
we go from the richer language to the leaner; it is
not clear how the predicates (such as "has guts in
his belly') are to be reinterpreted in such a case, and
Geach gives us no directions.
It seems to me that any cogency that attaches to
Geach's claim of pollution can be traced to a con­
fusion of his position with some sort of nominalism.
Geach's position seems to presuppose nominalism:
the thesis that, in our terminology, only occur­
rences are ultimately real. But it amounts to far
more. The nominalist would claim that "being of
the same type" is analyzable in terms of "equiform­
ity" and that references to types are in some sense
eliminable; Geach seems to claim that they are not
only eli minable, but never occur in the first place.
The disadvantages of interpreting a predicate
like "R (-, -)" as identity are thus illusory; are
there any advantages?
The most obvious is that if we interpret "R (-,
-)" as "equiform" even though there are no pre­
dicates in L that discriminate between tokens, then
we seem to be granting that the speakers of L refer
to a kind of objects, tokens, between which they
have no means of distinguishing. But if tokens
cannot be individuated in L, is it really reasonable
to suppose that the users of L are actually talking
about tokens, but have just not bothered to express
in the language any of the ways they use to tell
them apart?
This point does not have its full weight with the
example of L. L, a language with a restricted sub­
ject matter of the sort dealt with only by those with
access to a richer language, presents itself as an
artificial language. It clearly might be reasonable
for someone to stipulate that the referring expres­
sions in some artificial language he is discussing
should be construed as referring to tokens even if
they could be construed as referring to types; he
might, for example, want to compare L with wider
languages such as L+, and this might be more
conveniently done if L is so construed.
But suppose an anthropologist should have the
following worry. He arrives at a coherent and
plausible translation scheme for a certain out­
of-the-way language. In this scheme a certain
predicate "R (-, -)" is translated "-is identical
with -. " In the thousands of conversations he has
recorded and studied he has found no cases in
which natives would deny that an object had the
relation expressed by this predicate to itself; he has
found that, in every case, once natives find objects
have this relation, they are willing to infer that what
The Same F
is true of one is true of the other. In a murder trial,
the prosecution tries to prove, and the defense to
disprove, that this relation obtains between the
defendant and the murderer. But our anthropolo­
gist is a Geachian. He worries, Does "R (-, -)"
really express identity? Do they really talk about
people, or only stages of people? This is absurd.
Some internally consistent theory about the
natives' beliefs and linguistic practices could be
formulated that casts this sort of metaphysical
doubt on any entry in the anthropologist's diction­
ary. He need not have any special worries about
identity; in the situation described, there is no real
room for doubt.
With regard to one's own language, it seems
clear that we can pick out predicates - for example,
"is one and the same as" - which, in some sense I
shall not here try to analyze, owe their logical
properties (transitivity, symmetry, and so forth)
to their meaning, and could not lose them merely
by virtue of additions to the ideology of the lan­
guage, or changes in the state of the nonlinguistic
world. Such predicates express the concept of
identity.
Thus, as far as I can see, Geach has no effective
arguments against the dilemma posed in section II
for any counterexample to Frege. Until some coun­
terexample is put forward to which those objec­
tions do not apply, we have no reason to reject this
part of Frege's account of identity. In the next
section, I shall examine an example of the required
form which may seem more powerful than the one
discussed thus far.
v
Suppose Smith offered Jones $5, 000 for a clay
statue of George Washington. Jones delivers a sta­
tue of Warren Harding he has since molded from
the same clay, and demands payment, saying,
"That's the same thing you bought last week. "
It is the same piece of clay, but a different statue.
It seems then that we can form the awkward but
true conjunction
This is the same piece of clay as the one you
bought last week, but this is a different statue
from the one you bought last week.
What are we to say of this sentence? lS
Following the criticisms of such counterex­
amples outlined in section II, we could either say \nJohn Perry
that "this" and "the one you bought last week"
refer to pieces of clay in the first conjunct and
statues in the second, or that one or the other of
the conjuncts does not assert or deny identity.
To maintain the first criticism, we must claim
that "this statue" and "this clay" would not in this
situation refer to one and the same object; that the
clay and the statue are not identical. This view
seems paradoxical to some, but I think it can be
reasonably defended. There are things true of the
one not true of the other (for example, the piece of
clay was bought in Egypt in 1956, but not the
statue), and the piece of clay may remain with us
long after the statue is destroyed. There is clearly a
rather intimate relation between the two; I would
argue that this relation is that the current "stage"
of the piece of clay and the current "stage" of the
statue are identical. We might well reserve the
phrase "are the same thing" for this relation,
while using "identical', "are the same object, "
"are the same entity, " and so forth, for the notion
whose logical properties were formulated by Leib­
niz and Frege. But the point I wish to insist on at
present is simply that there is nothing paradoxical
about maintaining that the clay and the statue are
not identical, and a great deal that is problematical
about maintaining the opposite.
If all the references are to the statue, then "being
the same piece of clay" simply amounts to "being
made of the same piece of clay" and does not
express identity. If all the references are to the
clay, then "-is a different statue from -" should
be construed as meaning "-is a different statue
than - was, " which amounts to "-is formed into
Notes
Peter Geach, Reference and Generality (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1962), p. 39.
2 David Wiggins, Identity and Spatio-Temporal Conti­
nuity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), pI. l.
3 Peter Geach, "Identity, " Review of Metaphysics 21
(1967-8), pp. 3-12.
4 Ibid. , p. 3.
5 Geach, Reference and Generality, p. 39.
6 Ibid. , pp. 151-2.
7 I base my remarks about what Frege could say and
would say on his general view of these matters as
expressed in various writings, and not on any specific
discussion of this problem. My general view about
identity owes much to Frege's remarks in his Grun­
dlagen der Arithmetik (Breslau: W. Kolbner, 1884),
sects. 62ff, and those expressed by W. V. Quine in
a statue that is not identical with the statue - was
formed into. "
Having these alternative unobjectionable ana­
lyses of the apparent counterexample does not con­
stitute an embarras des richesses. The speaker's
intention to refer to the clay or the statues, or the
clay in one conjunct and the statues in the other,
might be revealed by later turns in the conversa­
tion. But he need not have any such intentions, just
as when I say "This is brown" with a gesture
toward my desk, I need not have decided whether
I am referring to the desk or its color.
VI
Let me then summarize my position. (1) In identity
statements like "This is the same river as that" the
general term plays the same role as it does in "This
river is the same as that river'; it identifies the
referents, and not the "kind of identity" being
asserted. (2) Apparent counterexamples to the
equivalence of "x and yare the same F" and "x
andy are F's, and are the same, " of the form "x is
the same F as y, but x and yare different G's, " err
either because (i) they have the grammatical, but
not the logical, form of a counterexample, since the
referring expressions do not have the same refer­
ents in both conjuncts, or (ii) one of the conjuncts
does not assert or deny identity, but one of the
other relations often expressed by phrases of
the form "is the same F as. " (3) Geach's criticisms
of the distinctions implicit in (i) and (ii) are
unfounded. 16
From a Logical Point of View (Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press, 1953), pp. 65ff.
8 It should be pointed out that Frege would not regard
this equivalence as a helpful analysis of "being the
same F. " See the remarks cited in n. 7.
9 Peter Geach, Mental Acts (New York: Humanities
Press, 1957), p. 69.
10 This may seem inconsistent with the view I attributed
to Frege with respect to the bathing example. The
river I bathed in yesterday and the river I bathed in
today are water, and they are the same. Shouldn't it
follow that they are the same water? Well, in the sense
in which the rivers are water, they are the same water,
and were the same water yesterday - although the
river I bathed in today is not the water the river I
bathed in yesterday was. Two confusions need to be \navoided. First, the statement in question, that the
river I bathed in yesterday and the river I bathed in
today are the same water, is not an identity statement
(see below). Second, the truth of this statement in no
way conflicts with the falsity of "The water I bathed
in yesterday and the water I bathed in today are the
same, " which, on one interpretation, is what "What
I bathed in yesterday and what I bathed in today are
the same water" amounts to in the example in ques­
tion.
II Geach, Reference and Generality, p. 157.
12 It is important to see that statements of "relative"
identity are not what I have called "identity state­
ments" at all, but rather what I would prefer to call
"statements of resemblance" or "common property
statements. " The statements on p. 93 above, for
example, are what Geach calls statements of relative
The Same F
identity. Relative identity should not be confused with
restricted identity (see p. 9 above). On my view, a
restricted identity statement can be reworded without
changing referents, as a clear identity statement: to
say "Leningrad and Stalin grad are the same city" is
just to say "The city of Leningrad is identical with the
city of Stalingrad. " This is not true of statements of
relative identity - and that is why they are not identity
statements.
13 Double quotes occasionally function as quasi-quotes.
I am ignoring problems of nonextensional contexts.
14 Geach, "Identity, " p. 10.
15 An example like this is discussed by Wiggins, Identity,
pp. Sf£.
16 I am grateful to a number of persons for commenting
on earlier versions of this paper; I would particularly
like to thank Keith Donnellan and Wilfrid Hodges. \nAllan Gibbard
This brief for contingent identity begins with an
example. Under certain conditions, I shall argue, a
clay statue is identical with the piece of clay of
which it is made - or at least it is plausible to
claim so. If indeed the statue and the piece of clay
are identical, I shall show, then the identity is
contingent: that is to say, where s is the statue and
c the piece of clay.
( I ) s = c & <) (s exists & c exists & s # c)
This claim of contingent identity, if true, has
important ramifications. Later I shall develop the­
ories of concrete things and proper names which
are needed to fit the claim. These theories together
form a coherent alternative to theories which hold
that all true identities formed with proper names
are necessary - a plausible alternative, I shall argue,
with many advantages.
Most purported examples of such contingent
identity fail: that much, I think, has been shown
by Saul Kripke's recent work. ! Kripke's work has
transformed the subjects of necessity and refer­
ence, and the usual examples of contingent identity
depend on accounts of those subjects which Krip­
ke's attacks undermine. Take, for instance, one of
Frege's examples of a posteriori identity, somewhat
reworded: 2
Originally published in Journal of Phifosophical Logic 4
(1975). pp. 187-221. Copyright C0 by D. Reidel Publish­
ing Company. Reprinted by permission of Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
(2) If Hesperus exists, then Hesperus = Phos­
phorus.
On the account of necessity which prevailed before
Kripke, a truth is necessary only if it can be known
a priori. Now as Frege pointed out, (2) is clearly
a posteriori, since it reports a discovery which
could only have been made by observation. On
the old account, then, (2), although true, is not a
necessary truth. Kripke's attacks undermine this
account of necessary truth as a priori truth.
Whether something is a necessary truth, he argues,
is not a matter of how we can know it, but of
whether it might have been false if the world had
been different: a proposition is a necessary truth if
it would have been true in any possible situation.
The necessary-contingent distinction and the a
priori-a posteriori distinction, then, are not drawn
in the same way, and to prove a truth contingent, it
is not enough simply to show that it is a posteriori. .l
Kripke's attacks also undermine accounts of
reference which would make (2) a contingent
truth. On both Russell's theory of descriptions4
and the later "cluster" theory, a name gets its
reference in some way from the beliefs of the per­
son who uses it. On Russell's view, the heavenly
body Hesperus of which the ancients spoke would
be the thing which fitted certain beliefs they had
about Hesperus; on the cluster theory, it would be
the thing which fitted a preponderance of their
beliefs about it. Now the ancients" beliefs about
Hesperus and their beliefs about Phosphorus were
such that, in some possible worlds, one thing would
fit the former and another the latter. On such an \naccount of proper names, then, (2) would be false in
some possible worlds, and is therefore contingent.
I shall not repeat Kripke's attacks on the descrip­
tion and cluster theories of proper names. s My
purpose here is to argue that even if these attacks
are successful, there may well remain some con­
tingent identities consisting of proper names. The
identity of Hesperus and Phosphorus is not con­
tingent, on the theories I shall develop, but I shall
give an example which is. Kripke's attacks, if I am
right, transform the subject of contingent identity,
but they do not eliminate it.
I
In what sort of case might a statue s be identical
with the piece of clay, c, of which it is made?
Identity here is to be taken in a strict, timeless
sense, not as mere identity during some period of
time. For two things to be strictly identical, they
must have all properties in common. That means,
among other things, that they must start to exist at
the same time and cease to exist at the same time. If
we are to construct a case in which a statue is
identical with a piece of clay, then, we shall need
persistence criteria for statues and pieces of clay -
criteria for when they start to exist and when they
cease to exist.
Take first the piece of clay. Here I do not mean
the portion of clay of which the piece consists,
which may go on existing after the piece has been
broken up or merged with other pieces. I shall call
this clay of which the piece consists a portion of
clay; a portion of clay, as I am using the term, can
be scattered widely and continue to exist. Here I
am asking about a piece or lump of clay.
A lump sticks together: its parts stick to each
other, directly or through other parts, and no part
of the lump sticks to any portion of clay which is
not part of the lump. The exact nature of this
sticking relation will not matter here; it is a familiar
relation which holds between parts of a solid object,
but not between parts of a liquid, powder, or heap
of solid objects. We know, then, what it is for two
portions of clay to be parts of the same lump of clay
at a time t, and if they are, I shall say that they are
stuck to each other at t.
For how long, then, does a piece of clay persist?
As a first approximation, the criteria might be put
as follows. A piece of clay consists of a portion P of
clay. It comes into existence when all the parts of P
come to be stuck to each other, and cease to be
Contingent Identity
stuck to any clay which is not part of P. It ceases to
exist when the parts of P cease to be stuck to each
other or come to be stuck to clay which is not in P.
Thus a piece of clay can be formed either by stick­
ing smaller pieces of clay together or by breaking it
off a larger piece of clay, and it can be destroyed
either by breaking it apart or by sticking it to other
pieces of clay.
This standard is probably too strict; we ought to
allow for such things as wear and the adherence of
clay dust to a wet piece of clay. Nothing will
change, though, for my purposes, if we allow the
portion of clay which composes a piece of clay to
change slowly over time. In the actual world, then,
a piece of clay might be characterized by a function
P from instants to portions of clay. In order for it to
characterize a piece of clay, the function P would
have to satisfy the following conditions.
(a) The domain ofP is an interval of time T.
(b) For any instant t in T, P(t) is a portion of clay
the parts of which, at t, are both stuck to each
other and not stuck to any clay particles which
are not part of P(t).
(c) The portions of clay P(t) change with t only
slowly, if at all. (I shall give no exact standard
of slowness here, but one might be stipulated
if anything hinged on it. )
(d) No function P* which satisfies (a), (b), and
(c) extends P, in the sense that the domain of
P* properly includes the domain ofP and the
function P is P* with its domain restricted.
Both on this standard, then, and on the earlier,
stricter one, a piece of clay comes into existence
when parts in it are stuck to each other and unstuck
from all other clay, and goes out of existence when
its parts cease to be stuck to each other or become
stuck to other clay. That is what I shall need for
what follows.
What, now, are the persistence criteria for clay
statues? By a statue here, I do not mean a shape of
which there could be more than one token, but a
concrete particular thing: distinct clay statues, as I
am using the term, may come out of the same mold.
A clay statue consists of a piece of clay in a specific
shape. It lasts, then, as long as the piece of clay lasts
and keeps that shape. It comes into being when the
piece of clay first exists and has that shape, and it
goes out of existence as soon as the piece of clay
ceases to exist or to have that shape.
These criteria too may be overly strict: again we
may want to allow for slow changes of shape from
wear, accretion, and slight bending. So let us say, a \nAllan Gibbard
clay statue persists as long as the piece of clay it is
made of persists and changes shape only slowly.
I do not claim that the criteria I have given are
precisely set forth that way in our conceptual
scheme. I do think that the criteria I have given
fit at least roughly what we say about statues and
pieces of clay. My argument will depend on no
such claim, though, and for all I shall have to say,
the criteria I have given might have been purely
stipulative. I do need to make one claim for those
criteria: I claim that as I have defined them, pieces
of clay and clay statues are objects. That is to say,
they can be designated with proper names, and the
logic we ordinarily use will still apply. That is all,
strictly speaking, that I need to claim for the cri­
teria I have given.
Now we are in a better position to ask, are a clay
statue and the piece of clay of which it is made
identical? The persistence criteria I have given
make it clear that often the two are distinct. In a
typical case, a piece of clay is brought into existence
by breaking it off from a bigger piece of clay. It
then gets shaped, say, into the form of an elephant.
With the finishing touches, a statue of an elephant
comes into being. The statue and the piece of clay
therefore have different properties: the times they
start to exist are different, and whereas the statue
has the property of being elephant-shaped as long
as it exists, the piece of clay does not. Since one
has properties the other lacks, the two are not
identical. 6
Suppose, though, a clay statue starts to exist at
the same time as the piece of clay of which it is
made, and ceases to exist at the same time as the
piece of clay ceases to exist. Will the statue then be
identical with the piece of clay? It is indeed possible
for a statue to endure for precisely the same period
of time as its piece of clay, as the persistence criteria
I have given make clear. Consider the following
story.
I make a clay statue of the infant Goliath in two
pieces, one the part above the waist and the other
the part below the waist. Once I finish the two
halves, I stick them together, thereby bringing
into existence simultaneously a new piece of clay
and a new statue. A day later I smash the statue,
thereby bringing to an end both statue and piece of
clay. The statue and the piece of clay persisted
during exactly the same period of time.
Here, I am tempted to say, the statue and the
piece of clay are identica! ' They began at the same
time, and on any usual account, they had the
same shape, location, color, and so forth at each
instant in their history; everything that happened
to one happened to the other; and the act that
destroyed the one destroyed the other. If the statue
is an entity over and above the piece of clay in that
shape, then statues seem to take on a ghostly air.
No doubt other explanations of what the statue is
can be offered, but the hypothesis that the statue
and piece of clay are identical seems well worth
exploring.
If indeed the statue and piece of clay are the
same thing, then their identity is contingent. It is
contingent, that is to say in the sense of (1) at the
beginning of this paper. (1) uses proper names, and
so let me name the statue and the lump: the statue I
shall call "Goliath"; the piece of clay, "Lump! ."
Naming the piece of clay, to be sure, seems strange,
but that, presumably, is because it is unusual to
name pieces of clay, not because pieces of clay are
unnamable. With these names, (1) becomes
(3) Goliath = Lumpl & 0 (Goliath exists &
Lumpl exists & Goliath", Lumpl).
It is in this sense that I want to claim that Goliath =
Lumpl contingently.
Suppose, then, that Goliath = Lump! . Then
their identity is contingent in the sense of (3). For
suppose I had brought Lumpl into existence as
Goliath, just as I actually did, but before the clay
had a chance to dry, I squeezed it into a bal! . At that
point, according to the persistence criteria I have
given, the statue Goliath would have ceased to
exist, but the piece of clay Lumpl would still exist
in a new shape. Hence Lumpl would not be
Goliath, even though both existed. We would have
Lumpl exists & Goliath exists & Goliath '"
Lump! .
If in fact, then, Goliath = Lumpl, then here is a
case of contingent identity. In fact Goliath =
Lumpl, but had I destroyed the statue Goliath by
squeezing it, then it would have been the case that,
although both existed, Goliath", Lump! . The iden­
tity is contingent, then, in the sense given in (3).
II
The claim that Goliath = Lumpl, then, has import­
ant consequences for the logic of identity. How can
the claim be evaluated? \nInitially, at least, the claim seems plausible.
Goliath and Lumpl exist during precisely the
same period of time, and at each instant during
that period, they have, it would seem, the same
shape, color, weight, location, and so forth: they
share all their obvious properties.
The claim that Goliath = Lumpl, moreover, fits
a systematic account of statues and piece of clay. A
clay statue ordinarily begins to exist only after its
piece of clay does. In such cases, it seems reason­
able to say, the statue is a temporal segment of the
piece of clay - a segment which extends for the
period of time during which the piece of clay keeps
a particular, statuesque shape. Here, then, is a
systematic account of the relation between a statue
and its piece of clay. By that account, however,
there will be cases in which a clay statue is identical
with its piece of clay. For in some cases the very
temporal segment of the piece of clay which con­
stitutes the statue extends for the entire life of the
piece of clay. In such a case, the segment is the piece
of clay in its entire extent: the statue and the
piece of clay are identica! .7
That leads to my main reason for wanting to say
that Goliath = Lump! . Concrete things, like statues
and pieces of clay, are a part of the physical world,
and we ought, it seems to me, to have a systematic
physical account of them. Concrete things, I want
to maintain, are made up in some simple, canonical
way from fundamental physical entities. Now what
I have said of the relation between a statue and its
piece of clay fits such a general view of concrete
things. Suppose, for example, we take point­
instants to be our fundamental physical entities,
and let a concrete thing be a set of point-instants.
In that case, Goliath = Lumpl simply because they
are the same set of point-instants. Suppose instead
we take particles to be our fundamental physical
entities, and let a concrete thing be a changing set
of particles - which might mean a function from
instants in time to sets of particles. Then again,
Goliath = Lumpl, because at each instant they
consist of the same set of particles. Now particles
and point-instants are the sorts of things we might
expect to appear in a well-confirmed fundamental
physics - in that part of an eventual physics which
gives the fundamental laws of the universe. A sys­
tem according to which Goliath = Lumpl, then,
may well allow concrete things to be made up in a
simple way from entities that appear in well­
confirmed fundamental physics. Concrete things,
then, can be given a place in a comprehensive view
of the world.
Contingent Identity
In the rest of this paper, then, I shall work out a
theory according to which Goliath = Lump! . Con­
crete things, for all I shall say, may be either sets of
point-instants or changing sets of particles. The
sections which follow develop a theory of proper
names and a theory of modal and dispositional
properties for concrete things.
III
If, as I want to claim, Goliath = Lumpl, then how
do proper names like "Goliath" and "LumpP'
work? Kripke gives an account of proper names
from which it follows that Goliath cannot be iden­
tical with Lumpl; thus if Kripke's were the only
plausible account of proper names, then the claim
that Goliath = Lumpl would have to be abandoned.
In fact, though, accepting that Goliath = Lumpl
leads to an alternative account of proper names,
which, I shall argue, is fully coherent and at least at
plausible as Kripke's.
Kripke's account of proper names is roughly
this. We in the actual world use proper names
both to talk about the actual world and to talk
about ways the world might have been. According
to Kripke, if a proper name denotes a thing in the
actual world, then in talk of non-actual situations,
the name, if it denotes at all, simply denotes that
same thing. A proper name is a rigid designator: it
refers to the same thing in talk of any possible
world in which that thing exists, and in talk of
any other possible world, it refers to nothing in
that world. 8
Now if all proper names are rigid designators,
then Goliath cannot be identical with Lumpl as I
have claimed. For suppose they are identica! ' Call
the actual world Wo and the world as it would be if
I had squeezed the clay into a ball W'; then
(i) In W o, Goliath = Lumpl,
but as I have shown,
(ii) In W', Goliath # Lump! .
Now if the names "Goliath" and "LumpP' are both
rigid designators, then (i) and (ii) cannot both hold.
For suppose (i) is true. Then the names "Goliath"
and "LumpP' both denote the same thing in Woo
Hence if they are both rigid designators, they both
denote that thing in every possible world in which
it exists, and denote nothing otherwise. Since they \nAllan Gibbard
each denote something in W', they must therefore
both denote the same thing in W', and thus (ii)
must be false.
The claim that Goliath = Lumpl, then, is incom­
patible with Kripke's account of proper names.
Suppose, then, that Goliath is indeed identical
with Lumpl; what view of proper names emerges?
How, on that supposition, could we decide whether
the name "Goliath" is a rigid designator? Consider
the situation. In the actual world, "Goliath" refers
to a thing which I made and then broke, which is
both a statue and a piece of clay. Hence the name
"Goliath" is a rigid designator if it refers to that
same thing in any possible situation in which the
thing exists, and refers to nothing otherwise.
What, though, would constitute "that same
thing" if the statue and the piece of clay were
different? Take the situation in W': suppose
instead of breaking the statue, as I actually did, I
had squeezed the clay into a ball. Would that single
thing which in fact I made and then broke - which
in fact was both a piece of clay and a statue - then
be the statue Goliath which I squeezed out of
existence, or the piece of clay Lumpl which went
on existing after I squeezed it?
I can find no sense in the question. To ask
meaningfully what that thing would be, we must
designate it either as a statue or as a piece of clay. It
makes sense to ask what the statue Goliath would
be in that situation: it would be a statue; likewise, it
makes sense to ask what the piece of clay Lumpl
would be in that situation: it would be a piece of
clay. What that thing would be, though, apart from
the way it is designated, is a question without
meaning.
A rough theory begins to emerge from all this. If
Goliath and Lumpl are the same thing, asking what
that thing would be in Wi apart from the way the
thing is designated, makes no sense. Meaningful
cross-world identities of such things as statues, it
begins to seem, must be identities qua something:
qua statue or qua lump, 9 qua Goliath or qua Lumpl.
It makes sense to talk of the "same statue" in
different possible worlds, but no sense to talk of
the 'same thing. '
Put more fully, what seems to be happening is
this. Proper names like "Goliath" or "Lump! "
refer to a thing as a thing of a certain kind:
"Goliath" refers to something as a statue;
"Lumpl, " as a lump. For each such kind of thing,
there is a set of persistence criteria, like the ones
I gave for statues and for lumps. lo In rare cases, at
least, one thing will be of two different kinds, with
different persistence criteria, and whereas one
proper name refers to it as a thing of one kind,
another proper name will refer to it as a thing of
another kind. In such cases, the identity formed
with those names is contingently true. It is true
because the two names designate the same thing,
which ceases to exist at the same time on both sets
of criteria. It is contingent because if the world had
gone differently after the thing came into existence,
the thing might have ceased to exist at different
times on the two sets of criteria: it would have been
one thing on one set of persistence criteria, and
another thing - perhaps a temporal segment of the
first - on the second set of criteria.
If all that is so, it makes no sense to call a
designator rigid or nonrigid by itself. A designator
may be rigid with respect to a sortal: it may be
statue-rigid, as "Goliath" is, or it may be lump­
rigid, as "Lump! " is. A designator, for instance, is
statue-rigid if it designates the same statue in every
possible world in which that statue exists and des­
ignates nothing in any other possible world. What
is special about proper names like "Goliath" and
"Lump! " is not that they are rigid designators. It is
rather that each is rigid with respect to the sortal it
invokes. "Goliath" refers to its bearer as a statue
and is statue-rigid; "Lumpl" refers to its bearer as
a lump and is lump-rigid.
In short, then, if we accept that Goliath = Lumpl
and examine the situation, a rough theory of proper
names emerges. A proper name like "Goliath"
denotes a thing in the actual world, and invokes a
sortal with certain persistence criteria. It then
denotes the same thing-of-that-sort in every possi­
ble world in which it denotes at all. The name
"Goliath" itself, for instance, denotes a lump of
clay and invokes the sortal statue; hence it denotes
the same statue in every possible world in which
that statue exists.
That leaves two questions unanswered. First,
how does a name like "Goliath" get its reference
in the actual world? Second, what makes a thing in
another possible world "the same statue" as the one
which in fact I made and then broke? I shall tackle
this second question first.
Once I made my statue, that statue existed, and
nothing that happened from then on could change
the fact that it had existed or the way it had come to
exist. It would be that same statue whether I sub­
sequently broke it, squeezed it, or sold it. Its origin,
then, makes a statue the statue that it is, and if
statues in different possible worlds have the same
beginning, then they are the same statue. \nThe name "Goliath" picks out in Withe one
statue which begins in W' like Goliath in Woo Con­
sider the case more fully. The world W' bears an
important relation to Wo and the statue Goliath in
Wo: Wi branches from Wo after Goliath begins to
exist; that is, until some time after Goliath begins
to exist in W o, the histories of Wo and W' are exactly
the same. In the branching world W', then, Goliath
is the statue which has exactly the same history
before the branching as Goliath in Woo The name
"Lump)" too picks out a thing in W' which begins
exactly like the statue Goliath in Woo "Lumpl, "
though, picks out, not the unique statue in W'
which begins that way, but the unique piece of
clay in W' which begins that way. Since that piece
of clay in W' is distinct from that statue in W', the
two names pick out different things in W' - differ­
ent things which both start out in the same way.
Here, then, is a theory of reference for the spe­
cial case of branching possible worlds. Let proper
name a denote a thing X in the actual world Wo;
the theory will apply to any possible world W
which branches from Wo after X begins to exist
in Woo According to the theory, a not only denotes
X in W o, but also invokes a set C of persistence
criteria which X satisfies in Woo The reference of a
in W, then, is the thing in W which has the same
history before the branching as X has in Wo and
which satisfies the persistence criteria in set C.
According to the theory, then, the reference of a
name in branching world W depends on two
things: its reference in the actual world, and the
persistence criteria it invokes. The reference of the
name in the actual world determines how the thing
it denotes in W begins; the persistence criteria it
invokes determine which of the various things that
begin that way in W the name denotes.
That leaves the problem of possible worlds
which do not branch from the actual world, or
which branch too early. How to handle reference
to things in such obdurate worlds I do not know.
Perhaps the best course is to deny that any such
reference is possible. The clearest cases of refer­
ence by a speaker in one possible world to a thing in
another are ones like the clay statue case, where a
world branches from the actual one after the thing
to which reference is made starts to exist. I am
inclined, then, for the sake of clarity, to rule out
any other sort of reference to concrete entities in
other possible worlds. If, though, a clear criterion
which allowed such reference were devised, that
criterion could probably be adopted without much
changing the system I am proposing.
Contingent Identity
There remains the question of how a name gets
its reference in the actual world. Its reference in
branching worlds, I have said, depends partly on its
reference in the actual world. Until we say how a
name gets its reference in the actual world, then,
even the theory of reference for branching worlds is
incomplete. Nothing I have said about the names
"Goliath" and "Lump)" has any direct bearing on
the question of reference in the actual world. The
account Kripke givesll seems plausible to me, and
everything I have said in this paper is compatible
with it.
On that account, a name gets its reference from a
causal chain that connects the person who uses the
name with the thing denoted. In my mouth and in
the mouth of anyone else who uses the names
"Goliath" and "Lumpl, " those names denote the
actual thing they do because I applied those names
to it directly and others got the names from me.
Other people, then, are connected to that clay sta­
tue by a tradition through which the name was
handed down; I am connected more directly, by
having perceived the thing and named it.
Persistence criteria play a role in starting the
tradition. I named the thing I did by pointing to
it and invoking persistence criteria: "I name this
statue 'Goliath, ''' I said, "and this piece of clay
'Lump\. '" The name "Goliath, " then, denoted the
unique thing at which I was pointing which satis­
fied the persistence criteria for statues - that is, the
unique statue at which I was pointing. Since the
same thing satisfied both the criteria for statues and
the criteria for pieces of clay, both names denoted
the same thing, but if I had invoked different
persistence criteria, I might have named a different
thing. When I pointed at the statue, I pointed at a
number of things of various durations. I pointed,
for instance, at the portion of clay which made up
the statue. I might have said, "I name the portion
of clay which makes up this statue 'Portia. ''' If I
had done so, I would have named a portion of clay
which survived the breaking of the statue. Thus
when the tradition is started which gives a name a
concrete reference in the actual world, the persist­
ence criteria invoked help determine what entity
bears that name.
I have given a theory of proper names, and on
that theory, it is clear why the identity "Goliath =
Lumpl" is contingent. It is equally clear, on that
theory, why the identity "Hesperus = Phosphorus"
is necessary, in the sense that it holds in any possible
world in which Hesperus exists. At least, it is clear if
identity of concrete things across possible worlds is \nAllan Gibbard
confined to branching cases In the way I have
described. Both names, "Hesperus" and "Phos­
phorus, " invoke the persistence criteria for hea­
venly bodies. Both refer to Venus. Hence in any
possible world W which branches from the actual
world after Venus begins to exist, they both refer to
the heavenly body in W which starts out in W
like Venus in Woo Both, then, refer to the same
thing in W. On the theory here, then, as on Kripke's
theory, the identity "Hesperus = Phosphorus, "
even though a posteriori, is a necessary truth: it
would hold in any situation in which Hesperus or
Phosphorus existed.
In short, then, if we accept that Goliath =
Lumpl, the following theory of proper names for
concrete objects emerges. The reference of a name
in the actual world is fixed partly by invoking a set
of persistence criteria which determine what thing
it names. The name may then be passed on through
a tradition, and the reference is fixed by the origin
of that tradition. The name can also be used to refer
to a thing in a possible world which branches from
the actual world after the thing named in the actual
world begins to exist. In that case the name refers
to the unique thing in that possible world which
both satisfies the persistence criteria the name
invokes and starts out exactly like the bearer of
the name in the actual world.
IV
Kripke's theory of proper names is incompatible
with the theory I have developed, and Kripke gives
a number of forceful arguments for his theory. Do
any of those arguments tell against the theory here?
Let me try to pick out arguments Kripke gives
which are germane.
According to the theory here, it makes no sense
to call a designator rigid and leave it at that, because
it makes no strict sense to call things in different
possible worlds identical and leave it at that: ident­
ity across possible worlds makes sense only with
respect to a sortal. According to Kripke, qualms
about identity across possible worlds are
unfounded, and plain talk of rigid designators
makes perfectly good sense. What Kripke says
most directly on this point, however, shows
no more than what I have already accepted: that it
makes sense to call a designator rigid with respect
to a sortal, like statue, number or man. ". .. we can
perfectly well talk about rigid and nonrigid desig­
nators. Moreover, we have a simple, intuitive test
for them. We can say, for example, that the number
of planets might have been a different number from
the number it in fact is. " The designator "the
number of planets, " then, is nonrigid. "If we
apply this intuitive test to proper names, such as
for example 'Richard Nixon, ' they would seem
intuitively to come out as rigid designators. .. . It
seems that we cannot say 'Nixon might have been a
different man from the man he in fact was, ' unless,
of course, we mean it metaphorically. ,, 12
Does it make sense, then, to call a designator
"rigid" independently of a sortal it invokes? Krip­
ke's examples here prove no such thing. Nixon
indeed could not have been a different man from
the man he in fact is. That, however, shows only
that the designator "Nixon" is rigid with respect to
the sortal man, not that it is rigid independently of
any sortal. To show it rigid independently of any
sortal, one would have to go beyond what Kripke
says in the passage I have quoted, and show that
Nixon could not have been a different entizy from
the one he in fact is.
For that purpose, the "simple, intuitive test"
Kripke offers will not help. We speak and think
of "the same person" but not of "the same entity. "
The point at issue is how everyday talk of "the
same person" best fits into systematic talk of
"entities. " To this issue, everyday intuitions
about entities, if we had them, would be irrelevant:
the matter has to be settled by working out rival
systems and comparing their implications.
Kripke attacks qualms about cross-world ident­
ity in another way: those qualms, he says, may just
grow out of a confusion about what possible worlds
are. Talk of "possible worlds" suggests that they
are like distant planets to be explored. If that were
what they were like, I might explore a possible
world and discover someone who looked like Ben­
jamin Franklin; I would then have to determine
whether it actually was Franklin I had discovered,
or just someone who looked like him. 13
Instead, according to Kripke, possible worlds
are situations which we stipulate - "counterfactual
situations" may be the best term. What thing is
what in a counterfactual situation is not something
I find out; it is part of what I stipulate: it is "given
in the very description" of the stipulated situation.
"And there seems to be no less objection to stipu­
lating that we are speaking of certain people than
there can be to stipulating that we are speaking of
certain qualities. " 14
Is that so? The statue example seems to provide
an objection - an objection, at least, to stipulating \nthat we are speaking of certain entities. In that
example, a possible situation was stipulated, just
as Kripke demands. "For suppose I had brought
Lumpl into existence as Goliath, just as I actually
did, but before the clay had a chance to dry, I
squeezed it into a ball. " In this stipulated situation,
I showed, there are two distinct things, a statue and
a piece of clay. It might be tempting to ask which of
the two is the one thing which, in the actual world, I
made and then broke. To that question, though,
there is no plain answer - or so I argued. Now the
problem is not one of understipulation. It is not as if
the thing I actually made could appear in two dif­
ferent possible situations in which I squeezed it: in
one as a statue that ceased to exist when squeezed,
and in another as a piece of clay which persisted
after it was squeezed. After I made that thing, I held
it in my hands and I could have squeezed it; if I
suppose that I did squeeze it, I have stipulated as
much about the identities of the things in that
supposed situation as can be stipulated. A situation,
then, can be fully stipulated even though questions
of identity across possible worlds remain unsettled.
Kripke agrees to something like this. "Given
certain counterfactual vicissitudes in the history
of the molecules of a table, T, one may ask whether
T would exist, in that situation, or whether a cer­
tain bunch of molecules, which in that situation
would constitute a table, constitute the very same
table T. " Such a conception of "transworld identi­
fication, " he says, "differs considerably from the
usual one"; for one thing, "the attempted notion
deals with criteria of identity of particulars in terms
of other particulars, not qualities" - in terms of
particular molecules, that is to say. IS This qualifi­
cation, though, has no bearing on the point in
question here. Take a possible world in which I
squeeze Lumpl into a ball, and suppose all the
molecules involved are clearly identified. There
are still two distinct things in that world, the statue
Goliath which I destroy by squeezing, and the piece
of clay Lumpl which survives the squeezing. The
question remains, then, which of those two distinct
things in that possible world is the single thing
which in fact I made and then broke. There is, in
short, a genuine problem with cross-world identi­
fication - Kripke's arguments notwithstanding.
v
The most prominent objection to contingent ident­
ity remains to be tackled: the objection that it
Contingent Identity
violates Leibniz' Law. If Goliath is contingently
identical with Lumpl, then although
(4) o (Lumpl exists --> Lumpl = Lumpl)
is true,
(5) 0 (Lumpl exists --> Goliath = Lumpl)
is false. Yet (5) is derived from (4) and
(6) Goliath = Lumpl
by substitutivity of identicals. Thus, the objection
goes, Goliath cannot be contingently identical with
Lumpl.
The usual answer will serve my purpose here.
Leibniz' Law settles very little by itself: put as a
general law of substitutivity of identicals, it is just
false; in its correct version, it is a law about proper­
ties and relations: If x = y, then for any property, if
x has it, then y has it, and for any relation and any
given things, if x stands in that relation to those things,
then y stands in that relation to those things. The law
so stated yields substitutivity of identicals only for
contexts that attribute properties and relations. (5)
follows from (4) and (6) by Leibniz' Law, then,
only if the context
(7) D(Lumpl exists --> - = Lumpl)
attributes a property. We can block the inference to
(5), then, simply by denying that the context (7)
attributes a property.
It may seem arbitrary to deny that (7) attributes a
property, but whether it does is the very point in
question here. A property, ifit is to be a property,
must apply or not apply to a thing independently of
the way the thing is designated. (7) gives a prop­
erty, then, only if it gives something that is true of
Lumpl or false of Lumpl independently of the way
Lumpl is designated, and whether it does is the
point in question.
The proponent of contingent identity, then, has
a reasonable, consistent position open to him - a
position that is familiar in the literature on the
subject. 16 Expressions constructed with modal
operators, he can say, simply do not give properties
of concrete things, such as statues and pieces of clay.
Modal expressions do not apply to concrete things
independently of the way they are designated.
Lumpl, for instance, is the same thing as Goliath:
it is a clay statue of the infant Goliath which I put \nAllan Gibbard
together and then broke. Necessary identity to
Lumpl, though, is not a property which that
thing has or lacks, for it makes no sense to ask
whether that thing, as such, is necessarily identical
with Lump! . Modal contexts, then, do not attribute
properties or relations to concrete things - so the
proponent of contingent identity can respond to
Leibniz' Law.
Now this response comes at a stiff price. Quan­
tificational contexts must attribute properties or
relations; they must be true or false of things inde­
pendently ofthe way those things are designated. If
modal contexts do not attribute properties or rela­
tions to concrete things, it follows that such con­
texts are not open to quantification with variables
whose values are concrete things. A large number
of formulas, then, must be ruled out as ill formed.
Although, for instance, the sentence
o (Lumpl exists & Goliath i= Lumpl)
is well formed, the expression
(8) 0 (Lump I exists & x i= Lumpl)
turns out to be ill formed - at least, that is, if the
variable x can take Goliath as a value. Now on the
basis of what I have said, that seems reasonable.
Take the expression (8), and consider the thing I
made and then broke, which is both a statue and a
lump. There is no apparent way of saying that (8) is
true or false of that thing; it is true of it qua statue
but not qua piece of clay. By that test, the free
variable x does not belong in its context in (8) if it
takes concrete things like statues and lumps among
its values.
Here, then, may be a telling objection to con­
tingent identity: if in order to maintain contingent
identity we must restrict quantification so drast­
ically, the objector can argue, we shall be unable to
say many of the things we need to say, both in
scientific talk and in daily life. Concrete things
will have no modal properties: there will, that is,
be no such thing as de re modality for concrete
things. Indeed on some accounts, there will also
be problems with dispositions - as I shall later
show. Perhaps we can maintain contingent identity
only at the cost of tying our tongues, and that, if it
is true, might be a strong reason for rejecting con­
tingent identity.
The remainder of my argument for the plaus­
ibility of the system I am advocating will concern
this issue. I shall give devices which I think will
enable us to say anything that we ought seriously to
regard as meaningful, and say it in the system I am
advocating. What I have to say will center around
the system Carnap proposed in Meaning and Neces­
si~y for quantifying into modal contexts. 17 Carnap's
system, I think, is the best one for handling quan­
tified modal talk of concrete things. In what fol­
lows, I shall draw loosely both on Carnap's system
and on Aldo Bressan's extension ofitl8 to give ways
of saying what we need to say.
Carnap's system has many advantages. It fits my
claim that Goliath = Lumpl, and it allows variables
in any context in which a proper name can appear.
Indeed on Carnap's account, variables in modal
contexts act almost exactly as proper names do on
the account in section III of this paper. Carnap, in
short, gives a clear, consistent theory which fits
what I have been saying.
There is, to be sure, a price for all this: Carnap
gives a nonstandard account of the way predicates
and variables behave in modal contexts. The
account he gives, though, makes sense, and it
departs from the standard account of quantifiers
in much the same way as I departed in section III
from the standard account of proper names. It is
nonstandard, then, in ways that fit nicely the the­
ory in this paper.
Carnap's treatment of variables is suggested by
part of Frege's treatment of proper names. Accord­
ing to Frege/9 a proper name in a modal context
refers obliquezy: its reference there is its usual sense.
Hence in
(9) 0 (Lumpl exists & Goliath i= Lumpl),
the name "Goliath" refers, not to a statue, but to a
statue-concept which is the normal sense of the
name. Any other name with that same normal
sense could be substituted for "Goliath" in (9)
without changing its truth-value. This part of Fre­
ge's account fits what I have said of proper names,
as I shall later illustrate.
Now just as, on Frege's account, proper names
shift their reference in modal contexts, on Carnap's
account, variables in modal contexts shift their
range of values: they range over senses. In the
formula
o (Lumpl exists & x i= Lumpl),
then, x ranges not over concrete things, like statues
and pieces of clay, but over what Carnap calls
"individual concepts" - including statue-concepts \nand lump-concepts. Call things of the kind the
variables take as values in nonmodal contexts indi­
viduals: an individual conupt is a function whose
domain is a set of possible worlds, and which
assigns to each world Win its domain an individual
that exists in W.
I spell out what is roughly Carnap's proposal in
the appendix/o here I give it by example. Let the
individuals in the system be concrete things, like
statues and lumps. Let "E" in nonmodal contexts
be the predicate exists, and let "H" in such con­
texts be the predicate is humanoid, by which I shall
mean is human-shaped throughout its earzy history.
Then in the formula
(10) D(Ex ----> Hx),
on Carnap's proposal, both the variable and the
predicates make a shift. The variable x in (10)
now ranges over individual concepts, and the pre­
dicates in (10) make compensating shifts as follows:
"E" now means not exists, but rather is a conupt of
an individual that exists. "H" now means not is
humanoid, but rather is a concept of an individual
that is humanoid. For any possible world Wand
individual concept! , that is to say, "H" in modal
contexts is true of fin W if and only if the indivi­
dualf assigns to W is humanoid in w. 21
That gives (10) a clear interpretation: the open
sentence (10) is true of any individual concept f
such that for every world W, iff assigns an indivi­
dual to W, thenfassigns to Wan individual that is
humanoid in W. In particular, then, (10) is true of
the Goliath-concept ~ the individual concept that
assigns the statue Goliath to each possible world in
which that statue exists, and assigns nothing to any
other possible world. For Goliath in any possible
world, according to the theory I have given, is
humanoid: in any world in which it exists, it starts
out in the shape of the actual Goliath, and changes
shape only slowly. (10) is false of the Lumpl­
concept correspondingly defined, since in possible
worlds in which I squeeze Lumpl into a ball,
Lumplloses its human shape during its early his­
tory, and thus is not humanoid in the stipulated
sense. To such a possible world, then, the Lumpl­
concept does not assign an individual which is
humanoid.
Variables on this proposal work very much like
proper names on my account of them in section III.
Just as on that earlier account,
(11) 0 (E Goliath ----> H Goliath)
Contingent Identity
is true and
(12) D(E Lumpl ----> H Lumpl)
is false, so on the Carnapian account I am now
giving, the open sentence D(Ex ----> Hx) is true of
the Goliath-concept and false of the Lumpl­
concept.
Indeed, just as, on Carnap's account, variables in
modal contexts range over individual concepts, so
on the account in section III, proper names in
modal contexts can be construed as denoting indi­
vidual concepts. Proper names work, in other
words, roughly as Frege claims. Let the name
"Goliath" in (11), for instance, denote the
Goliath-concept, and suppose predicates shift in
modal contexts as Carnap suggests. Then (11)
attributes to the Goliath-concept the property
D(E_---->H_),
that in every possible world W, if it assigns to Wan
existing individual, then it assigns to Wan indivi­
dual that is humanoid. The Goliath-concept has
that property, and so (11) on this construal is
true. The Lumpl-concept does not have that prop­
erty, and so (12) on this construal is false. That is as
it should be on the account in section III. Modal
properties can be construed as attributing proper­
ties and relations to individual concepts, much as
Frege claims.
VI
What happens to identity on this account? Identity
of individual concepts x andy is not now expressed
as "x = y"; that, in modal contexts, means just that
x and y are concepts of the same individual. The
way to say that x and yare the same individual
concept is
o [(Ex V Ey) ----> x = y].
I shall abbreviate this "x ~y".
It could now be objected that the thesis of con­
tingent identity has collapsed. Identity in the sys­
tem here, it seems, is given not by "=, " but by
" ~ " and the relation " ~ " is never contingent: if
it holds between two individual concepts, then it
holds between them in every possible world. No
genuine relation of identity, then, is contingent; the
illusion that there are contingent identities came \nAllan Gibbard
from using the identity sign "=" to mean some­
thing other than true identity.
To this objection the following answer can be
given. "=" indeed is the identity sign for indivi­
duals in the system, and if! am right that a piece of
clay is an individual in the Carnapian sense, then
"=" is the identity sign for pieces of clay. For
consider: in nonmodal contexts, I stipulated, the
variables range over individuals. Now "=" in such
contexts holds only for identical individuals; it is
the relation a piece of clay, for instance, bears to
itself and only to itself. Moreover, applied to indi­
viduals, "=" satisfies Leibniz' Law: individuals
related by it have the same properties in the strict
sense, and stand in the same relations in the strict
sense. The contexts where "=" is not an identity
sign are modal contexts, but there the variables
range not over individuals, but over individual
concepts. "=" in the system, then, is the identity
sign for individuals, and according to the system,
"=" can hold contingently for individuals: A sen­
tence of the form "a = b, " then, asserts the iden­
tity of two individuals, and it may be contingent.
Quine would object to this answer. It depends on
a "curious double interpretation of variables": out­
side modal contexts they are interpreted as ranging
over individuals; inside modal contexts, over indi­
vidual concepts. "This complicating device, "
Qp. ine says, "has no essential bearing, and is better
put aside. ,, 22 "Since the duality in question is a
peculiarity of a special metalinguistic idiom and not
of the object-language itself, there is nothing to
prevent our examining the object-language from
the old point of view and asking what the values
of its variables are in the old-fashioned non-dual
sense of the term. ,, 23 The values in the old-fash­
ioned sense, Quine says, are individual concepts,
for "(\Ix) ~" is a logical truth, and on "the old
point of view, " that means that entities between
which the relation ~ fails are distinct entities. In
all contexts, then, the values of the variables are
individual concepts, and identity is given by" ~. "
All this can be accepted, however, and the
point I have made stands: "=" in the system
expresses identity of individuals. "a = b, " on
Qp. ine's interpretation, says that a and b are con­
cepts of the same individual. That amounts to
saying that the individual of which a is the concept
is identical with the individual of which b is the
concept. Even on Quine's interpretation, then,
"a = b" in effect asserts the identity of individuals,
and does so in the most direct way the system
allows.
On either Quine's interpretation or Carnap's,
then, to assert
(13) Goliath = Lumpl
is in effect to assert the identity of an individual.
For all Carnap's system says, (13) may be true,
though Goliath might not have been identical
with Lumpl. If (13) is true but contingent, then it
seems reasonable to call it a contingent identity.
The claim that there are contingent identities in a
natural sense, then, is consistent with Carnap's
modal system on either Carnap's or Quine's inter­
pretation of values of variables.
VII
One further Qp. inean objection needs to be
answered. I am embracing "essentialism" for indi­
vidual concepts. Essentialism, if I understand
Quine, is the view that necessity properly applies
"to the fulfillment of conditions by objects. .. apart
from special ways of specifying them. ,, 24 Now what
I have said, as I shall explain, requires me to reject
essentialism for concrete things but accept it for
individual concepts. That discriminatory treat­
ment needs to be justified.
First, a more precise definition of essentialism:
Essentialism for a class of entities U, I shall say, is
the claim that for any entity e in U and any condi­
tion rp which e fulfills, the question of whether e
necessarily fulfills rp has a definite answer apart
from the way e is specified. 25
Now according to what I have said, essentialism
for the class of concrete things is false. In the clay
statue example, I said, the same concrete thing
fulfills the condition
necessarily under the specification "Goliath" and
only contingently under the specification
"Lump)"; whether that thing, apart from any spe­
cial designation, necessarily fulfills that condition
is a meaningless question.
Essentialism for the class of individual concepts,
on the other hand, must be true ifCarnap's system is
to work. That is so because Carnap's system allows
quantification into modal contexts without restric­
tion. For let rp be a condition and e an individual
concept which fulfills rp. Then Drpx is well formed
and the variable "x" ranges over individual con-\ncepts, so that e is in the range of "x. " Thus e either
definitely satisfies the formula 04>x or definitely
fails to satisfy it. The question of whether e neces­
sarily fulfills 4> must have a definite answer even
apart from the way e is specified. Thus essentialism
holds for individual concepts.
Why this discriminatory treatment? Why accept
essentialism for individual concepts and reject it for
individuals? The point of doing so is this: my
arguments against essentialism for concrete things
rested not on general logical considerations, but on
considerations that apply specifically to concrete
things. I argued that it makes no sense to talk of a
concrete thing as fulfilling a condition 4> in every
possible world - as fulfilling 4> necessarily, in other
words - apart from its designation. Essentialism,
then, is false for concrete things because apart from
a special designation, it is meaningless to talk of the
same concrete thing in different possible worlds.
For this last, I had two arguments, both of which
apply specifically to concrete things. First I con­
sidered the clay statue example, gave reasons for
saying that Goliath is identical to Lumpl, and
showed that the same statue in a different situation
would not be the same piece of clay. Second, in
section III, I gave a theory of identity of concrete
things across certain possible worlds, according to
which such identity made sense only with respect
to a kind. These arguments applied only to con­
crete things. 26
It makes good sense, on the other hand, to speak
of the same individual concept in different possible
worlds. An individual concept is just a function
which assigns to each possible world in a set an
individual in that world. There is no problem of
what that function would be in a possible world
different from the actual one. Whereas, then, there
is no good reason for rejecting essentialism indis­
criminately, there are strong grounds for rejecting
essentialism for concrete things.
VIII
An objection broached in section V remains to be
tackled. There is, according to the system here, no
such thing as de re modality for concrete things: in a
formula of the form OFx, the variable ranges over
individual concepts rather than concrete things.
Now without de re modality for concrete things,
the objection goes, our tongues will be tied: we will
be left unable to say things that need to be said,
both for scientific and for daily purposes.
Contingent Identity
In fact, though, the system here ties our tongues
very little. It allows concrete things to have modal
properties of a kind, and those permissible modal
properties will do any job that de re modalities
could reasonably be asked to do. To see how such
legitimate modal properties can be constructed,
return to the statue example.
According to the theory given here, the concrete
thing Goliath or Lumpl has neither the property
of being essentially humanoid nor the property of
being possibly nonhumanoid. There is a modal
property, though, which it does have: it is
essentially humanoid qua statue. That can be
expressed in the Carnapian system I have given.
Let 8 be the predicate "is a statue-rigid individual
concept. " 8 is intensional, then, in the sense that it
applies to individual concepts, so that variables in
its scope take individual concepts as values, just as
they do in the scope of a modal operator. The
sentence
x is essentially humanoid qua statue,
then, means this:
(14) (3y)[y = x &8y & O(Ey --> Hy)]. 27
Here the variable y is free within the scope of a
modal operator, and hence ranges over individual
concepts; but x occurs only outside the scope of
modal operators, and hence ranges over indivi­
duals. In "y = x, " then, the predicate "=" makes
a compensating shift of the kind shown in section
V, but only in its left argument. Thus "y = x" here
means that y is a concept of an individual identical
to x - in other words, y is a concept of x. (14), then,
says the following: "There is an individual concept
y which is a statue-concept, and is a concept of
something humanoid in any possible world in
which it is a concept of anything. " That gives a
property which applies to concrete things: only the
variable x is free in (14), and since it occurs only
outside the scope of modal operators, it ranges over
individuals. (14), then, gives a property of the
concrete thing Lumpl, a property which we might
call "being essentially humanoid qua statue. "
Concrete things, then, in the system given here,
have no de re modal properties - no properties of
the form OF. They do, however, have modal
properties of a more devious kind: modal proper­
ties qua a sortal. Such properties should serve any
purpose for which concrete things really need
modal properties. \nAllan Gibbard
IX
Dispositional properties raise problems of much
the same kind as do modal properties. At least
one promising account of dispositions is incompa­
tible with the system given here.
Here is the account. A disposition like solubility
is a property which applies to concrete things, and it
can be expressed as a counterfactual conditional: "x
is soluble" means "If x were placed in water, then x
would dissolve. " This counterfactual conditional in
turn means something like this: "In the possible
world which is, of all those worlds in which x is in
water, most like the actual world, x dissolves. "z8
Now this account is incompatible with the sys­
tem I have given, because it requires identity of
concrete things across possible worlds. For without
such cross-world identity, it makes no sense to talk
of "the possible world which is, of all those worlds
in which x is in water, most like the actual world. "
For such talk makes sense only if there is a definite
set of worlds in which x is in water, and there is
such a definite set only if for each possible world,
either x is some definite entity in that world - so
that it makes definite sense to say that x is in water
in that world - or x definitely does not exist in that
world. The account of dispositions I have sketched,
then, requires identity of concrete things across
possible worlds, which on the theory in this paper
is meaningless.
The point is perhaps most clear in the statue
example. It makes no sense to say of the concrete
thing Goliath, or Lumpl, that if I squeezed it, it
would cease to exist. If I squeezed the statue
Goliath, Goliath would cease to exist, but if I
squeezed the piece of clay Lumpl, Lumpl would
go on existing in a different shape. Take, then, the
property "If I squeezed x, then x would cease to
exist, " which I shall write
(15) I squeeze x 0-> x ceases to exist.
That is not a property which the single concrete
thing, Goliath or Lumpl, either has or straightfor­
wardly lacks.
Counterfactual properties, then, have much the
same status as modal properties. A concrete thing­
a piece of salt, for instance - cannot have the
counterfactual property
x is in water 0-> x dissolves,
or as I shall write it,
(16) Wx 0-> Dx.
Put more precisely, the point is this: a concrete
thing can have no such property if, first, the
account of counterfactuals which I have given is
correct and, second, identity of concrete things
across possible worlds makes no sense. Call a prop­
erty of the form given in (15) and (16) a straightfor­
ward counterJactual property; then on the theories I
have given, concrete things can have no straight­
forward counterfactual properties.
Individual concepts, in contrast, can perfectly
well have straightforward counterfactual proper­
ties, since they raise no problems of identity across
possible worlds. Indeed we can treat the connective
"0->" as inducing the same shifts as do modal
operators: making the variables in its scope range
over individual concepts, and shifting the predic­
ates appropriately. On that interpretation, (15) is
true of the Goliath-concept but false of the Lumpl­
concept; (15) says, "In the possible world which, of
all those worlds in which I squeeze the thing picked
out by concept x, is most like the actual world, the
thing picked out by x ceases to exist. " That holds of
the Goliath-concept but not of the Lumpl-concept.
Likewise on this interpretation, (16) is true not of a
piece of salt, but of a piece-of-salt individual con­
cept. (16) now says the following: "In the possible
world which is, of all those worlds in which the
thing picked out by x is in water, most like the
actual world, the thing picked out by x dissolves. "
So far the situation is grave. The moral seems to
be this: concrete things have no dispositional
properties, but individual concepts do. Water­
solubility, or something like it, may be a property
of a piece-of-salt individual concept, but it cannot
be a property of the concrete thing, that piece of
salt. That is a sad way to leave the matter. On close
examination, many seeming properties look cov­
ertly dispositional - mass and electric charge are
prime examples. Strip concrete things of their dis­
positional properties, and they may have few prop­
erties left.
Fortunately, though, individuals do turn out to
have dispositional properties of a kind. The device
used for modal properties in the last section works
here too. A concrete thing like a piece of salt
cannot, it is true, have the straightforward counter­
factual property Wx 0-> Dx. Only an individual
concept could have that property. A piece of salt
does, though, have the more devious counterfac­
tual property given by "Qua piece of salt, if x were
in water then x would dissolve, " which I shall write \n(17) (x qua piece)[Wx D-+ Dx].
This expands as follows: let. 0/ mean "is a piece­
rigid individual concept"; then (17) means
(18) (: ly)[y = x &. 9'y(Wy D-+ Dy)].
As in the corresponding formula (14) for modal
properties, "x" here is free of modal entangle­
ments, and so it ranges over concrete things. (18)
seems a good way to interpret water solubility as a
property of pieces of salt.
Concrete things, then, can have dispositional
properties. The dispositional property is water­
soluble is not the straightforward counterfactual
property given by (16), but the more devious coun­
terfactual property given by (18). A system with
contingent identity can still allow dispositions to be
genuine properties of concrete things.
x
From the claim that Goliath = Lumpl, I think I
have shown, there emerges a coherent system
which stands up to objections. Why accept this
system? In section II, I gave one main reason: the
system lets concrete things be made up in a simple
way from entities that appear in fundamental phy­
sics. It thus gives us machinery for putting into one
coherent system both our beliefs about the funda­
mental constitution of the world and our everyday
picture of concrete things.
Another important reason for accepting the sys­
tem is one of economy. I think I have shown how to
get along without de re modality for concrete things
and still say what needs to be said about them. That
may be especially helpful when we deal with causal
necessity; indeed, the advantages of doing without
de re causal necessity go far beyond mere economy.
What I have said in this paper about plain necessity
applies equally well to causal necessity, and the
notion of causal necessity seems especially unob­
jectionable - even Quine thinks it may be legitim­
ate. 29 Causally necessary truths are what scientists
are looking for when they look for fundamental
scientific laws, and it surely makes sense to look
for fundamental scientific laws. Now we might
expect fundamental scientific laws to take the
form Dc. p, "It is causally necessary that. p, " where. p is extensional - contains no modal operators. If
so, then scientific laws contain de dicto causal neces­
sity, but no de re necessity. To get significant de re
Contingent Identity
causal necessities, we would need to make meta­
physical assumptions with no grounding in scien­
tific law. If we can get along without de re physical
necessity, that will keep puzzling metaphysical
questions about essential properties out of physics.
The system here shows how to do that.
None of the reasons I have given in favor of the
system here are conclusive. The system has to be
judged as a whole: it is coherent and withstands
objections; the remaining question is whether it is
superior to its rivals. What, then, are the alter­
natives?
Kripke gives an alternative formal semantics/o
but no systematic directions for applying it. To use
Kripke's semantics, one needs extensive intuitions
that certain properties are essential and others
accidental. Kripke makes no attempt to say how
concrete things might appear in a theory of funda­
mental physics; whether such an account can be
given in Kripke's system remains to be seen.
One other alternative to the theory in this paper
is systematic: statues and pieces of clay can be
taken, not to be "individuals" in the Carnapian
sense of the term which I have been using, but to
be Carnapian "individual concepts. " They may be
regarded, that is, as functions from possible worlds,
whose values are Carnapian individuals. 3! On such
a view, a Carnapian individual would be regarded
as a sort of "proto-individual" from which concrete
things are constructed.
Such a view has its advantages: it allows standard
quantification theory, with no Carnapian shift of
the range of variables in modal contexts. Indeed, as
Q! ine points out, a Carnapian semantics can be
interpreted so that variables always range over
individual concepts. 32
One reason for preferring the Carnapian system
is this. I expect that the variables used in expressing
fundamental laws can most simply be interpreted
as ranging over Carnapian individuals. If so, then I
would be reluctant to regard those Carnapian indi­
viduals as mere proto-individuals, with genuine
individuals as functions which take these proto­
individuals as values at possible worlds. Funda­
mental physics, I would like to say, deals with
genuine individuals.
If the system I have given is accepted, the rami­
fications are wide. Take just one example: the
question of whether a person is identical with his
body. If there is no consciousness after death, then,
it would seem, a person ceases to exist when he
dies. A person's body normally goes on existing
after he dies. Ordinarily, then, a person is not \nAllan Gibbard
identical with his body. In some cases, however, a
person's body is destroyed when he dies. In such
cases, according to the system in this paper, there is
no purely logical reason against saying the follow­
ing: the person in this case is identical with his
body, but had he died a normal death, he would
have been distinct from his body. If there are
reasons against such a view, they must be nonlogi­
cal reasons.
Whether or not the system I have advocated is
the best one, I have at least done the following.
First, I have shown that there is a problem with
identity across possible worlds, even in the simple
case of possible worlds which branch after the
entity in question begins to exist. In such cases, I
Notes
I am grateful for the comments and criticisms of many
people. I was helped in the early stages of revision by
discussion at the University of Pittsburgh philosophy
colloquium, by the written comments of Richard Gale
and Paul Teller, and by discussion with Allen Hazen,
Robert Kraut, and Storrs McCall. I am especially grateful
to Anil Gupta for his extensive help, both in the early and
the late stages of revision.
Saul Kripke, "Identity and necessity, " this volume,
ch. 7; idem, "Naming and necessity, " in D. Davidson
and G. Harman (eds), Semantics of Natural Language
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972).
2 Gottlob Frege, "On sense and reference, " trans. M.
Black, in P. Geach and M. Black, Translations from the
Philosophical Writings ofGottlob Frege (Oxford: Black­
well, 1966), pp. 55-78, at p. 57; orig. German pub.
1892.
3 This volume, pp. 74-5; Kripke, "Naming and neces­
sity, " pp. 260-4.
4 Bertrand Russell, "On denoting, " in Robert Marsh
(ed. ), Logic and Knowledge (New York: Macmillan,
1956), pp. 41-56; orig. pub. 1905.
Kripke, "Naming and necessity, " pp. 254-60, 284-
308.
6 W. V. O. Quine, "Identity, ostension, and hyposta-
sis, " this volume, ch. 22, sect. I.
7 This fits the view put forth in ibid.
8 Kripke, "Naming and necessity, " pp. 269-70.
9 David Lewis, "Counterparts of persons and their
bodies, " Journal of Philosophy 68 (1971), pp. 203-11,
gives a theory very much like this. There are, accord­
ing to Lewis, a diversity of counterpart relations
which hold between entities in different possible
worlds - the "personal" counterpart relation and the
"bodily" counterpart relation are two (p. 208). The
counterpart relation appropriate to a given modal
have shown, certain assumptions, not easily
refuted, lead to contingent identity. Second, I
have given a theory of proper names which fits
much of what Kripke says about proper names
when he considers examples, and which, in rare
cases, allows contingent identity. Finally, I have
shown how, while accepting contingent identity
and rejecting de re modality for concrete things,
we can still allow concrete things to have modal and
dispositional properties.
The system I advocate is worked out in more
detail in the appendix. 33 In that system, I think,
concrete things and possible worlds lose some of
their mystery: they arise naturally from a systema­
tic picture of the physical world.
context may be selected by a term, such as "I" or
"my body, " or it may be selected by a phrase,
"regarded as a ~, " which works like one of my
"qua" phrases. In these respects, then, my theory
fits Lewis's. In other respects, it differs. My relation
of being an F-counterpart is an equivalence relation,
and it holds between any two entities in different
worlds which are both F's and which share a common
past. Lewis's counterpart relations "are a matter of
overall resemblance in a variety of respects" (p. 208),
and are not equivalence relations (p. 209).
10 Peter Geach Reference and Generality (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1962), sect. 34, contends
that a proper name conveys a "nominal essence" -
"requirements as to identity" that can be expressed by
a common noun. The name "Thames, " for instance,
conveys the nominal essence expressed by the com­
mon noun "river. " In this respect, my theory follows
Geach's. Geach, however, (sect. 31), thinks that even
in the actual world, identity makes no sense except
with respect to a general term. According to the theory
in this paper, non-relative identity makes sense in talk
of anyone possible world; it is only cross-world ident­
ity that must be made relative to a sortal.
11 Kripke, "Naming and necessity, " pp. 298-9.
12 This volume, p. 74.
13 Kripke, "Naming and necessity, " p. 268.
14 This volume, p. 74.
15 Kripke, "Naming and necessity, " pp. 271-2.
16 Cf. W. V. O. Quine, "Reference and modality, " in
From a Logical Point of View, 2nd edn (New York:
Harper & Row, 1961), pp. 139-59, sect. 2.
17 See esp. Rudolf Carnap, Meaning and Necessity (Chi­
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1947), sect. 41. I
shall not follow Carnap in detail, nor, for the most
part, shall I try to say in what precise ways I follow
him and in what ways I deviate from what he says. \n18 Aldo Bressan, A General Interpreted Modal Calculus
(New Haven, Conn. : Yale University Press, 1972).
19 Frege, "On sense and reference, " p. 59.
20 The original paper included an appendix, omitted
here.
21 The talk of "shifts" is not Carnap's; it is part of my
own informal reading of Carnap's semantics. Carnap
does think "that individual variables in modal senten­
ces. .. must be interpreted as referring, not to indivi­
duals, but to individual concepts" (Meaning and
Necessity, p. 180). He does not, however, allow vari­
ables to shift their ranges of values within a single
language. Rather, he constructs two languages, a non­
modal language S) in which variables range over
individuals and a modal language S2 in which vari­
ables range over individual concepts. Any sentence of
S) is a sentence of S2 and is its own translation into S2
(see ibid. , pp. 200-2). The semantics I give in the
Appendix (not included in this volume) is roughly
that ofCarnap's S2 (see ibid. , pp. 183-4). In informal
discussion in the body of this paper, though, I take a
variable to range over individuals whenever such an
interpretation is possible.
Carnap does not talk of predicates shifting in the way I
describe, but once variables are taken to range over
individual concepts, such a reinterpretation of predic­
ates allows a straightforward reading of Carnap's
semantics. Quine discussed this point in his letter to
Carnap (Meaning and Necessity, p. 197).
22 Quine, "Reference and modality, " p. 153.
23 Letter in Carnap, Meaning and Necessity, p. 196.
24 Quine, "Reference and modality, " p. 151.
Contingent Identity
25 For other characterizations of essentialism, see Ter­
ence Parsons, "Essentialism and quantified modal
logic, " Philosophical Review 78 (1969), pp. 35-52,
sect. 2.
26 Quine objects to essentialism even for abstract enti­
ties. "Essentialism, " he writes, "is abruptly at var­
iance with the idea, favored by Carnap, Lewis, and
others, of explaining necessity by analyticity"
("Reference and modality, " p. 155). That, however,
cannot be true: Carnap does explain his system in
terms of analyticity, and his system involves essenti­
alism, as I have explained. Carnap's system is thus a
counterexample to Q]Jine's claim; it shows that one
can consistently both accept essentialism for indivi­
dual concepts and explain necessity by analyticity.
27 Anil Gupta has shown me a formula similar to this
one, which he attributes to Nuel Belnap.
28 See Robert Stalnaker, "A theory of conditionals, " in
Studies in Logical Theory, American Philosophical
Quarterly Monograph Series, no. 2 (1968), and Stal­
naker and Richmond Thomason, "A semantic analy­
sis of conditional logic, " Theoria 36 (1970), pp. 23-42.
For a somewhat different theory which raises similar
problems, see David K. Lewis, Counterfactuals
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1973).
29 See Quine, "Reference and modality, " pp. 158-9.
30 Saul Kripke, "Semantical considerations on modal
logic, " Acta philosophica Fennica 16 (1963), pp. 83-94.
31 See Richmond Thomason and Robert Stalnaker,
"Modality and reference, " Nous 2 (1968) pp. 359-72.
32 Letter in Carnap, Meaning and Necessity, p. 196.
33 See n. 20 above. \n10
Stephen Yablo
Can things be identical as a matter of fact without
being necessarily identical? Until recently it seemed
they could, but now "the dark doctrine of a relation
of 'contingent identity', ,1 has fallen into disrepute.
In fact, the doctrine is worse than disreputable. By
most current reckonings, it is refutable. That is,
philosophers have discovered that things can never
be contingently identical. Appearances to the con­
trary, once thought plentiful and decisive, are
blamed on the befuddling influence of a powerful
alliance of philosophical errors. How has this come
about? Most of the credit goes to a simple argument
(original with Ruth Marcus, but revived by Saul
Kripke) purporting to show that things can never be
only contingently identical. Suppose that a and (3
are identical. Then they share all their properties.
Since one of (3's properties is that necessarily it is
identical with (3, this must be one of a's properties
too. So necessarily a is identical with (3, and it
follows that a and (3 cannot have been only con­
tingently identical. 2
1 A Paradox of Essentialism
Despite the argument's simplicity and apparent
cogency, somehow, as Kripke observes, "its con­
clusion. .. has often been regarded as highly para­
doxical. ,, 3 No doubt there are a number of bad
reasons for this (Kripke himself has exposed sev-
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 84 (1987),
pp. 293-314. Copyright~) byJournal of Philosophy, Inc.
Reprinted by permission of Columbia University.
eral), but there is also a good one: essentialism
without some form of contingent identity is an
untenable doctrine, because essentialism has a
shortcoming that only some form of contingent
identity can rectify. The purpose of this paper is
to explain, first, why contingent identity is
required by essentialism and, second, how contin­
gent identity is permitted by essentialism.
Essentialism's problem is simple. Identicals are
indiscernible, and so discernibles are distinct.
Thus, if a has a property necessarily which (3 has
only accidentally, then a is distinct from (3. In the
usual example, there is a bust of Aristotle, and it is
formed of a certain hunk of wax. (Assume for the
sake of argument that the hunk of wax composes
the bust throughout their common duration, so
that temporal differences are not in question. ) If
the bust of Aristotle is necessari(y a bust of Aristotle
and if the hunk of wax is only accidentalzy a bust of
Aristotle, then the bust and the hunk of wax are not
the same thing. Or suppose that Jones drives home
at high speed. Assuming that her speeding home is
something essential~y done at high speed, whereas
her driving home only happens to be done at high
speed, her speeding home and her driving home are
distinct.
So far, so good, maybe; but it would be incred­
ible to call the bust and the wax, or the driving
home and the speeding home, distinct, and leave
the matter there. In the first place, that would be to
leave relations between the bust and the hunk of
wax on a par with either's relations to the common
run of other things, for example, the Treaty of
Versailles. Secondly, so far it seems an extraordi-\nnarily baffling metaphysical coincidence that bust
and wax, though entirely distinct, nevertheless
manage to be exactly alike in almost every ordinary
respect: size, weight, color, shape, location, smell,
taste, and so on indefinitely. If distinct statues (say)
were as similar as this, we would be shocked and
amazed, not to say incredulous. How is such a
coincidence possible? And, thirdly, if the bust and
the wax are distinct (pure and simple), how is it
that the number of middle-sized objects on the
marble base is not (purely and simply) 2 (or
more)? Ultimately, though, none of these argu­
ments is really needed: that the bust and the wax
are in some sense the same thing is perfectly
obvious.
Thus, if essentialism is to be at all plausible,
non identity had better be compatible with intimate
identity-like connections. But these connections
threaten to be inexplicable on essentialist princi­
ples, and essentialists have so far done nothing to
address the threat. 4 Not quite nothing, actually; for
essentialists have tried to understand certain (spe­
cial) of these connections in a number of (special)
ways. Thus, it has been proposed that the hunk of
wax composes the bust; that the driving home gen­
erates the speeding home; that a neural event sub­
serves the corresponding pain; that a computer's
structural state instantiates its computational state;
that humankind comprises person kind; and that a
society is nothing liver and above its members. Now
all these are important relations, and each is
importantly different from the others. But it is
impossible to ignore the fact that they seem to
reflect something quite general, something not
adequately illuminated by the enumeration of its
special cases, namely, the phenomenon of things'
being distinct by nature but the same in the circum­
stances. And what is that if not the - arguedly
impossible - phenomenon of things" being contin­
gently identical but not necessarily so? The point is
that, if essentialism is true, then many things that
are obviously in slime sense the same will emerge as
strictly distinct; so essentialism must at least pro­
vide for the possibility of intimate identity-like
connections between distinct things; and such con­
nections seem to be ways of being contingently
identical. Essentialism, if it is to be plausible, has
to be tempered by some variety of contingent
identity.
Hence, essentialism is confronted with a kind of
paradox: to be believable, it needs contingent
identity; yet its principles appear to entail that
contingent identity is not possible. To resolve the
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
paradox, we have to ask: What is the "nature" of a
particular thing?
2 Essence
Begin with a particular thing a. How should a be
characterized? That is, what style of characteriza­
tion would best bring out "what a is"? Presumably
a characterization of any sort will be via certain of
a's properties. But which ones?
Why not begin with the set of all a's properties
whatsoever, or what may be called the complete
profile of a? Since a's properties include, among
others, that of being identical with a, there can be
no question about the sufficiency of characteriza­
tion by complete profile. But there may be doubt
about its philosophical interest. For the properties
of a will generally be of two kinds: those which a
had to have and those which it merely happens to
have. And, intuitively, the properties a merely
happens to have reveal nothing of what a is, as
contrasted with what it happens to be like. As
Antoine Arnauld explains in a letter to Leibniz, .. . it seems to me that I must consider as con­
tained in the individual concept of myself only
that which is such that I should no longer be me
if it were not in me: and that all that is to the
contrary such that it could be or not be in me
without my ceasing to be me, cannot be con­
sidered as being contained in my individual
concept. s
(Adding: "That is my idea, which I think conforms
to everything which has ever been believed by all
the philosophers in the world"! ) If a's nonneces­
sary properties reveal nothing about what a is,
nothing will be lost if they are struck from its
characterization.
Dropping a's non necessary properties from its
complete profile yields the set of all properties that
a possesses essentially, or what can be called the
complete essence of 00. 6 Since a is essentially ident­
ical with a, the property of so being will be
included in a's complete essence; so the sufficiency
of the characterization is again beyond doubt. Nor
can there be much question that complete essences
do better than complete profiles at showing what
particulars are by nature. But worries about philo­
sophical interest remain.
In the first place, the essence of an entity ought,
one feels, to be an assortment of properties in virtue \nStephen Yablo
of which it is the entity in question. But this
requirement is trivialized by the inclusion, in
essences, of identity properties, like that of being
identical with California. A thing does not get to
be identical with California by having the property,
alike, by having certain other properties. And it is
these other properties that really belong in a thing's
characterization. Another way of putting what is
probably the same point is that identity properties
and their ilk are not "ground floor, " but dependent
or supervenient. As a kind of joke, someone I know
explains the difference between his two twin collies
like this: "It's simple: this one's Lassie, and that
one's Scottie. " What makes this a joke is that that
cannot be all there is to it; and the reason is
that identity properties are possessed not simplici­
ter, but dependently on other properties. It is only
these latter properties that ought, really, to be
employed in a thing's characterization.
Secondly, the essence of a thing is supposed to
be a measure of what is required for it to be that
thing. But, intuitively, requirements can be more
or less. If the requirements for being (3 are stricter
than the requirements for being Cl: , then (3 ought to
have a "bigger" essence than Cl: . To be the Shroud
of Turin, for instance, a thing has to have every­
thing it takes to be the associated piece of cloth, and
it has to have enshrouded Jesus Christ (this is
assuming that the Cloth of Turin did, in fact,
enshroud Jesus Christ). Thus, more is essential to
the Shroud of Turin than to the piece of cloth, and
the Shroud of Turin ought accordingly to have the
bigger essence. So, if essences are to set out the
requirements for being their possessors, it should
be possible for one thing's essence to include
another's. 7 What is perhaps surprising, however,
is that this natural perspective on things will not
survive the introduction of identity properties and
their ilk into individual essences. Think of the
piece of cloth that makes up the Shroud of Turin
(call it "the Cloth of Turin"): if the property of
being identical with the Cloth of Turin is in the
Cloth of Turin's essence, then, since that property
is certainly not in the Shroud of Turin's essence,
the inclusion is lost. Equivalently, it ought to be
possible to start with the essence of the Cloth of
Turin, add the property of having served as the
burial shroud of Jesus Christ (along perhaps with
others this entails), and wind up with the essence of
the Shroud of Turin. But, if the property of being
identical to the Cloth of Turin is allowed into the
Cloth of Turin's essence, then adding the property
of having served as Jesus's burial shroud produces a
sort of contradiction; for, obviously, nothing is both
identical to the Cloth of Turin and necessarily
possessed of a property - having served as Jesus's
burial shroud - which the Cloth of Turin possesses
only contingently. And the argument is perfectly
general: if identity properties (or others like them)
are allowed into things' essences, then distinct
things' essences will always be incomparable. s
Implicit in the foregoing is a distinction between
two types of property. On the one hand, there are
properties that can only 'build up' the essences in
which they figure. Since to include such properties
in an essence is not (except trivially) to keep any
other property out, they will be called cumulative.
On the other hand, there are properties that exer­
cise an inhibiting effect on the essences to which
they belong. To include this sort of property in an
essence is always to block the entry of certain of its
colleagues. Properties like these - identity proper­
ties, kind properties, and others - are restrictive. If
restrictive properties are barred from essences, that
will ensure that essences are comparable, and so
preserve the intuition that each essence specifies
what it takes to be the thing that has it.
Essences constrained to include only cumulative
properties will have two advantages. First, they will
determine their possessors' inessential properties
negatively, not by what they include but by what
they leave out; and, as a result, things' essences will
be amenable to expansion into the larger essences
of things it is "more difficult to be, " thus preser­
ving the intuition that a thing's essence specifies
what it takes to be that thing. And, second, things
will be the things they are in virtue of having the
essences they have. To put it approximately but
vividly, they will be what they are because of what
they are like (see Prop. 4). 9 Our tactic will be to
look first for properties suited to inclusion in
cumulative essences and then to show that, under
reasonable further assumptions, identity super­
venes on cumulative essence.
3 Modeling Essence
To find a set of properties suitable for the con­
struction of cumulative essences, one needs to
know what "properties" are; especially because a
totally unrestricted notion of property is incoher­
ent, as Richard's and Grelling's paradoxes show. lO
So it makes sense to look for a sharper formulation
of the notion of property before pushing ahead
with the search for cumulative essence. Such a \nformulation is provided by the apparatus of possi­
ble worlds.
Let 2 be an ordinary first-order language with
identity, and let 2(0) be 2 supplemented with
the sentential necessity operator "0. " To a first
approximation, a model of 2(0) is just a set "fII of
models W of 2 (to be thought of as possible
worlds). But there is a qualification. Traditionally,
a model's domain is simultaneously the set of
things that can be talked about and the set of things
that exist, i. e. , the domain of discourse and the
ontological domain. But, since one can talk about
things that do not exist, W's domain of discourse
should be allowed to contain things not in its onto­
logical domain; and since there are not, mystical
considerations to the side, things about which one
cannot talk, W's ontological domain should be a
subset of its domain of discourse. What this means
formally is that with each model Win 1{/. is asso­
ciated a subset fiJ( W) of its domain (intuitively, the
set of things existing in J1I). Let W thus supple­
mented be known as afree model of 2. For simpli­
city's sake, every member of"fll will have the same
domain fiJ, and fiJ will be the union of the fiJ( W)'s.
And now a model of 2 ( 0) can be defined as a set
1fl" of free models of! t', such that the domain of
discourse of each is the union of all their ontologi­
cal domains. 11
Tempting though it is to define a property as any
function P from worlds W to subsets P( W) of fiJ,
there is reason not to. For when will a have P
necessarily: when it has P in every world, or when
it has it in every world in which it exists? Not the
former, because then everything necessarily
exists. 12 Nor the latter, first, because it permits a
thing to possess only accidentally a property it
must perish to lose and, second, because it upsets
the principle that essence varies inversely with
existence; i. e. , the fewer the worlds a thing exists
in, the more properties it has essentially. What this
in fact points up is a difference between two kinds
of characteristic: being human in every world
where you exist is sufficient for being human
everywhere (almost all characteristics are like
this), but existing in every world where you exist
is obviously not sufficient for existing everywhere
(apparently only existence and characteristics
involving existence are like this). From now on,
an attribute is a function from worlds W to subsets
of fiJ, and a proper~y is an attribute P such that
anything having it wherever it exists has it every­
where. In general, an attribute is necessary to a
thing if it attaches to the thing in every possible
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
world (preserving the intuition that existence is
sometimes contingent). If the attribute is also a
property, this reduces to the thing's having the
attribute wherever it exists (preserving the intui­
tion that humanity is necessary to Socrates if he
cannot exist without it). In what follows, properties
(rather than attributes in general) are the items
under investigation.
From the definition of property, it follows that,
if P is a property, then so are pD: W -> {aEfiJ I
'v'W' mP( W')} (the property of being essentially P,
or P's essentialization); pO: W -> {aEfiJ I: l W'
mP( W')} (the property of being possibly P, or
P's possibilization); and p"'-: W -> {mP( W) I: lW' art P(W')} (the property of being acciden­
tally P, henceforth P's accidentalization). The
essentialization XD (accidentalization X"'-) of a
set X of properties is the set of its members' essen­
tializations (accidentalizations). If a is in P( W) and
exists in W, then it is in P[W] (note the square
brackets). If for each P in X mP( W), then
mX( W); if, in addition, a exists in W, then it is
in X[W]. A set Y of properties is satisfiable in W,
written Sat [Y, W], iff there is something in
np, yp[W]. Given a set X of properties, a thing
a's X-essence lEA a) is the set of all P in X which a
possesses essentially, or {PEX I: lW(mpD(W))}.
(3 is an X-refinement of a, written a: :; (3(X) - or
just a: :; (3 if X is clear from context - iff a's X­
essence is a subset of (3's, i. e. , if IEAa) <; ;; lEx ((3).
That essences drawn from X should be amen­
able to expansion is a condition not on X alone, but
on X and "fII taken together: X and "fII must be so
related that suitably expanding the X-essence of
any thing in any world in "fII always produces the
X-essence of some other thing existing in that same
world. Let fl =< "fII, X > be a property-model of
2 ( 0) if "fII is a model of 2 (0) and X is a set of
properties on "fII. A property-model fl is upward­
closed, or u-closed, iff:
(U) 'v'a'v'Y <; ;; X -IEAa)'v'W[aEY"'-[W]
=? (: l(3 2: a) (3f yD [W]]
In words, given any a, given any set Y of proper­
ties not essential to a, and given any world W, if a
exists in Wand has Y there, then it has a refine­
ment (3 which exists in Wand has Y essentially
there. (For future reference, (U) is provably
equivalent to the simpler statement that
'v'Z <; ;; X'v'W [Sat[Z, W] =? Sat[ZD, W]]. )
Upward closure requires that any existing a
possessing (suitable) properties inessentially be \nStephen Yablo
refinable into an existing (3 that possesses those
properties essentially. The converse is intuitive
too: if there exists a (3 refining a which essentially
possesses (suitable) properties not essential to a,
then a should exist and possess those same proper­
ties accidentally. Thus, if the Shroud of Turin
exists in a world W, then not only should the
Cloth of Turin exist in W, but it should serve as
Jesus's burial shroud in W. Not only is this plau­
sible on the face of it, but otherwise it is hard to see
what separates the worlds in which the Cloth
occurs by itself from those in which it occurs
together with the Shroud; whereas surely the dif­
ference is that in the latter, but not the former, the
Cloth serves as Jesus's burial shroud. And, in gen­
eral, if (3 refines a, then surely what separates
worlds in which a exists without (3 from those in
which a exists with (3 is that, in the latter worlds, a
possesses the difference between their X-essences,
whereas in the former it does not. Specifically, if (3
refines a, then (1) a exists wherever (3 does, (2) in
worlds where both exist, a accidentally possesses
every property in IEx((3) - IEAoo), i. e. , every prop­
erty in the difference between their essences, and
(3) in worlds where just (3 exists, a does not possess
all the properties in IEA(3) - lEA a). All of these
follow on the addition of a requirement of down­
ward closure, literally the converse of the upward
closure enforced above:
(D) 't/oo't/y c: :: X - IEAoo)'t/W[(: l(3; :: : a)
(3EyD[W] =} mY""[Wll
In words, for anything a, any properties Y not
essential to it, and any world, if a has an existing
refinement (3 possessing Y essentially, then a
exists and possesses Y accidentally. Property­
models satisfying both (U) and (D) are closed.
Prop. 1 Let [2 be closed. If a: :: ; (3, then
(I) 11/'((3) c: :: 1fI(oo)
(2) 't/WE1fI((3) [m(IEx((3) -lEx(OO))""(W)]
(3) 't/WE1fI(oo) -1fI((3)[oo rt (1Ex((3)
-lEx(OO))""(W)]
Proof For (1), observe first that A[W] = A(W)n
E1 (W) = E1 n 2Ll (W) = E1 (W) (because the null
intersection is everything, in this case E1).
By (D), (3EE1(W) =} (3E A[W] =} (3EAD[W] =}
mA"" [W] =} mA[W] =} m2Ll(W).
For (2), just let Zbe IEx((3) -lEx(OO). For (3), sup­
pose that (3 does not exist in W, and suppose per
absurdum that a accidentally possesses, in W, the
difference between its X-essence and (3's. By
upward closure, a has a refinement 'Y which exists
in Wand which possesses the whole lot, i. e. , all of
IEx((3), essentially. But then 'Y refines (3; so, by (1),
(3 exists in Wafter all. Contradiction.
4 Contingent Identity
Things that disagree in any of their properties are
not identical. The Shroud of Turin, which (let us
suppose) had to enshroud Jesus, is thus distinct
from the Cloth of Turin, which did not. But, as
we said, there is something deeply troubling about
leaving matters thus. After all, the Shroud of Turin
is also distinct from the Treaty of Versailles. Do we
really want to leave the Shroud's relations with
the Cloth on the same level as its relations with
the Treaty of Versailles? And the trouble does not
stop here. The Cloth and the Shroud differ, it is
true, but it must also be said that their differences
are of a somewhat recherche variety. In every ordin­
ary respect the two are exactly alike. And this is on
the face of it a rather extraordinary coincidence.
That the Cloth and the Shroud are specially con­
nected seems undeniable, but something must be
done to demystify the connection. Ifit is not ident­
ity, what is it?
Maybe the answer is that it is identity, but ident­
ity of a different, less demanding, character. In the
terms of a currently unpopular theory - and not­
withstanding the argument that seems to rule it out
- it is 'contingent identity, ' or (the more neutral
term) "coincidence. "l3 Despite the once wide­
spread enthusiasm for contingent identity, it
seems to me that the idea never received a satisfac­
tory formulation. Specifically, all the analyses I
have seen have a drawback in common: they (some­
times explicitly, sometimes in effect) treat things as
strung together out of their modal manifestations
(states, slices, stages), and call them coincident in a
world if their manifestations in that world are
properly identical. There are two objections to
this kind of explication. The first is that it relies,
ultimately, on the notion to be explicated; for one
has little idea what a thing's state or manifestation
in a world is, if not something whose nature is
exhausted by its being exactly like the thing so far
as the relevant world is concerned, i. e. , by its being
contingently identical with the thing in that world. \nEven more important, intuitively, things (e. g. , ani­
mals) are not strung together out of their modal
manifestations in this way, and proper identity of
modal manifestations is not what is meant by con­
tingent identity. Intuitively, things are just, well,
things, and coincidence is a matter of things' cir­
cumstantial sameness.
How, then, is circumstantial sameness to be
separated out from total sameness? What marks
off the "ordinary" respects in which the Cloth
and the Shroud are alike from the "extraordinary"
respects in which they differ? Let us start with
Dana Scott's idea that "two individuals that are
generally distinct might share all the same proper­
ties (of a certain kind! ) with respect to the present
world. ,, 14 Probably the most obvious way of elucid­
ating this would be to say the following: a and (3 are
contingently identical (in a world) if and only if
they have the same contingent properties (in that
world). So, for example, the bust and the hunk of
wax agree in their size, weight, color, and so on -
and all these are, of course, properties they have
contingently. Maybe contingent identity is same­
ness of contingent properties.
That that cannot be right follows from the fact
that, if anything has a property contingently, then
it has all its stronger properties contingently too.
(Suppose a has P contingently; then there is a
world in which a lacks P; but if Q is stronger
than P, a also lacks Q there; and, since a has Q,
it has it contingently. ) So, for example, if Paris is
only contingently romantic, then it is only contin­
gently identical-to-Paris-and-romantic. But that
means that anything that has the same contingent
properties that Paris has is (among other things)
identical with Paris. And that already shows that
Paris is the only thing with exactly its contingent
properties. Thus, if contingent identity is treated
as sameness of contingent properties, contingent
identity collapses into identity proper.
Still, from a certain perspective, this first analy­
sis might be only a little way off the mark. To the
question, What makes a thing's possession of a
property circumstantial? it seems natural to reply
that the possession is circumstantial if it depends
on how matters actually stand with the thing. But
now notice that this is ambiguous. Depends how:
part~y or whol~y? If you answer "partly, " then you
get the thing's contingent properties. But, if you
answer "wholly, " you get the properties the thing
has entirely in virtue of how matters actually stand
with it; and these properties, what can be called the
categorical properties, seem intuitively to be the
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
ones in question. IS For if two things agree in all
their categorical properties (in a world), then so far
as that world and it alone is concerned, the two
things are just the same. And that is what was
meant by "contingent identity. " So contingent
identity is categorical indiscernibility.
To come to this conclusion from a different
direction, consider again the driving home and
the speeding home. What separates the "ordinary"
respects in which these two are alike from the
"extraordinary" respects in which they differ?
For a start, the driving home could have been
done slowly, but not so the speeding home; the
driving home had higher prior probability than
the speeding home; if the driving home had not
occurred, Jones would have taken the bus home,
but the same cannot be said of the speeding home;
and the speeding home, rather than the driving
home as such, caused Jones's accident. Thus, the
driving home and the speeding home differ in -
among other things - their modal, probabilistic,
counterfactual, and causal properties. Now what
is special about modal, probabilistic, counterfac­
tual, and causal properties? Primarily this: they
are grounded not just in how a thing actually is,
but on how it would or could have been if circum­
stances had been different. All a thing's other prop­
erties, by contrast, are grounded entirely in how it
is in the circumstances that happen to obtain. The
former properties are a thing's hypothetical proper­
ties, the latter its categorical properties. Now the
contingent identity of the driving home with the
speeding home seems intuitively to be a matter of
their sharing such properties as speed, place, time,
etc. , regardless of their modal, causal, probabilistic,
and counterfactual differences; that is, their con­
tingent identity seems to be a matter of their shar­
ing their categorical properties, irrespective of their
hypothetical differences.
How are a thing's categorical properties to be
found? (Actually it will be simplest if we look for
properties categorical as such, i. e. , properties that
can only be had in a manner independent of what
would or could have happened. ) Why not take the
intuitive notion that a property is categorical just in
case a thing's having it is independent of what goes
on in nonactual worlds, and try to turn this into a
definition? The problem is that such a definition
would be circular. Suppose it is a categorical prop­
erty of this hunk of clay that it is spherical. How
can that depend on how the clay comports itself in
other worlds? But, if you think about it, it does, in
that the clay's being spherical in this world \nStephen Yablo
depends on its being, in those worlds, such that in
this world it is spherical. The problem is that being
such that, in this world, it is spherical, is a
hypothetical property of the clay. So, apparently,
what we really meant to say was that a property is
categorical if it attaches to a thing regardless of its
categorical properties in other worlds. And that is
clearly circular. 16
Somehow the circularity has to be circum­
vented. Things are going to be coincident in a
world iff they have exactly the same categorical
properties there. But maybe this can be turned
around: the categorical properties are exactly
those which cannot tell coincident things apart.
Postpone for a moment the question of how that
would help, and ask, instead, is it even true? That
is, are the categorical properties the properties
insensitive to the difference between coincidents?
This will be the case only if coincidence is compa­
tible with every kind of hypothetical variation, i. e. ,
if, for every hypothetical property, coincidents can
be found that disagree on it. But it is clear that
ordinary things do not exhibit the hypothetical
variety that this would require. Among ordinary
things, coincidents never differ on (e. g. ) the score
of fragility (if the statue is fragile, then so is the
piece of clay); among ordinary things, one never
finds one thing accidentally juvenile, or mature,
and another, coincident with the first, essentially
so (simply because no ordinary thing is essentially
juvenile, or mature).
So much for ordinary things. But what about
things as seen from the vantage point of metaphy­
sics? Metaphysics aspires to understand reality as it
is in itself, independently of the conceptual appa­
ratus observers bring to bear on it. Even if we do
not ourselves recognize essentially juvenile or
mature entities, it is not hard to imagine others
who would; 17 and to someone who, in addition to
the statue and the piece of clay, discerned a statue­
cum-shards, not everything coincident with the
statue would be fragile. Conversely, we recognize
things, say, essentially suitable for playing crib­
bage, or cutting grass, which others do not, or
might not have. To insist on the credentials of the
things we recognize against those which others do,
or might, seems indefensibly parochial. In meta­
physics, unusual hypothetical coloring can be no
ground for exclusion. IS Since this is metaphysics,
everything up for recognition must actually be
recognized; and, when this is done, there are co­
incidents enough to witness the hypotheticality of
every hypothetical property. 19
Given information about what was coincident
with what, the categorical properties could be iden­
tified: they would be the properties insensitive to
the difference between coincidents. Now, as of yet,
there is no information about what is coincident
with what (that is why we were looking for the
categorical properties in the first place). But that
is not to say that none can be obtained; and, in fact,
certain cases of coincidence - enough to weed out
all the noncategoricals - are discoverable in
advance.
To find these cases, try to imagine pairs of things
that differ as little as possible from being strictly
identical (for things almost identical will be con­
tingently identical if any things are). Trivially, if a
and {3 are strictly identical, a will exist in exactly
the same possible worlds as {3, and a will be coin­
cident with {3 in all of them. To arrange for the least
possible departure from this, let a exist in a few
more worlds than {3, but otherwise leave everything
unchanged, i. e. , let them be coincident in all the
worlds where both exist. As it happens, that is
exactly how it is with the driving home and the
speeding home. Wherever the speeding home
occurs, the driving home occurs too, and is coin­
cident with the speeding home. But there will also
be worlds in which the driving home is done at a
reasonable speed, and in such worlds the speeding
home does not occur.
Still, none of this helps with the project of expli­
cating contingent identity, unless there is a way of
characterizing the given relation - the relation
between the driving home and the speeding home
- which does not itself rely on the notion of con­
tingent identity. But there is: it is the relation of
refinement. Although only a fraction of all coincid­
ents stand in the relation of refinement, this frac­
tion is enough to weed out all the noncategorical
properties. 2o With the noncategorical properties
weeded out, the categorical properties are isolated.
And with the categorical properties in hand, con­
tingent identity is at last explicable: things are
contingently identical in a world if they have the
same categorical properties there.
Trivial cases aside, things contingently identical
will not be identical as a matter of necessity. But
then what about the argument that purported to
show that identities obtained necessarily if at all?
Was the argument invalid? No; it showed that
something was impossible. The question is, was
the refuted possibility really that of contingent
identity? Looking back at the argument, the crucial
assumption was this: to be contingently identical, \nthings have to have all their properties, up to and
including properties of the form necessary identity
with such and such, in common. If that is right, then
contingent identity is, as argued, impossible. So the
question is, do contingently identical things have to
have all their properties, not only categorical but
hypothetical as well, in common?
They do not. To agree that they did would be to
concede the very point of contingent identity and
to frustrate the clear intent of its advocates, which
was that it was to be a relation compatible with
counterfactual divergence. Understanding contin­
gent identity as sameness of nonhypothetical prop­
erties, on the other hand, preserves its point and
sustains it against the "proof' of its impossibility.
Still, why did it even seem that contingent iden­
tity entailed absolute indiscernibility? Probably
because it was taken for granted that contingently
identical things were (at least) properly identical,
only - and this was their distinction - not necessarily
so. 21 (And the expression "contingent identity" can
certainly be faulted for encouraging this interpre­
tation. ) Admittedly, contingent identity in this
sense is not possible? Z But there is a better and
more generous way of understanding contingent
identity: strict and contingent identity are different
relations, and, because of their differences as rela­
tions, one can obtain contingently whereas the
other cannot. It only remains to spell out the formal
details.
5 Modeling Contingent Identity
Formally, a property P is categorical iff necessarily,
if a and (3 are related by refinement, then a has P
iff (3 does, i. e. , if
(VW)(Va, (3fE0(W))(a <: :: : (3 =; . (mP(W) {o}
(3EP(W)))
What is the relation between the cumulative prop­
erties and the categorical properties? Closure
implies a partial answer.
Prop. 2 If n is closed, then every cumulative
property is categorical.
Proof Let PEX, and let a, (3EE0( W), a <: :: : (3. By
u-closure, there are 00* and (3* in E0(W) such
that VPEX(mP[W] =; . a*EpD [W]) and VPEX((3E
P[W] =; . (3*EpD [W]). We show that mP[W] {o}
(3EP[W]. Since a <: :: : (3 <: :: : (3*, a <: :: : (3*. Therefore,
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
(3EP[W] =; . (3*EpD[W] {o} aEP[W] (by d-closure).
For the converse, notice first that (3 <: :: : 00*. For if
QEiEA(3), then, by d-closure, mQ[W]; whence
QEiEAa*). Since (3 <: :: : 00*, mP[W] =; . a*EpD[W]
=; . (3EP[W] (by d-closure).
Things are coincident in W - written a "'" (3 - if
they have the same categorical properties there.
But, for the definition of categoricity to achieve
its purpose, the system of coincidents has to be
full or complete. Informally, this means that every
point in the logical space of possible coincidents
must actually be occupied; formally, for any (par­
tial) functionffrom worlds W to things existing in
W, there is a thing existing, and coincident with
f( W), in exactly the worlds infs domain. n is full
if it satisfies
(F) Vf: WdY -+ f(W)EE0(W): 300 [ir(a) =
domer) & VWEir(a)a ""'wf(W)]
Prop. 2 showed that, if n is closed, then every
cumulative property is categorical. For the con­
verse, let n be maximal closed if
(M) n = (ir, X) is closed, and there is no
X'extending X such that(ir, X')is closed.
If n is maximal closed and full, then every cat­
egorical property is cumulative. In other words, a
property is cumulative if and only if it is categor­
ical.
Prop. 3 Let n be maximal closed and full. Then
VP[Pis cumulative {o} Pis categorical]
Proof [=; .] This is just Prop. 2. [~] Let P be
categorical. I claim that < ir, X + P > is closed.
For u-closure, let Z c; : X and suppose that a has
Z + Pin W. By fullness, there is an 00* which exists
in Wonly and which is coincident with respect to
(X) with a in W. Since 00* exists in Wonly, it has
all its properties essentially. In particular, 00* has all
of a's categorical (w. r. t. X) properties essentially,
and so (by Prop. 2) 00* refines a (w. r. t. X). Since P
is categorical (w. r. t. X), 00* has P in W too, and so it
has P essentially in W. Thus 00* has (Z + p)D
in W. For d-closure, let Z c; : X and let
00<: :: : (3E(Z + p)D [W]. By the d-closure of n,
aEZ[W], and, since P is categorical (w. r. t. X),
mP[W] too. Since < ir, X + P > is both u­
closed and d-closed, P is in x. Z3 \nStephen Yablo
6 Essence and Identity
Can distinct things have the same cumulative
essence? So far, nothing prevents it. For example,
there is nothing to rule out the following: there are
exactly two possible worlds, Wand W', a and {3
exist in both worlds; "( exists in W alone; and "('
exists in W' alone. In this situation "( will have to
refine both a and {3 in W, and "(' will refine both a
and {3 in W'. From the fact that a and {3 have a
common refinement in each world, it quickly fol­
lows that they are coincident, i. e. , have the same
categorical properties, in each world. But, by Prop.
3, the categorical properties are exactly the cumu­
lative properties; and, if a and {3 share their
cumulative properties in every world, how can
they have different cumulative essences?
Actually, this raises the critical question,
avoided until now, of how coincidence and identity
are related. Can a and {3 exist in the same worlds,
be coincident in all of them, and still be distinct? It
is hard to imagine how they could. For, presum­
ably, distinct items differ in one or another of two
ways. Either they exist in different worlds, or they
exist in the same worlds and are unlike, i. e. , have
different categorical properties, in at least one of
them. Between distinct things, that is, there have
got to be either intra-world or extra-world differ­
ences.
But what is the argument for this? If things exist
in the same worlds, then, unless they have different
categorical properties in at least one of them, the
hypothesis of their distinctness can find no foot­
hold. Take the standard example of 'indiscernible'
spheres afloat in otherwise empty space (suppose
for argument's sake that they exist in no other
world). If the spheres were in exactly the same
place, could they still be reckoned distinct? A
hypothesis so gratuitous is beyond not only our
powers of belief, but even our powers of stipula­
tion. If, on the other hand, the spheres are in
different places, then they differ on the (presum­
ably categorical) properties of being in those places.
(The properties have to be different, because they
map the world in question to different spheres. )24
Call a property-model separable if it satisfies
(S) VaV{3[(1f/"(a) = 1f/"({3) & VWc#/(a)U
1f/"({3)a ~w (3) =? a = {3]
The last proposition shows that, if [2 is (besides
being closed) separable, then things with the same
cumulative essence are identical.
Prop. 4 Let [2 be closed and separable. Then
Proof: Let a and {3 have the same X-essence. Since
a and {3 X-refine each other, by Prop. 1 they exist
in the same worlds. By the definition of X-cate­
goricity, in each of these worlds any X-categorical
property attaching to either attaches also to the
other. Thus a and {3 have the same X-categorical
properties, and so coincide, in every world where
they exist. By separability, a is identical with {3.
To this extent, essence determines identity. 25
7 Applications
(A) Treating contingent identity as sameness of
categorical properties goes part of the way toward
solving a problem David Wiggins raises for relative
identity in Sameness and Substance. He argues there
that, since (i) what sets identity relations apart from
the common run of equivalence relations is their
satisfaction of Leibniz's law, and (ii) no variety of
relative identity can satisfy (an unrestricted version
of) Leibniz's law, (iii) relations of relative identity
are not identity relations (pending discovery of a
suitably restricted form of Leibniz's law). To
answer this argument, one would need an uncon­
trived law of the form: if a is the same/as {3, then a
and {3 have thus-and-such properties in common.
However, Wiggins thinks such a law will prove
impossible to formulate:
It seems that the very least we shall require is
more information about the case of the restricted
congruence that results from the g-identity, for
some one sortal concept g, of x and y. No stable
formulation of restricted congruence is avail­
able, however. Nor, I suspect, will it ever be. 26 gIVen.
But, if contingent identicals are seen as the same
concrete thing, then a rigorous restriction of Leib­
niz's law is at hand: if a and {3 are the same con­
crete thing, then they have the same categorical. 27 properties.
(B) Nearly everyone's gut reaction to function­
alism is that phenomenal properties, at any rate,
cannot be functional, because nothing functional
can attain to the "manifest" character of felt
experience. Perhaps this idea finds support in the \ncategorical/hypothetical distinction. The property
of playing functional role R is the property of
bearing certain complicated counterfactual rela­
tions to inputs, outputs, and the players of various
other functional roles. Details aside, such a prop­
erty is obviously hypothetical. But the property of
painfulness (note: not the property of causing pain,
but that of being pain) seems to be a categorical
property par excellence. Therefore, painfulness is
not a functional property. (Note that this affects
only the version of functionalism that flatly identi­
fies mental properties with functional properties. )
(C) That mental and physical events are not
properly identical is argued not only by their essen­
tial differences (emphasized by Kripke), but also by
their causal differences. Suppose Smith's pain is
identical with neural event v, which causes neural
event E. Then the strict identity theorist will have
to say that Smith's pain caused E; but that seems
questionable, because v's being Smith's pain con­
tributed nothing to its production of E (one wants
to say: even if v had not been Smith's, or any, pain,
NOTES
Donald Davidson, Sally Haslanger, Kit Fine, David
Kaplan, Noa Latham, Shaughan Lavine, Barry Loewer,
George Myro, Sydney Shoemaker, Robert Stalnaker, and
David Velleman all made comments that helped me with
the writing of this paper.
I Saul Kripke, NamIng and Necessity (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1980), p. 4.
2 In the prevailing necessitarian euphoria, it has become
difficult to recapture the atmosphere of a few years
back, when contingent identity was a commonplace of
logical and metaphysical theorizing. To cite just two
examples, Dana Scott's "Advice on modal logic, " in
Karel Lambert (ed. ), Philosophical Problems in Logic
(Boston: Reidel, 1970), urged that "two individuals
that are generally distinct might share all the same
properties (of a certain kind! ) with respect to the
present world. .. Hence they are equivalent or incid­
ent at the moment. Relative to other points of refer­
ence they may cease to be incident" (p. 165). And
most of the early mind/body-identity theorists - U.
T. Place, ]. ]. C. Smart, Thomas Nagel, among others
- took themselves to be asserting the contingent
identity of mental and physical entities. Smart, for
instance, says very explicitly that "on the brain­
process thesis the identity between the brain process
and the experience is a contingent one" ("Sensations
and brain processes, " Philosophical Review, 68, 2
(April 1959), pp. 141-56, at p. 152). There is a ques-
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
E would still have eventuated). If Smith's pain and
v are only coincident, on the other hand, then
natural~y they will have different causal powers
and susceptibilities; and a sensitive counter factual
theory of causation might be able to exploit their
essential differences to predict their causal differ­
ences. 28 Irrelevant qualifications aside, an event a
causes an event (3 only if it is required for (3, in the
following sense: given any (actually occurring)
event I ~ a whose essence does not include a's,
if I had occurred in a's absence, (3 would not have
occurred; and only if it is enough for (3, in the
following sense: given any (actually occurring)
event I ~ a whose essence is not included in a's,
I is not required for (3. As for Smith's pain (call it
'if), that E would have occurred even in 'if'S absence,
provided that v had still occurred, shows that 'if is
not required for E; and that v is (let us assume)
required for E shows that 'if is not enough for E
either. Complementary considerations show how it
can be Smith's decision, rather than the corres­
ponding neural event, that causes her action.
tion, actually, how it is that so many people thought
that an impossible thing was possible. One hypothesis
- maybe it is Kripke's hypothesis - is that these
people were just very mixed up. And, in fact, it does
seem that to varying degrees they were. Ruth Marcus
once described W. V. Quine as thinking that modal
logic was conceived in sin, the sin of confusing use
and mention. Contingent identity had, if anything,
even shadier beginnings, because at least three sepa­
rate sins attended at its conception. Contingency was
routinely identified with (or at least thought to follow
from) a posteriority; particular identity statements
(like "This pain is identical to that brain-event")
were insufficiently distinguished from general iden­
tity statements (like "Consciousness is a process in the
brain"); and the contingent truth of an identity state­
ment was equated with the contingency of the
asserted identity, guaranteeing that contingent co­
incidence of concepts would be taken for the contin­
gent identity of the things specified. So evidence for
the confusion hypothesis is not lacking. The other
hypothesis is, of course, that people recognized, con­
fusedly perhaps, something sensible and defensible in
the notion that things can be identical as a matter of
fact. Philosophically, it does not much matter which
of these hypotheses is correct. There is something
sensible and defensible in the idea of contingent iden­
tity, whether its advocates recognized it or not. Or so I
hope to show. \nStephen Yablo
3 Kripke, "Identity and necessity, " this volume, p. 72.
Let me say at the outset that, as far as I can see,
Kripke's argument does succeed in establishing what
it claims to establish: namely, that identity, in the
strict sense, can never obtain contingently. If the
conclusion seems paradoxical, as it surely does, that
is because people are confusing it with the genuinely
paradoxical thesis that there can be no relation with
the characteristics traditionally associated with "con­
tingent identity. " Speaking more generally, what
Kripke says about identity is important and correct,
and not questioned here; but people may have
thought that his conclusions closed off certain ave­
nues of investigation which are in fact still open. And
that is perhaps why some of those conclusions have
seemed hard to accept.
4 Observing that not only modal but temporal differ­
ences "establish that a statue is not the hunk of stone,
or the congery of molecules, of which it is composed, "
Kripke allows that "mere non-identity. .. may be a
weak conclusion" (this volume, p. 89). Extremely
weak, from the point of view of philosophical materi­
alism. That pains were not identical with neural sti­
mulations seemed to be a powerfully antimaterialistic
result; but now it turns out to be compatible with
pains and neural stimulations being as tightly bound
up with one another as statues and their clay. And
what materialist would not be delighted with that
result? On the other hand, "The Cartesian modal
argument. .. surely can be deployed to maintain
relevant stronger conclusions as well" (ibid. ). Possibly
this means that the statue is "nothing over and above"
its matter, whereas the same cannot be said of a
person; in the sense that necessarily, the statue (but
not the person) exists if its matter does, and with a
certain organization (Naming and Necessity, p. 145).
But it seems doubtful whether the statue is "nothing
over and above" its matter in that sense (what if the
statue's matter had gathered together by chance,
before the earth was formed? what if a different
sculptor had organized the matter? ); and the subtler
the sense in which a statue really is "nothing over and
above" its matter, the less implausible it becomes that,
in a substantially similar sense, a person is "nothing
over and above" its matter. So there may still be room
for doubt whether modal arguments establish signific­
antly more difference between a person and her mat­
ter than between a statue and its.
H. T. Mason (ed. ), The Leibniz-Arnauld Correspond­
ence (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
1967), p. 30.
6 In some contexts it is useful to distinguish between
essential and necessary and between accidental and
contingent properties. For example, someone might
think that, whereas Socrates is essentially human, he
is only necessarily Greek-or-not. The distinction is
intuitive but irrelevant to our purposes.
7 Where kinds of things are concerned, this is comparat­
ively uncontroversial: the essence attaching to the
kind cow strictly includes the essence attaching to
the kind animal. But, as Leibniz noticed, individuals
can be thought of as instancing smallest or least kinds,
what we might call individual kinds (what sets indivi­
dual kinds apart is that in each possible world at most
one thing instances them): ". .. since St Thomas
could maintain that every separate intelligence dif­
fered in kind from every other, what evil will there
be in saying the same of every person and in conceiv­
ing individuals as final species" (G. R. Montgomery
(ed. ), Discourse on Metaphysics, Correspondence with
Arnauld, Monadology (La Salle, III. : Open Court,
1908), p. 237). Now just as the essences of general
kinds can be comparable, so can the essences of an
individual and a general kind (Bossie's essence
includes that of cow). But then why should the
essences of individual kinds not be comparable too?
There is every reason to see the relation between the
Shroud of Turin and the piece of cloth as continuous
with that between cow and animal: just as it is harder
to be a cow than an animal, it is harder to be the
Shroud of Turin than the piece of cloth, and just as
nothing can be a cow without being an animal (but not
conversely), nothing can be the Shroud of Turin
without being the piece of cloth (but not conversely).
So there seems to be a strong case for extending the
familiar doctrine that the essence of one kind can
include that of another to individual kinds, and,
what comes to the same, to individuals themselves.
(Incidentally, I am assuming that the Shroud of Turin
could not have been made of anything other than that
piece of cloth. Something made of another piece of
cloth might have been called "the Shroud of Turin, "
but it would not have been our Shroud of Turin. )
8 Identity properties are by no means the only proper­
ties that lead to these difficulties. Kind properties, for
example, are just as bad. If the property of being a
piece of cloth (i. e. , being of the kind piece of cloth) is
included in the Cloth of Turin's essence, then adding
on the property of having served as Jesus's burial
shroud (along with perhaps some others) can no
longer yield the essence of the Shroud of Turin. For
it is never essential to any piece of cloth that it should
have been used in any particular way (necessarily, any
piece of cloth could have been destroyed moments
after its fabrication). Incidentally, kind properties
are disqualified by the first argument too: like identity
properties, they are possessed not simpliciter, but
dependently on other properties. It defies credulity
that two things should be indiscernible up to this
detail, that one is a collie and the other is not. (Think­
ing of identity and kind properties as classificatory,
rather than characterizing, the above becomes the
truism that a thing's classification depends entirely
on what the thing is like. ) \n9 Although this is probably overstating it, at least as far
as what is actually established goes (see Prop. 4
below). See also David Wiggins, Sameness and Sub-
stance (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press,
1980), and Robert M. Adams, "Primitive thisness and
primitive identity, " this volume, ch. 14, in both of
which the sufficiency of "quality" for "quiddity" is
considered and rejected. Wiggins's opinion is that
". .. to make clear which thing a thing is, it is not
enough (pace the friends of the logically particularized
essence) to say however lengthily that it is such, or so
and so. We have to say that it is this or that such. This is
perfectly obvious when we think of trying to deter-
mine one entity by mentioning short or simple pred-
icates (other than identical with x or suchlike). But it is
difficult to see any reason to believe that by making
ordinary predicates ever longer and more complicated
we shall be able to overcome the obvious non-
sufficiency or nonnecessity for identity with just x
that infects all the relatively simple predicates true
of x" (pp. 104-5).
10 See Peter Geach, "Identity, " in his Logic Matters
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1972). Baruch Brody asserts that
his theory, according to which items are identical if
and only if they are indiscernible over "all" proper-
ties, "is not ruled out by its leading to any paradoxes"
(Jdenti~y and Essence (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1980), p. 18). But he does not satisfactorily
explain why not.
11 The accessibility relation is omitted; in effect, every
world has access to every other.
12 The problem existence raises for the definition of
"essential" is not unfamiliar. Kripke alludes to it in
"Identity and necessity": "Here is a lectern. A ques-
tion which has often been raised in philosophy is:
What are its essential properties? What properties. .. are such that this object has to have them if it
exists at all. .. [Footnote: ] This definition is the
usual formulation of the notion of essential property,
but an exception must be made for existence itself: on
the definition given, existence would be trivially
essential. We should regard existence as essential to
an object only if the object necessarily exists" (this
volume, pp. 80, 87).
13 Another reason for preferring "coincident" to "con-
tingently identical" is that properly identical things
will also be coincident, indeed necessarily so, and it
sounds funny to say that they are necessarily contin-
gently identical. But I continue to use the term, partly
for shock value, and partly for reasons to be given
presently.
14 Scott, "Advice on modal logic, " p. 165.
15 To be absolutely clear about the difference between
contingency and categoricity, consider their comple-
ments. Where a thing has its noncontingent proper-
ties necessarily, it has its noncategorical properties
hypothetically.
16
17
18
19
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
Two remarks. As a characterization of the categorical
properties, the foregoing is circular. But it does have
the virtue of illustrating why not every property can be
hypothetical (as is sometimes suggested). For a prop­
erty to be hypothetical, whether a thing has it must
depend on the things" categorical properties in other
worlds; and that shows that no property can be
hypothetical unless at least some properties are cate­
gorical. And, since it is relatively unproblematic that
categorical properties give rise to hypothetical proper­
ties (given the present broadly essentialist assump­
tions), neither category can be emptied without
emptying the other. So a skeptic about the distinction
should maintain that no property is of either kind, not
that all (some) properties are of one kind and none are
of the other. [For example, Sydney Shoemaker's the­
ory of properties as "second-order powers, " though it
might seem to imply that all properties are hypothet­
ical, or, on another reading, that all properties are
categorical, is perhaps better read as rejecting the
distinction altogether. See "Causality and proper­
ties, " this volume, ch. 20, and "Identity, properties,
and causality, " in Identity, Cause, and Mind (New
York: Cambridge University Press, 1984). ] Second,
in rejecting the proposed account of categoricity on
grounds of circularity, I do not mean to imply that the
account I finally give is not itself ultimately circular.
Given the cumulative properties, the categorical
properties can be noncircularly specified; but the
cumulative properties themselves cannot be non­
circularly specified, in particular not by the formal
conditions laid down above.
To get a sense of what it might be like to countenance
a creature coming into existence "in mid-life, " con­
sider Jane Eyre's reflections on the eve of her (anticip­
ated) marriage to Mr Rochester: "Mrs Rochester! She
did not exist: she would not be born till tomorrow,
sometime after eight o'clock A. M. ; and I would wait
to be assured she had come into the world alive before
I assigned her all that property. " For a creature that
stops existing "in mid-life, " there are the opening
lines of Neil Young's "A child's claim to fame': "I
am a child / I last a while. '
Less dogmatically, there are two kinds of metaphysics:
descriptive and transcendental. In descriptive meta­
physics one is interested in reality as people see it; in
transcendental metaphysics one tries to abstract to the
largest extent possible from the human contribution.
Pretty clearly, the distinction is relative. All metaphy­
sics is somewhat transcendental (metaphysicians do
not spend much time thrashing out the nature of time
zones), but probably the present approach is more
transcendental than most.
To say that everything up for recognition is actually
recognized, is to say the following: given any set of
worlds, and given an assignment to each of categorical
properties satisfiable therein, there is something that
exists in those worlds exactly and possesses in each the \nStephen Yablo
associated categorical properties. Call this the require­
ment of fullness.
20 To see why the properties insensitive to the difference
between things related by refinement can be relied on
to be exactly the categoricals: Call these properties the
provisionally categorical properties, and call things
indiscernible with respect to these properties provi­
sionally coincident. The problem is really to prove
that every provisionally categorical property is genu­
inely categorical (the converse is clear). Let P be
provisionally categorical. Then, by the definition of
provisional coincidence, P cannot distinguish provi­
sionally coincident things. Suppose toward a contra­
diction that P is not genuinely categorical. Then there
are a and W such that a possesses P in W, but its
possession of Pin W depends on what worlds (other
than W) it inhabits or on its genuinely categorical
properties in those worlds. Thus, if there were some­
thing genuinely coincident with a in W, but differing
from a in the worlds (other than W) it inhabited, or
the genuinely categorical properties it had in them,
that thing would lack P in W. Specifically, something
existing in worlds W, W', W". .. , and possessing the
genuinely categorical properties Yin W (Y is the set
of a's genuinely categorical properties in W), Y' in
W', Y" in W". .. , would lack P in W. To produce
such a thing, let -y( = a), -y', -ylll. .. be entities satisfy­
ing Y, yl, Y", .. . in W, W', W". .. If Z, Z', Z". ..
are the sets of provisionally categorical properties
possessed by -y, -y', -y", .. . in W, W', W". .. , then,
by fullness (see the preceding note), there is a {3
existing in exactly W, W', W". .. , and possessing Z
in W, ZI in W', Z" in W". .. . Since a thing's provi­
sionally categorical properties include its genuinely
categorical properties, {3 meets the conditions laid
down above for lacking P in W. But, by its definition,
{3 is provisionally coincident with a in W. Since P
distinguishes provisional coincidents, it is not provi­
sionally categorical after all. QE. D.
21 True, Smart does go out of his way to emphasize that
"the brain-process doctrine asserts identity in the
strict sense" (, Sensations and brain processes, " p.
145). But by this he seems to mean that he is not
talking about the relation that one thing bears to
another when they are "time slice[ s 1 of the same
four-dimensional object" or when they are "spatially
or temporally continuous" (ibid. ). Certainly there is
nothing to suggest that he had in mind a contrast
between "strict identity" and coincidence. What is
clear is that he took "strict identity" to be a relation
fully compatible with hypothetical dissimilarity.
22 Although some philosophers would say that identity
itself can obtain contingently. To some extent, such
philosophers can be seen as questioning the notion
that is here called "identity proper" and as taking
something roughly analogous to what is here called
"coincidence" to be all the identity there is. Since this
relation, which, relative to their schemes, probably
deserves to be called "identity proper, " can obtain
contingently, the kind(s) of contingent identity they
advocate is (are) in a certain sense more radical than
the kind assayed here. See, e. g. Allan Gibbard, "Con­
tingent identity, " this volume, ch. 9; David Lewis,
"Counterpart theory and quantified modal logic, "
Journal of Philosophy, 65/5 (7 Mar. 1968), pp. IJ3-
26; and idem, Counterfactuals (Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press, 1973); and Robert Stalna­
ker, "Counterparts and identity, " Midwest Studies in
Philosophy, (1986). (Take note: as a descriptive
account of these authors' theories, which are anyway
not very similar to one another, the above is not
reliable. )
23 Although it is wrong to try to explicate contingent
identity in terms of identity of modal states (the
notion of modal state depending on that of contingent
identity), Prop. 3 suggests a way to define modal
states so that the equation comes out true. Call
a'a's state in Wiff a's cumulative essence is exactly
the set of a's categorical properties in W. To see that
if a exists in W, its state in Wexists too: By fullness,
there is a {3 existing in Walone and coincident with a
there. Thus {3's categorical properties in Ware exactly
a's. By Prop. 3, {3's cumulative properties in Ware
exactly a's categorical properties in W. Since {3 has all
its properties essentially, {3's cumulative essence is the
set of a's categorical properties in W. Now it is easy to
verify that things are coincident in a world iff they
have strictly identical states there: a coincides with {3
in W iff a and {3 have the same categorical propert­
ies in W iff anything whose cumulative essence is the
set of a's categorical properties is also something
whose cumulative essence is the set of {3's categorical
properties iff any state of a in W is a state of {3 in W.
(For the uniqueness of a's state in W, see Prop. 4. )
24 Granted, one cannot identify these properties without
appeal to the objects that have them; but the claim was
that they have different categorical properties, not
that one can distinguish them by their categorical
properties. Granted also, except in connection with
the world in question, the properties' extensions will
be to a large extent arbitrary (when is something in
this world in the same place as the first sphere in that
one? ); but that does not matter, so long as the arbitrary
choices are made in such a way that the resulting
properties are categorical.
25 Even if this result is accepted, there is plenty of room
for doubt about its precise significance. Briefly, one
worry is that to distinguish a's cumulative essence
from {3's, one would already have to be able to distin­
guish a from {3. But this seems to confuse the meta­
physical thesis that distinct things have different
essences with the epistemological doctrine that dis­
tinct things can always be distinguished by their
essences. Second, not everything here called a "prop­
erty" - basically, functions from worlds to extensions
- is a genuine property. If this means that genuine \nproperties are not functions, this is granted; but it
does not matter, if, for every world-to-extension func­
tion, there is some genuine property such that the
function takes each world to the set of things posses­
sing that property therein. But the criticism survives
in the form: not all world-to-extension functions (not
even all cumulative ones) are induced in this way by
genuine properties. And that is undeniable. Further
progress depends on figuring out what makes genuine
properties genuine. (For more on the difference
between genuine and pseudo properties, see the art­
icles by Sydney Shoemaker mentioned in n. 16 above. )
Identity, Essence, and Indiscernibility
26 Wiggins, Sameness and Substance, p. 39.
27 Whether this helps with the general problem of saying
what properties relative identicals must have in com­
mon is another question, but one perhaps worth
exploring. See also Nicholas Griffin, Relative Identity
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1975), sects 1. 2
and 8. 5.
28 Thanks to Barry Loewer for talking to me about this;
he and Paul Boghossian are working along similar
lines. \n\n\n\nIntroduction
Modalities in the present sense used to be called
"modes" of truth. Some propositions, like "There
are horses" and "Socrates is wise, " are true but
only contingently so. That is, they might have been
false: the world might have been such that there
were no horses, and Socrates was a fool. Or, as one
is apt to say today, there are "possible worlds" in
which horses don't exist and those in which
Socrates is not wise. On the other hand, some
truths seem necessary; for example, "Horses are
animals" and "2 + I = 3. " Nothing could count as
a horse unless it was an animal; a world without
animals is ipso Jacto one without horses. Might
there be a world in which 2 plus I isn't 3? It's
difficult - in fact, it does not seem possible - to
think of such a world. What could such a world be
like? Perhaps there is a world in which 2 plus I
equals 4? But where would 3 fit into the number
series in that world? Perhaps 3 would immediately
follow 4, in which case 3 would be 4 + 1. But
wouldn't that make 4 an odd number and 3 an
even number? This doesn't make sense. Or perhaps
there is a world in which our 3 is missing, and 4 is
the immediate successor of 2? But these things
don't seem to make much sense: what makes a
natural number the number it is, is its position in
the number series, and if per impossibile 3 and 4
switched their places, 4 would now just be 3 (that
is, the number that follows 2 would still be 3) and 3
would now be 4, and nothing would have changed
- or so it seems. The reader is invited to explore
further consequences of supposing that 2 plus I
doesn't equal 3.
In "Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinc­
tions" (chapter 11), Alvin Plantinga elucidates the
basic modal concepts, including those of necessity
and possibility, and explains the important distinc­
tion between de re and de dicto modalities, defend­
ing the coherence of de re modal concepts against
some influential objections. Briefly, de dicto mod­
alities apply to dicta - that is, statements, sentences,
propositions, and the like - and de re modalities
pertain not to dicta but directly to objects in the
world. So when we say that the proposition that
horses are animals is necessa~y, the modality
involved is de dicto. When we say that Socrates is
necessarily a person but only contingently a hus-
Introduction
band, we are attributing the modal properties of
being necessarily a person and of being contin­
gently a husband to Socrates, the person, not to
any linguistic/conceptual item. We are saying of
Socrates, by whatever name he is picked out, that
he could not have been something other than a
person (a world without persons is ipso Jacto one
in which Socrates does not exist), but that he might
not have married (there is a possible world in which
he stays a bachelor).
But this convenient and often perspicuous way of
explaining de re modalities seems to assume that
Socrates, the very same person, could inhabit dif­
ferent possible worlds, having different properties
in different worlds. How is this possible? In "Iden­
tity through Possible Worlds" (chapter 12), Roder­
ick Chisholm forcefully brings out a difficulty
('Chisholm's paradox') involved in the assumption
that one and the same object can be in different
possible worlds. One possible response to this pro­
blem is David Lewis's "counterpart theory. "
According to Lewis, individuals can each inhabit
only a single world. But they can have "counter­
parts" in other worlds, and to say that Socrates is
possibly rich is to say that there is a possible world
in which Socrates' counterpart is rich. In "Counter­
parts or Double Lives? " (chapter 13), Lewis gives
detailed discussions of many issues involved in the
controversy between positions that allow different
worlds to share common parts and those that do not.
In "Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity"
(chapter 14), Robert M. Adams takes up an import­
ant related issue: Is a world constituted exclusively
by pure qualities, or do individuals as such ("this­
ness") have part in shaping it? This is the age-old
question of haecceitism, a question addressed by
Lewis as well.
Talk of possible worlds, nonactual but possible
individuals, and the like strikes some philosophers
as highly dubious - metaphysics at its speculative
extreme. In "The Nature of Possibility" (chapter
15), D. M. Armstrong undertakes to construct
possible worlds on a naturalistically acceptable
basis. His basic idea, derived from Wittgenstein,
is to generate possible worlds by combining and
recombining the materials that exist in the actual
world. Whether these combinatorial possible
worlds can fully serve to explicate all of our
modal notions remains an open question. \nPart III
Further reading
Adams, Robert M. , "Actualism and thisness, " Synthese
49 (1981), pp. 3-42.
--, "Theories of actuality, " Nous 8 (1974), pp. 211-31.
Armstrong, David, A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
Forbes, Graeme, The Metaphysics of Modality (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1985).
Jubien, Michael, "Problems with possible worlds, " in
D. F. Adams (ed. ), Philosophical Analysis (Dordrecht:
Reidel, 1988).
Kim, Jaegwon, "Possible worlds and Armstrong's combi­
natorialism, " Canadian Journal of Philosophy 16
(1986), pp. 595-612.
Lewis, David, On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Black­
well).
Loux, Michael (ed. ), The Possible and the Actual (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1979).
Lycan, William, "The trouble with possible worlds, " in
Loux (ed. ).
Marcus, Ruth Barcan, Modalities (Oxford: Oxford Uni­
versity Press, 1993).
Prior, A. N. , and Fine, Kit, Worlds, Times, and Selves
(Amherst, Mass. : University of Massachusetts Press,
1977).
Stalnaker, Robert, "Counterparts and identity, " Midwest
Studies in Philosophy 11 (1986): 121-40.
--, "Possible worlds, " Nous 10 (1976), pp. 65-75.
Van Fraassen, Bas, "All necessity is verbal necessity, "
Journal of Philosophy 74 (1977), pp. 71-85. \n11
Alvin Plantinga
1 Preliminary Distinctions and
Remarks
A. Necessity circumscribed
The distinction between necessary and contingent
truth is as easy to recognize as it is difficult to
explain to the sceptic's satisfaction. Among true
propositionsl we find some, like
(I) The average annual rainfall in Los Angeles is
about 12 inches
that are contingent, while others, like
(2) 7 + 5 = 12
or
(3) If all men are mortal and Socrates is a man,
then Socrates is mortal
that are necessary.
But what exactly do these words - 'necessary'
and 'contingent' - mean? What distinction do they
mark? Just what is supposed to be the difference
between necessary and contingent truths? We can
hardly explain that p is necessary if and only if its
denial is impossible; this is true but insufficiently
enlightening. It would be a peculiar philosopher
who had the relevant concept of impossibility well
Originally published in A. Plantinga, The Nature of
Necessity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974), chs 1, 2.
Copyright © by Oxford University Press. Reprinted by
permission of Oxford University Press.
in hand but lacked that of necessity. Instead, we
must give examples and hope for the best. In the
first place, truths of logic - truths of propositional
logic and first-order quantification theory, let us
say - are necessary in the sense in question. Such
truths are logically necessary in the narrow sense;
(3) above would be an example. But the sense of
necessity in question - call it 'broadly logical neces­
sity' - is wider than this. Truths of set theory,
arithmetic and mathematics generally are necessary
in this sense, as are a host of homelier items such as
No one is taller than himself
Red is a colour
If a thing is red, then it is coloured
No numbers are human beings
and
No prime minister is a prime number.
And of course there are many propositions debate
about whose status has played an important role in
philosophical discussion - for example,
Every person is conscious at some time or other
Every human person has a body
No one has a private language
There never was a time when there was space but
no material objects
and
There exists a being than which it is not possible
that there be a greater.
So the sense of necessity in question is wider than
that captured in first-order logic. On the other \nAlvin Plantinga
hand, it is narrower than that of causal or natural
necessity.
Voltaire once swam the Atlantic
for example is surely implausible. Indeed, there is a
clear sense in which it is impossible. Eighteenth­
century intellectuals (as distinguished from dol­
phins) simply lacked the physical equipment for
this kind of feat. Unlike Superman, furthermore,
the rest of us are incapable of leaping tall buildings
at a single bound, or (without auxiliary power of
some kind) travelling faster than a speeding bullet.
These things are impossible for us; but not in the
broadly logical sense. Again, it may be necessary -
causally necessary - that any two material objects
attract each other with a force proportional to their
mass and inversely proportional to the square of
the distance between them; it is not necessary in the
sense in question.
Another notion that must carefully be distin­
guished from necessity is what (for want of a better
name) we might call 'unrevisability' or perhaps
'ungiveupability'. Some philosophers hold that no
proposition - not even the austerest law of logic - is
in principle immune from revision. The future
development of science (though presumably not
that of theology) could lead us rationally to aban­
don any belief we now hold, including the law of
non-contradiction and modus ponens itself. So
Q! Iine: .. . it becomes folly to seek a boundary between
synthetic statements which hold contingently
on experience, and analytic statements, which
hold come what may. Any statement can be
held come what may, if we make drastic enough
adjustments elsewhere in the system. Even a
statement very close to the periphery can be
held true in the face of recalcitrant experience
by pleading hallucination or by amending cer­
tain statements of the kind called logical laws.
Conversely, by the same token, no statement is
immune to revision. Revision even of the logical
law of excluded middle has been proposed as a
means of simplifying quantum mechanics; and
what difference is there in principle between
such a shift and the shift whereby Kepler super­
seded Ptolemy, or Einstein Newton, or Darwin
Aristotle? 2
Giving up a truth oflogic - modus ponens, let us say
- in order to simplify physical theory may strike us
as like giving up a truth of arithmetic in order to
simplify the Doctrine of the Trinity. In any event,
Quine's point is that no statement is immune from
revision; for each there are circumstances under
which (perhaps with a reluctant wave) we should
give it up, and do so quite properly.
Here Quine mayor may not be right. But sup­
pose we temporarily and irenically concede that
every statement, modus ponens included, is subject
to revision. Are we then obliged to follow those
who conclude that there are no genuinely necessary
propositions? No; for their conclusion displays
confusion. To say of modus ponens that it (or its
corresponding conditional) is a necessary truth is
not, of course, to say that people will never give it
up, as if necessity were a trait conferred by long­
term popular favour. I may be unprepared to give
up the belief that I am a fine fellow in the face of
even the most recalcitrant experience; it does not
follow either that this belief is necessarily true or
that I take it to be so. Nor would the unlikely event
of everyone's sharing my truculence on this point
make any difference. Just as obviously, a proposi­
tion might be necessarily true even if most people
thought it false or held no opinion whatever on the
matter.
So necessity has little or nothing to do with what
people would in fact give up under various happy
or unhappy circumstances. But it must also be
distinguished from what cannot be rationalzy
rejected. For clearly a proposition might be both
necessary and such that on a given occasion the
rational thing to do is to give up or deny it. Suppose
I am a mathematical neophyte and have heard and
accepted rumours to the effect that the continuum
hypothesis has been shown to be independent of
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. I relate this rumour
to a habitually authoritative mathematician, who
smiles indulgently and produces a subtly fallacious
argument for the opposite conclusion - an argu­
ment which I still find compelling after careful
study. I need not be irrational in believing him
and accepting his argument, despite the fact that
in this instance his usual accuracy has deserted him
and he has told me what is necessarily false. To take
a more homely example: I have computed the sum
97 + 342 + 781 four times running, and each time
got the answer 1120; so I believe, naturally enough,
that 97 + 342 + 781 = 1120. The fact, however, is
that I made the same mistake each time - carried a
'I' instead of a '2' in the third column. But my
belief may none the less be rational. I do not know
whether circumstances could arise in which the \nreasonable thing to do would be to give up modus
ponens; but if such circumstances could and did
arise, it would not follow that modus ponens is not
a necessary truth. Broadly logical necessity, there­
fore, must be distinguished from unrevisability as
well as from causal necessity and logical necessity
strictly so called.
It must also be distinguished from the self-evid­
ent and the a priori. The latter two are epistemolo­
gical categories, and fairly vaporous ones at that.
But consider the first. What does self-evidence
come to? The answer is by no means easy. In so
far as we can make rough and intuitive sense of this
notion, however, to say that a proposition pis self­
evident is to answer the question 'how do you know
that p? ' It is to claim that p is utterly obvious -
obvious to anyone or nearly anyone who under­
stands it. If p is self-evident, then on understanding
it we simply see that it is true; our knowledge of
modus ponens may be cited as of this sort. Now
obviously many questions arise about this notion;
but in so far as we do apprehend it, we see that
many necessary propositions are not thus transpar­
ent. 97 + 342 + 781 = 1220 is indeed necessary,
but certainly not self-evident - not to most of us,
at any rate.
Still, perhaps we could say that this truth is self­
evident in an extended sense: it is a consequence of
self-evident truths by argument forms whose cor­
responding conditionals are themselves self-evid­
ent. Could we add that all necessary truths are self­
evident in this extended sense? Not with any show
of plausibility. The axiom of choice and the con­
tinuum hypothesis are either necessarily true or
necessarily false; there is little reason to think that
either of these, or either of their denials, are dedu­
cible from self-evident propositions by self-evident
steps. You may think it inappropriate to speak of
truth in connection with such an item as, say, the
continuum hypothesis. If so, I disagree; I think this
proposition just as true or just as false as the com­
monest truths and falsities of arithmetic. But no
matter; there are simpler and more obvious exam­
ples. Each of Goldbach's conjecture and Fermat's
last theorem, for example, is either necessarily true
or necessarily false; but each may turn out to be
such that neither it nor its denial is self-evident in
the extended sense. That is to say, for all I know,
and, so far as I know, for all anyone knows, this may
be so. I do not mean to assert that this is possiNv so,
in the broadly logical sense; for (as could plausibly
be argued) where S is the set of self-evident pro­
positions and R that of self-evident argument
Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinctions
forms, a proposition p possibly follows from S by
R only if p actually, and, indeed, necessarily thus
follows. And since I do not know whether Gold­
bach's conjecture or Fermat's theorem do follow
from S by R, I am not prepared to say that it is
possible that they do so. My point is only that the
question whether, for example, Goldbach's conjec­
ture is self-evident in the extended sense is distinct
from the question whether it is a necessary truth.
So not all necessary propositions are self-evid­
ent. What about the converse? Are some contingent
propositions self-evident? The question is vexed,
and the answer not obvious. Is the proposition I
express by saying '2 + 2 = 4 is self-evident for me
now' self-evident for me now? Perhaps so, perhaps
not. Perhaps the idea of self-evidence is not sharp
enough to permit an answer. What is once more
important is that a negative answer is not immedi­
ate and obvious; self-evidence must be distin­
guished, initially, at least, from necessity.
Not strictly to the point but worth mentioning is
the fact that some propositions seem or appear to be
self-evident although they are not necessarily true
or, for that matter, true at all. Some of the best
examples are furnished by the Russellian para­
doxes. It seems self-evident that for every condi­
tion or property P there is the set of just those
things displaying P; it seems equally self-evident
that there is such a condition or property as that
of being non-self-membered. But of course these
(together with some other apparently self-evident
propositions) self-evidently yield the conclusion
that there is a set that is and is not a member of
itself; and this is self-evidently false. Some may see
in this the bankruptcy of self-evidence. It is not my
purpose, in these introductory pages, to defend
self-evidence or answer the question how we
know the truth of such propositions as modus
ponens. Still, the conclusion is hasty. Our embar­
rassment in the face of such paradoxes shows that a
proposition may seem to be self-evident when in
fact it is false. How does it follow that modus ponens,
for example, is not self-evident, or that there is
some other or better answer to the question of
how we know that it is true? The senses sometimes
deceive us; square towers sometimes appear round.
It does not follow either that we do not know the
truth of such propositions as The Empire State
Building is rectangular or that we have some non­
empirical method of determining its truth.
Finally, the distinction between the necessary
and the contingent must not be confused with the
alleged cleavage between the a priori and the \nAlvin Plantinga
a posteriori. The latter distinction, indeed, is
shrouded in obscurity. But given the rough and
intuitive understanding we have of the terms
involved, it is clear that the distinction they mark,
like that between what is self-evident and what is
not (and unlike that between the necessary and
contingent), is epistemological. Furthermore, the
relation between what is known a priori and what
is necessarily true is by no means simple and
straightforward. It is immediately obvious that
not all necessary truths are known a priori; for
there are necessary truths - Fermat's last theorem
or its denial, for example - that are not known at
all, and a fortiori are not known a priori. Is it rather
that every necessary truth that is known, is known a
priori? This question divides itself: (a) is every
necessary truth that is known, known a priori to
everyone who knows it? and (b) is every necessary
truth that is known to someone or other, known a
priori to some one or other? The answer to (a) is
clear. Having taken the trouble to understand the
proof, you may know a priori that the Schroeder­
Bernstein theorem is a consequence of some stand­
ard formulation of set theory. IfI know that you are
properly reliable in these matters and take your
word for it, then I may know that truth a posteriori
- as I may ifI've forgotten the proof but remember
having verified that indeed there is one. To learn
the value of the sine of 54 degrees, I consult a
handy table of trigonometric functions: my know­
ledge of this item is then a posteriori. In the same
way, even such simple truths of arithmetic as that
75 + 36 = 111 can be known a posteriori. So the
answer to (a) is obvious. The answer to question (b)
is perhaps not quite so clear; but elsewhere give
some examples of truths that are necessary but
probably not known a priori to any of us. 3
So necessity cannot be identified with what is
known a priori. Should we say instead that a pro­
position is necessary if and only if it is knowable
a priori? But by whom? We differ widely in our
ability to apprehend necessary truths; and no doubt
some are beyond the grasp of even the best of us. Is
the idea, then, that a proposition is necessarily true,
if and only if it is possible, in the broadly logical
sense, that some person, human or divine, knows it
a priori? Perhaps this is true. Indeed, perhaps every
truth whatever is possibly known a priori to some
person - to God if not to man. But suppose we
avoid the turbid waters of speculative theology and
restrict our question to human knowledge: must a
contingent proposition, if known, be known a
posteriori? The question is as vexed as the notion
of a priori knowledge is obscure. What is known a
priori is known independently, somehow or other,
of experience. My knowledge of modus ponens or
that 7 + 5 = 12 would be cited by way of example.
But how about my knowledge that I do know that
7 + 5 = 12? Is that independent of experience in
the requisite fashion? Suppose
(4) I know that 7 + 5 = 12;
cannot I know a priori that (4) is true? And this
despite the contingency of (4)? Perhaps you will say
that I know (4) only if! know
(4) I believe that 7 + 5 = 12;
and perhaps you will add that knowledge of this last
item must be a posteriori. But is this really true? On
a strict construction of 'independent of experience'
it may seem so; for surely I must have had some
experience to know that I thus believe - if only that
needed to acquire the relevant concepts. But on
such a strict construction it may seem equally
apparent that I know no truths at all a priori; even
to know that 7 + 5 = 12, I must have had some
experience. There is no specific sort of experience I
need, to know that 7 + 5 = 12; and this (subject, of
course, to all the difficulty of saying what counts as
a sort here) is perhaps what distinguishes my
knowledge of this truth as a priori. But the same
thing holds for my knowledge of (4'). Belief is not
(pace Hume) a special brilliance or vividness of idea
or image; there is no specific sort of experience I
must have to know that I believe that 7 + 5 = 12.
So perhaps I know a priori that I believe that
7 + 5 = 12. If so, then I have a priori knowledge
of a contingent truth. Similarly, perhaps my
knowledge that I exist is a priori. For perhaps I
know a priori that I believe that I exist; I also know
a priori that ifI believe that I exist, then indeed I do
exist. But then nothing but exceptional obtuseness
could prevent my knowing a priori that I exist,
despite the contingency of that proposition.
It is fair to say, therefore, that I probably know
some contingent truths a priori. At any rate it
seems clearly possible that I do so. So necessity
cannot be identified with what is knowable
a priori. 4 Unrevisability, self-evidence, and a priori
knowledge are difficult notions; but conceding that
we do have a grasp - one that is perhaps halting and
infirm - of these notions, we must also concede that
the notion of necessary truth coincides with none of
them. \nB. Modality de dicto and modality de re
I have spoken of necessity as a property or trait of
propositions and tried to distinguish it from others
sometimes confused with it. This is the idea of
modality de dicto. An assertion of modality de
dicto, for example
(5) necessarily nine is composite
predicates a modal property - in this instance
necessary truth - of another dictum or proposition:
(6) nine is composite.
Much traditional philosophy, however, bids us
distinguish this notion from another. We may
attribute necessary truth to a proposition; but
we may also ascribe to some object - the number
9, let us say - the necessary or essential possession of
such a property as that of being composite. The
distinction between modality de dicto and modality
de re is apparently embraced by Aristotle, who
observes (Prior Analytics, i. 9) that 'It happens
sometimes that the conclusion is necessary when
only one premiss is necessary; not, however, either
premiss taken at random, but the major premiss'. 5
Here Aristotle means to sanction such inferences
as
(7) Every human being is necessarily rational
(8) Every animal in this room is a human being
so
(9) Every animal In this room IS necessarily
rational;
he means to reject such inferences as
(10) Every rational creature is in Australia
(11) Every human being is necessarily a rational
creature
so
(12) Every human being is necessarily in Aus­
tralia.
Now presumably Aristotle would accept as
sound the inference of (9) from (7) and (8) (granted
the truth of(8)). Ifhe is right, therefore, then (9) is
not to be read as
Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinctions
(9') It is necessarily true that every animal in this
room is rational;
for (9') is clearly false. Instead, (9) must be con­
strued (if Aristotle is correct) as the claim that each
animal in this room has a certain property - the
property of being rational - necessarily or essen­
tially. That is to say, (9) must be taken as an
expression of modality de re rather than modality
de dicto. And what this means is that (9) is not the
assertion that a certain dictum or proposition -
every animal in this room is rational - is necessarily
true, but is instead the assertion that each res of a
certain kind has a certain property essentially or
necessarily - or, what comes to the same, the asser­
tion that each such thing has the modal property of
being essentially rational.
In Summa contra Gentiles, St Thomas considers
the question whether God's foreknowledge of
human action - a foreknowledge that consists,
according to St Thomas, in God's simply seeing
the relevant action's taking place - is consistent
with human freedom. In this connection he
inquires into the truth of
(13) What is seen to be sitting IS necessarily
sitting.
For suppose at t\ God sees that Theaetetus is
sitting at fz. If(13) is true, then presumably Theae­
tetus is necessarily sitting at t2, in which case he was
not free, at that time, to do anything but sit.
St Thomas concludes that (13) is true taken de
dicto but false taken de re; that is
(13') It is necessarily true that whatever is seen to
be sitting is sitting
is true but
(13") Whatever is seen to be sitting has the prop­
erty of sitting necessarily or essentially
is false. The deterministic argument, however,
requires the truth of (13"); and hence that argu­
ment fails. Like Aristotle, then, Aquinas appears to
believe that modal statements are of two kinds.
Some predicate a modality of another statement
(modality de dicto); but others predicate of an object
the necessary or essential possession of a property;
and these latter express modality de reo
But what is it, according to Aristotle and
Aquinas, to say that a certain object has a certain \nAlvin Plantinga
property essentially or necessarily? That, presum­
ably, the object in question could not conceivably
have lacked the property in question; that under no
possible circumstances could that object have failed
to possess that property. Here, as in the case of
modality de dicto, no mere definition is likely to be
of much use; what we need instead is example and
articulation. I am thinking of the number 5; what I
am thinking of then, is prime. Being prime, further­
more, is a property that it could not conceivably
have lacked. Of course, the proposition
(14) What I am thinking of is prime
is not necessarily true. This has no bearing on the
question whether what I am thinking of could have
failed to be prime; and indeed it could not. No
doubt the number 5 could have lacked many prop­
erties that in fact it has: the property of numbering
the fingers on a human hand would be an example.
But that it should have lacked the property of being
prime is quite impossible. And a statement of mod­
ality de re asserts of some object that it has some
property essentially in this sense.
Aquinas points out that a given statement of
modality de dicto ~ (13') for example ~ may be
true when the corresponding statement of modality
de re ~ (13") in this instance ~ is false. We might
add that in other such pairs the de dicto statement is
false but the de re statement true; if! am thinking of
the number 17, then
(15) What I am thinking of is essentially prime
is true, but
(IS') Necessarily, what I am thinking of is prime
is false.
The distinction between modality de re and
modality de dicta is not confined to ancient and
medieval philosophy. G. E. Moore discusses the
idealistic doctrine of internal relations; 6 he con­
cludes that it is false or confused or perhaps both.
What is presently interesting is that he takes this
doctrine to be the claim that all relational proper­
ties are internal ~ which claim, he thinks, is just the
proposition that every object has each of its rela­
tional properties essentially in the above sense. The
doctrine of internal relations, he says, 'implies, in
fact, quite generally, that any term which does in
fact have a particular relational property, could not
have existed without having that property. And in
saying this it obviously flies in the face of common
sense. It seems quite obvious that in the case of
many relational properties which things have, the
fact that they have them is a mere matter of fact;
that the things in question might have existed with­
out having them. ,7 Now Moore is prepared to
concede that objects do have some of their rela­
tional properties essentially. Like Aristotle and
Aquinas, therefore, Moore holds that some objects
have some of their properties essentially and others
non-essentially or accidentally.
One final example: Norman Malcolm believes
that the Analogical Argument for other minds
requires the assumption that one must learn what,
for example, pain is 'from his own case'. But, he
says, 'if! were to learn what pain is from perceiving
my own pain then I should, necessarily, have
learned that pain is something that exists only
when I feel pain. For the pain that serves as my
paradigm of pain (i. e. my own) has the property of
existing only when I feel it. That property is essen­
tial, not accidental; it is nonsense to suppose that
the pain I feel could exist when I did not feel it. 's
This argument appears to require something like
the following premiss:
(16) If! acquire my concept of C by experiencing
objects and all the objects that serve as my
paradigms have a property P essentially,
then my concept of C is such that the pro­
position Whatever is an instance ofC has P is
necessarily true.
Is (16) true? I shall not enter that question here.
But initially, at least, it looks as if Malcolm means
to join Aristotle, Aquinas and Moore in support of
the thesis that objects typically have both essential
and accidental properties; apparently he means to
embrace the conception of modality de reo
There is a prima facie distinction, then, between
modality de dicto and modality de reo This distinc­
tion, furthermore, has a long and distinguished
history. Many contemporary philosophers who
find the idea of modality de dicto tolerably clear,
however, look utterly askance at that of modality de
re, suspecting it a source of boundless confusion.
Indeed, there is abroad the subtle suggestion that
the idea of modality de re is not so much confused
as vaguely immoral or frivolous ~ as if to accept or
employ it is to be guilty of neglecting serious work
in favour of sporting with Amaryllis in the shade.
In the next section, therefore, we shall examine
objections to modality de reo \n2 Modality De Re: Objections
A. The problem
One who accepts the idea of modality de re typically
holds that some objects - 9, for example - have
some of their properties - being composite, for
example - essentially or necessari~y. 9 That is to say,
9 has this property and could not conceivably have
lacked it. And here the force of 'could have' is that
broadly logical notion of possibility outlined in
section 1. This is a notion of possibility broader
than that of casual or natural possibility: it is cau­
sally impossible that David should have the attri­
bute of travelling from Boston to Los Angeles at a
velocity greater than the speed of light, but not
impossible in the sense in question. On the other
hand, this sense is narrower than that of logical
possibility strictly so called. That someone should
have the attribute of knowing that 7+5 = 13 is
impossible, and impossible in the sense in question;
the resources oflogic alone, however, do not suffice
to demonstrate this impossibility. The claim that
objects have some of their properties essentially or
necessarily is part of what we may call essentialism.
To this contention the essentialist, as I shall under­
stand him, adds the claim that objects have acci­
dental as well as essential properties. Socrates, for
example, has self-identity essentially, but is acci­
dentally snub-nosed; while he could not have been
self-diverse, he could have been non-snub-nosed.
Still further, essentialism (as here understood)
includes the idea that some properties are essential
to some but not all objects; thus 9 but not 5 is
essentially composite. So the essentialist holds
that objects have both essential and accidental
properties; and that some properties are had essen­
tially by some but not all objects.
According to Quine, essentialism 'is the doctrine
that some of the attributes of a thing (quite inde­
pendently of the language in which the thing is
referred to, if at all) may be essential to the thing
and others accidental'. 10 I take the point to be this.
When the essentialist says of something x that it has
a certain property P essentially, he means to be
predicating a property of x - a property distinct
from p. ll For every property P there is the prop­
erty of having P essentially; and if x has P essen­
tially, then x has the property having P essential~y.
This has two important consequences. In the first
place, a proposition of the form x has P essentially
entails that something has P essentially and is there­
fore properly subject to existential generalization.
Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinctions
To say that 9 is essentially composite is to predicate
a property - that of being essentially composite - of
9; hence
(1) 9 is essentially composite
entails
(2) There is at least one thing that is essentially
composite.
A second consequence: if x has P essentially,
then the same claim must be made for anything
identical with x. If 9 is essentially composite, so is
Paul's favourite number, that number being 9.
This follows from the principle sometimes called
'Leibniz's Law' or 'The Indiscernibility of Ident­
icals':
(3) For any property P and any objects x andy, if
x is identical withy, then x has P if and only if
y has P.
Like Caesar's wife Calpurnia, this principle is
entirely above reproach. 12 But then, if an object x
has a property P essentially, it has the property of
having P essentially; by (3), therefore, anything
identical with x shares that distinction with it.
Accordingly, if an object has a property essentially,
so does anything identical with it. Having P essen­
tially is a property of an object x; it is not, for
example, a three-termed relation involving x, P,
and (say) some description of x.
The essentialist, therefore, holds that some
objects have both accidental and essential proper­
ties - properties not everything has essentially. He
adds that where P is a property, so is having P
essentially. And many philosophers view these
claims with suspicion, if not outright disdain.
What are the objections to it?
B. Essentialism and set-theoretical reduction
Some who accept essentialism point, by way of
illustration, to the fact that the number 9 has the
property being composite essentially or necessarily.
Gilbert Harman is unsympathetic to this notion. 13
Arguing that 'the claim that numbers have such
essential properties is incompatible with the famil­
iar idea that number theory can be reduced to set
theory in various ways', 14 he taxes those who accept
de re modality with putting forward this idea 'less
as an empirical hypothesis than as a metaphysical \nAlvin Plantinga
or religious doctrine, ;! 5 and he rhetorically asks
'Why should we take them seriously? '
While I have no ready answer to this last ques­
tion, I do feel that the theory of de re modality,
taken as a religious doctrine, is a bit thin. It will
never replace the Heidelberg Catechism, or even
Supralapsarianism. What is presently interesting,
however, is Harman's argument for the thesis that
9's being essentially composite is incompatible with
this familiar idea. How does it go? According to the
familiar idea, says Harman,
the natural numbers can be identified with any
of various sequences of sets. Zero might be
identified with the null set, and each succeeding
natural number with the set whose only mem­
ber is the set identified with the previous num­
ber. Or a natural number might be identified
with the set of all natural numbers less than it.
And there are an infinity of other possible iden­
tifications all of which allow the full develop­
ment of number theory. !6
So far, so good. That the natural numbers can be
identified, in this fashion, with various distinct set­
theoretical structures is indeed a familiar idea. But
of course there is no reason to stick thus unimagi­
natively to sets; we may, if we wish, identify Pres­
ident Nixon with zero and the remaining numbers
with propositions about him: Nixon is less than one
foot tall, Nixon is less than two feet tall, .. . All we
need for such 'identification' is a countably infinite
set of objects together with a relation! 7 under
which they form an infinite sequence or progres­
sion. Since practically any object you please is the
tenth element in some progression, any object you
please can be 'identified', in this fashion, with 9.
'But', continues Harman, 'being a composite
number is not an essential property of any set.
Therefore', he says, 'if numbers can be identified
with sets and de re necessity is in question, no
number is necessarily a composite number. Being
a composite number is not an essential property of
any number. ,! 8
Here there may be less than meets the eye. How,
exactly, are we to construe this argument? Taken
at face value, it appears to involve an application
of Leibniz's Law; perhaps we can outline it as
follows:
(4) No set is essentially a composite number,
that is,
(5) No set has the property of being essentially
composite.
But
(6) Numbers can be identified with sets.
Therefore (given Leibniz's Law),
(7) No number has the property of being essen­
tially composite.
Put thus baldly, this argument, obviously, is about
as imperforate as an afghan knitted by an elephant.
We might as well argue that 9 does not have the
property of being divisible by 3, since Nixon does
not, and it can be identified with him.
The point is this. That number theory can be
reduced to set theory in various ways is indeed, in
Harman's words, a familiar idea. It is widely recog­
nized and accepted as accurate and as part of the
current lore about numbers and sets. And according
to this familiar idea, a given number can be 'identi­
fied' with any of many distinct sets. But what this
comes to (in so far as the idea in question is widely
accepted) is only this: there are many denumerable
families of sets that form a progression under some
(recursive) relation. Accordingly, for any number n,
there are many distinct sets each of which is the n+
1st element in some progression and can therefore
play the role of n in some set-theoretical develop­
ment of number theory. But of course the fact that
numbers can be identified in this sense with Nixon
or with various distinct set-theoretical objects does
not suggest that any number is in fact identical with
Nixon or some set; it is this latter, however, that is
required for an application of Leibniz's Law.
C. Essentialism and the number of apostles
According to the essentialist, for each property P
there is the property of having P essentially - a
property an object has (if at all) in itself, regardless
of how it may be described or referred to. If 9 is
essentially composite, so is Paul's favourite num­
ber, that number being 9. The essentialist therefore
rejects the idea that 9 qua, as they say, Paul's
favourite number has the property of being his
favourite number essentially, but qua the successor
of 8 has that property accidentally, this would be to
say that being essential(y Paul's favourite number is
not a property at all but perhaps a relation invol­
ving 9, the property of being Paul's favourite \nnumber, and a designation of 9. He holds instead
that such an item as being essentially composite is a
property - in this case, one enjoyed by 9; hence it is
a property of Paul's favourite number, if indeed
Paul's favourite number is 9.
It is here that he makes his mistake, according to
William Kneale. 19 For, says Kneale, an object does
not have a property P essentially just as an object (to
speak oracularly); instead it has P essentially (if at
all) relative to certain ways of specifying or selecting
it for attention - and perhaps accidentally, relative
to other ways. When we say that x has P essentially
or necessarily, this must be construed as 'an ellip­
tical statement of relative necessity, ;20 that is, as
short for something like 'x has P necessarily relat­
ive to D' where D is some description. Of course if
P is a truistic property - one which, like is red or is
not red, is had necessarily by every object relative to
every way of describing it, then this reference to
ways of selecting x may perhaps be suppressed
without undue impropriety, so that we may say
simpliciter that P is essential to x. In these cases,
then, the reference to a description is otiose; but
where P is not truistic, such a reference is crucial,
even if implicit. Fundamentally, therefore, Kneale
holds that there is no such thing, for a property P,
as the property of having P essentially; these are
only three-termed relations involving P, an object
x, and the various ways of selecting x for attention.
But why so? The opposite view, he says, is based
on the mistaken assumption that
properties may be said to belong to individuals
necessarily or contingently, as the case may be,
without regard to the ways in which the indivi­
duals are selected for attention. It is no doubt
true to say that the number 12 is necessarily
composite, but it is certainly not correct to say
that the number of apostles is necessarily com­
posite, unless the remark is to be understood as
an elliptical statement of relative necessity. And
again, it is no doubt correct to say that this at
which I am pointing is contingently white, but
it is certainly not correct to say that the white
paper at which I am looking is contingently
white, unless again, the remark is to be under­
stood as elliptical. 21
Kneale's argument does not wear its structure
upon its sleeve. How, exactly, does it go? What are
the premisses? The conclusion, pretty clearly, is that
an object does not have a property necessarily in
itse(( or just as an object; it has it necessarily or
Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinctions
contingently, as the case may be, relative to certain
descriptions of the object. There is no such thing as
the property of being necessarily composite; and a
proposition like
(8) The number 12 is necessarily composite
does not predicate a property of 12; instead it
predicates a relation of 12, the property of being
composite, and a 'way of selecting 12 for attention'.
But why should we think so? How are we to con­
strue the argument? Perhaps it has something like
the following premisses:
(9) 12 = the number of apostles.
(8) The number 12 is necessarily composite.
(10) If (8), then if there is such a property as being
necessarily composite, 12 has it.
(11) The number of apostles is not necessarily
composite.
(12) If (11), then if there is such a property as
being necessarily composite, the number of the
apostles lacks it.
It therefore follows that there is no such prop­
erty as being necessarily composite; hence, it is false
that for any property P, there is the property of
having P essentially or necessarily; and hence the
essentialist thesis is mistaken.
Now clearly Kneale's argument requires Leib­
niz's Law as an additional premiss - a principle the
essentialist will be happy to concede. And if we add
this premiss, then the argument is apparently valid.
But why should we accept (11)? Consider an ana­
logous argument for the unwelcome conclusion
that necessary truth or being necessarily true is not a
property that a proposition has in itself or just as a
proposition, but only relative to certain descrip­
tions of it:
(13) The proposition that 7 + 5 = 12 is neces­
sarily true.
(14) The proposition I am thinking of is not
necessarily true.
(15) The proposition that 7 + 5 = 12 is identical
with the proposition I am thinking of.
Therefore
(16) Being necessarily true is not a property.
This argument is feeble and unconvincing; if
(15) is true, then (14) must be false. But is not the \nAlvin Plantinga
very same comment appropriate to (11) and (9)? If
(9) is true, then presumably (II) is false. And so the
question becomes acute: why does Kneale take (11)
to be true? The answer, I suspect, is that he reads
(11) as
(11') The proposition the number of apostles IS
composite is not necessarily true.
More generally, Kneale seems to think of sentences
of the form '-has. .. essentially' (where the first
blank is filled by a singular term and the second by
an expression denoting a property) as short for or a
stylistic variant of the corresponding sentences of
the form 'the proposition - has. .. is necessarily
true'; where a ranges over singular terms and 'B'
over expressions denoting properties, Kneale
apparently means to ascribe something like the
following definitional schema to the essentialist:
DJ r a has B essentially 1 = def. r The proposi­
tion a has B is necessarily true 1.
But this ascription is at best uncharitable as an
account of what the essentialist means by his char­
acteristic assertions. As noted above, the latter
holds that a proposition like
(17) 12 is essentially composite
predicates a property of 12, and hence entails (by
way of existential generalization)
(18) There is at least one object x such that x is
essentially composite.
Applying DJ (and making appropriate grammatical
adjustments) we have
(19) There is at least one object x such that the
proposition x is composite is necessarily true.
But of course (19) as it stands is grotesque; there is
no such thing as the proposition x is composite; the
words 'x is composite' do not express a proposition.
The essentialist may be benighted, but he does not
confound (18), which he accepts, with such a dark­
ling hodge-podge as (19).
Fundamentally, however, to saddle the essenti­
alist with DJ is to ignore his claim that an item like
(17) is a de re assertion that predicates a proper~y of
the number 12. If he accepts (17), then he will also
hold that the number of apostles is essentially
composite; and he will be utterly unshaken by the
de dicto truth that
(11') the number of apostles IS composite IS not
necessarily true.
A central feature of his programme, after all, is to
distinguish such de re propositions as (17) from
such de dicto items as (11'); and to ascribe D J to
him is to ignore, not discredit, his claim that there
is such a distinction to be drawn.
But perhaps we were being hasty. Suppose we
look again at Kneale's argument. Perhaps he does
not mean to ascribe D J to the essentialist: perhaps
we are to understand his argument as follows. We
have been lold that 'x has P essentially' means that
it is impossible or inconceivable that x should have
lacked P; that there is no conceivable set of circum­
stances such that, should they have obtained, x
would not have had P. Well, consider the number
12 and the number of apostles. Perhaps it is impos­
sible that the number 12 should have lacked the
property of being composite; but it is certainly
possible that the number of apostles should have
lacked it; for clearly the number of apostles could
have been 11, in which case it would not have been
composite. Hence being essentially composite is not a
property, and the essentialist thesis fails.
How could the defender of essentialism
respond? The relevant portion of the argument
may perhaps be stated as follows:
(20) The number of apostles could have been II.
(21) If the number of apostles had been 11, then
the number of apostles would have been
prime.
Hence
(22) It is possible that the number of apostles
should have been prime
and therefore
(23) The number of apostles IS not essentially
composite.
But the essentialist has an easy retort. The argu­
ment is successful only if (23) is construed as the
assertion de re that a certain number ~ 12 as it
happens ~ does not have the property of being
essentially composite. Now (22) can be read de
dicto as \n(22a) The proposition the number of apostles is
prime is possible;
it may also be read de re, that is, as
(22b) The number that numbers the apostles
(that is, the number that as things in fact
stand numbers the apostles) could have
been prime.
The latter entails (23); the former, of course,
does not. Hence to preserve the argument we
must take (22) as (22b). Now consider (20). The
same de rei de dicto ambiguity is once again present.
Read de dicto it makes the true (if unexciting)
assertion that
(20a) The proposition there are just 11 apostles is
possible.
Read de re, however - that is, as
(20b) The number that (as things in fact stand)
numbers the apostles could have been 11
- it will be indignantly repudiated by the essen­
tialist; for the number that numbers the apostles
is 12, and accordingly could not have been 11.
We must therefore take (20) as (20a).
This brings us to (21). If (20a) and (21) are to
entail (22b), then (21) must be construed as
(21a) If the proposition the number of apostles is 11
had been true, then the number that (as
things in fact stand) numbers the apostles
would not have been composite.
But surely this is false. For what it says is that if
there had been 11 apostles, then the number that in
fact does number the apostles - the number 12 -
would not have been composite; and at best this is
outrageous. No doubt any inclination to accept
(21a) may be traced to an unremarked penchant
for confusing it with
(24) If the proposition the number of apostles is 11
had been true, then the number that would
have numbered the apostles would have been
prime.
(24), of course, though true, is of no use to Kneale's
argument. Accordingly, Kneale's objection to
essentialism is at best inconclusive.
Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinctions
D. Essentialism and the mathematical cyclist
Let us therefore turn to a different but related
complaint. Quine argues that talk of a difference
between necessary and contingent attributes of an
object is baffling:
Perhaps I can evoke the appropriate sense of
bewilderment as follows. Mathematicians may
conceivably be said to be necessarily rational
and not necessarily two-legged; and cyclists
necessarily two-legged and not necessarily
rational. But what of an individual who counts
among his eccentricities both mathematics and
cycling? Is this concrete individual necessarily
rational and contingently two-legged or vice
versa? Just insofar as we are talking referentially
of the object, with no special bias towards a
background grouping of mathematicians as
against cyclists or vice versa, there is no sem­
blance of sense in rating some of his attributes
as necessary and others as contingent. Some of
his attributes count as important and others as
unimportant, yes, some as enduring and others
as fleeting; but none as necessary or contin­
gent. 22
Noting the existence of a philosophical tradition
in which this distinction is made, Quine adds that
one attributes it to Aristotle 'subject to contradic­
tion by scholars, such being the penalty for attribu­
tions to Aristotle'. None the less, he says, the
distinction is 'surely indefensible'.
Now this passage reveals that Q! .tine has little
enthusiasm for the distinction between essential
and accidental attributes; but how exactly are we
to understand him? Perhaps as follows. The essen­
tialist, Quine thinks, will presumably accept
(25) Mathematicians are necessarily rational but
not necessarily bipedal
and
(26) Cyclists are necessarily bipedal but not
necessarily rational.
But now suppose that
(27) Paul K. Zwier is both a cyclist and a math­
ematician.
From these we may infer both that \nAlvin Plantinga
(28) Zwier is necessarily rational but not neces­
sarily bipedal
and
(29) Zwier is necessarily bipedal but not neces­
sarily rational
which appear to contradict each other twice over:
(28) credits Zwier with the property of being neces­
sarily rational, while (29) denies him that property;
(29) alleges that he has the property of being essen­
tially bipedal, an allegation disputed by (28).
This argument is unsuccessful as a refutation of
the essentialist, whatever its merits as an evocation
of a sense of bewilderment. For consider the infer­
ence of (29) from (26) and (27). (29) is a conjunc­
tion, as are (26) and (27). And presumably its first
conjunct
(30) Zwier is necessarily bipedal
is supposed to follow from the first conjuncts of
(26) and (27), viz.
(31) Cyclists are necessarily bipedal
and
(32) Zwier is a cyclist.
But sensitive, as by now we are, to de rei de dicto
ambiguity, we see that (31) can be read de dicto as
(31a) Necessarily, all cyclists are bipedal
or de re as
(31b) Every cyclist has the property of being
necessarily bipedal.
And if (30) is to follow from (32) and (31), the latter
must be seen as predicating of every cyclist the
property (30) ascribes to Zwier; (31), that is, must
be read as (31 b). So taken, there is less than a ghost
of a chance the essentialist will accept it. No doubt
he will concede the necessary truth of
(33) All (well-formed) cyclists are bipedal
and thus the truth of (31a); he will accept no
obligation to infer that such well-formed cyclists
as Zwier are essentially bipedal. And the same
comments apply, mutatis mutandis, to the inference
of the second conjunct of (29) from those of (26)
and (27). Accordingly, (26) is true but of no use to
the argument if we read it de dicto; read de re, it will
be repudiated by the essentialist.
Taken as a refutation of the essentialist, there­
fore, this passage misses the mark; but perhaps we
should emphasize its second half and take it instead
as an expression of a sense of bewildered puzzle­
ment as to what de re modality might conceivably
be. Similar protestations may be found elsewhere
in Quine's works:
An object, of itself and by whatever name or
none, must be seen as having some of its traits
necessarily and others contingently, despite
the fact that the latter traits follow just as ana­
lytically from some ways of specifying the
object as the former do from other ways of
specifying it.
And
This means adapting an invidious attitude
towards certain ways of specifying x. .. and
favouring other ways. .. as somehow better
revealing the 'essence' of the object.
But 'such a philosophy', he says, 'is as unreasonable
by my lights as it is by Carnap's or Lewis's, .23
Here Q]. Iine's central complaint is this: a given
object, according to the essentialist, has some of its
properties essentially and others accidentally,
despite the fact that the latter follow from certain
ways of specifying the object just as the former do
from others. So far, fair enough. Snub-nosedness
(we may suppose) is not one of Socrates' essential
attributes; none the less it follows (in the sense in
question) from the description 'the snub-nosed
teacher of Plato'. As we construe him, furthermore,
the essentialist holds that among the essential attri­
butes of an object are certain non-truistic proper­
ties - properties which, unlike the property of
being red or not red, do not follow from every
description; so it will indeed be true, as Quine
suggests, that ways of uniquely specifying an object
are not all on the same footing. Those from which
each of its essential properties follows must be
awarded the accolade as best revealing the essence
of the object.
But what, exactly, is 'unreasonable' about this?
And how, precisely, is it baffling? The real depth of
Quine's objection, as I understand it, is this: he \nholds that 'A's are necessarily B's' must, if it means
anything at all, mean something like 'necessarily,
A's are B's'; for 'necessity resides in the way we talk
about things, not in the things we talk about'. And
hence the bafflement in asking, of some specific
individual who is both cyclist and mathematician,
Notes
Necessity, truth and allied properties are at bottom (as
I see it) properties of propositions, not sentences. A
sentence is true, on a given occasion of its use, if on
that occasion it expresses a true proposition. My con­
ception of proposition as non-linguistic entity
expressed by but distinct from sentences parallels
Moore's idea of proposition, Frege's of Gedanke, and
Bolzano's of Satz. Some find propositions objection­
able - on the grounds, apparently, that they lack 'a
clear criterion of identity'. In so far as the alleged
debility can be made tolerably clear, it is one that
propositions share with electrons, mountains, wars -
and sentences.
2 W. V. O. Quine, 'Two dogmas of empiricism', in
From a Logical Point of View, 2nd edn (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1961), p. 43.
See A. Plantinga, The Nature of Necessity (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1974), ch. 5, sect. 2. See also idem,
'World and essence', Philosophical Review 79 (1970),
p. 481.
4 In 'Naming and necessity', in D. Davidson and G.
Harman (eds), Semantics of Natural Language (Dor­
drecht: Reidel, 1972, p. 253), Saul Kripke suggests
that another kind of proposition is contingent but
knowable a priori. Suppose, he says, that I fix the
reference of the term 'one metre' as the length of a
certain stick (call it S) at a time t. Then 'one metre' is
not synonymous with the phrase 'the length of S at t'
but is instead a proper name or 'rigid designator'
of the length S actually has at t. And under these
conditions, he adds, my knowledge of the pro­
position S is one metre long at t is a priori despite
the contingency of that proposition. 'If he used
stick S to fix the reference of the term "one metre",
then as a result of this kind of "definition" (which is
not an abbreviative or synonymous definition) he
knows automatically without further investigation,
that S is one metre long' (p. 275). Here we may have
doubts. Suppose I have never seen S and hold no
views as to its length. I propose none the less to use
'one metre' as a rigid designator of the length, what­
ever it is, that S actually displays at t. After thus
determining the reference of 'one metre', I know
that the sentence'S is one metre long at t' expresses a
truth in my language; the truth it does express, how­
ever, is one I neither know nor believe. So my thus
determining the reference of 'one metre' is not
Modalities: Basic Concepts and Distinctions
whether he is essentially rational and contingently
two-legged, or vice versa. Perhaps the claim is,
finally, that while we can make a certain rough
sense of modality de dicto, we can understand mod­
ality de re only if we can explain it in terms of the
former.
sufficient for my knowing a priori that S is one
metre long.
What I do know a priori (or so it seems to me) is
that if I use 'one metre' as a rigid designator of the
length of S (and given the appropriate function of the
phrase'S is. .. long at t'), then the sentence'S is one
metre long at t' expresses a truth in my language. This
conditional, however, is necessary rather than contin­
gent.
The issues here are complex, and much more must
be said; unfortunately 'Naming and necessity' came
into my hands too late for the detailed consideration
I should like to have given this and other issues it
raIses.
5 Quoted by William Kneale in 'Modality de dicto and
de re', in E. Nagel, P. Suppes, and A. Tarski (eds),
Logic, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science (Stan­
ford, Calif. : Stanford University Press, 1962), p. 623.
6 G. E. Moore, Philosophical Studies (London: Rout­
ledge & Kegan Paul, 1951), p. 276.
7 Ibid. , p. 289.
8 Norman Malcolm, 'Wittgenstein's Philosophical
Investigations', Philosophical Review 63 (1954); repro
in idem, Knowledge and Certainty (Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc. , 1963). The quoted passage is
on p. 105 of the latter volume.
9 In speaking of the view in question, I use the words
'necessarily' and 'essentially' as synonyms. Of course I
neither assume nor suggest that these words are in fact
synonyms as ordinarily employed. See R. Marcus,
'Essential attribution', Journal of Philosophy 68 (Apr.
1971), p. 193.
10 W. V. O. Qpine, 'Three grades of modal involve­
ment', in The Ways of Paradox (New York: Random
House, 1966), p. 173.
11 Alternatively, we might take it that what he asserts is a
proposition predicating of x and P a special relation of
property-inherence: that in which an object and a of
property stand if the former has the latter essentially.
Such a proposition, presumably, will be equivalent to
one predicating of x the property of having P essen­
tially.
12 Apparently Leibniz himself did not clearly distin­
guish (3) from:
(3') Singular terms denoting the same object can
replace each other in any context salva veritate, \nAlvin Plantinga
a 'principle' that does not hold for such excellent
examples of language as English.
13 Gilbert Harman, 'A nonessential property', Journal oj
Philosophy 67 (Apr. 1970), p. 183.
14 Ibid. , p. 184.
15 Ibid. , p. 185.
16 Ibid. , p. 184.
17 Perhaps recursive; see Paul Benacerraf, 'What num­
bers could not be', Philosophical Review 74 (1965),
p. 51.
18 Harman, 'Nonessential property', p. 184.
19 Kneale, 'Modality de dicto and de re', p. 622.
20 Ibid. , p. 629.
21 Ibid.
22 W. V. Quine, Word and Objea (Cambridge, Mass. :
MIT Press, 1960), p. 199.
23 From a Logical Point oj View, 2nd edn (New York:
Harper & Row, 1963), pp. 155-6.
24 Quine, Ways IIJ Paradox, p. 174. \n12
Roderick M. Chisholm
It is now easy to see a simple lPay of avoiding undesir~
able existential generalizations in epistemic contexts.
Existential generalization with respect to a term - say
b -is admissible in such contexts ifb r~fers to one and
the same man in all the "possible worlds" we have to
consider. I
In an article on Hintikka's Knowledge and Belief, I
suggested that certain difficult questions come to
mind when we consider the thought that an indi~
vidual in one possible world might be identical with
an individual in another possible world. 2 The pre~
sent paper is written in response to the editor's
invitation to be more explicit about these ques~
tions.
Let us suppose, then, that the figure of an infin~
ity of possible worlds makes good sense and let us
also suppose, for simplicity of presentation, that we
have a complete description of this one. We may
consider some one of the entities of this world, alter
its description slightly, adjust the descriptions of
the other entities in the world to fit this alteration,
and then ask ourselves whether the entity in the
possible world that we thus arrive at is identical
with the entity we started with in this world. We
start with Adam, say; we alter his description
slightly and allow him to live for 931 years instead
Originally published in Nous (1967). Reprinted here
from Roderick M. Chisholm. On Metaphysics (Minnea­
polis: University of Minnesota Press. 1989). pp. 19-
24. by permission of the University of Minnesota
Press.
of for only 930; we then accommodate our descrip~
tions of the other entities of the world to fit this
possibility (Eve, for example, will now have the
property of being married to a man who lives for
931 years instead of that of being married to a man
who lives for only 930); and we thus arrive at a
description of another possible world. 3
Let us call our present world "WI" and the
possible world we have just indicated "W2. " Is
the Adam of our world Wi the same person as the
Adam of the possible world W 2? In other words, is
Adam such that he lives for just 930 years in WI
and for 931 in W 2? And how are we to decide?
One's first thought might be that the proposition
that Adam is in both worlds is incompatible with
the principle of the indiscernibility of identicals.
How could our Adam be identical with that one if
ours lives for just 930 years and that one for 931?
Possibly this question could be answered in the
following way:
"Compare the question: How can Adam at the
age of 930 be the same person as the man who ate
the forbidden fruit, if the former is old and the
latter is young? Here the proper reply would be: it
is not true that the old Adam has properties that
render him discernible from the young Adam; the
truth is, rather, that Adam has the property of
being young when he eats the forbidden fruit and
the property of being old in the year 930, and that
these properties, though different, are not incom­
patible. And so, too, for the different possible
worlds: It is not true that the Adam of Wi has
properties that render him discernible from the \nRoderick M. Chisholm
Adam of W2; the truth is, rather, that Adam has
the property of living for 930 years in WI and the
property of living for 931 in W 2, and that these
properties, though different, are not incompatible. "
I think it is clear that we must deal with the old
Adam and the young Adam in the manner indic­
ated; but in this case, one could argue, we know
independently that the same Adam is involved
throughout. But are we justified in dealing in a
similar way with the Adam of WI and the Adam
ofW2? In this latter case, one might say, we do not
know independently that the same Adam is
involved throughout. Here, then, is one of the
questions that I do not know how to answer. Let
us suppose, however, that we answer it affirm­
atively.
The Adam of this world, we are assuming, is
identical with the Adam of that one. In other
words, Adam is such that he lives for only 930
years in WI and for 931 in W 2. Let us now suppose
further that we have arrived at our conception of
W 2, not only by introducing alterations in our
description of the Adam of wI, but also by intro­
ducing alterations in our description of the Noah of
WI. We say: "Suppose Adam had lived for 931
years instead of 930 and suppose Noah had lived
for 949 years instead of950. " We then arrive at our
description of W2 by accommodating our descrip­
tions of the other entities of WI in such a way that
these entities will be capable of inhabiting the same
possible world as the revised Noah and the revised
Adam. Both Noah and Adam, then, may be found
in W2 as well as in WI.
Now let us move from W2 to still another pos­
sible world W 3. Once again, we will start by intro­
ducing alterations in Adam and Noah and then
accommodate the rest of the world to what we
have done. In W 3 Adam lives for 932 years and
Noah for 948. Then moving from one possible
world to another, but keeping our fingers, so to
speak, on the same two entities, we arrive at a world
in which Noah lives for 930 years and Adam for
950. In that world, therefore, Noah has the age that
Adam has in this one, and Adam has the age that
Noah has in this one, and Adam has the age that
Noah has in this one; the Adam and Noah that we
started with might thus be said to have exchanged
their ages. Now let us continue on to still other
possible worlds and allow them to exchange still
other properties. We will imagine a possible world
in which they have exchanged the first letters of
their names, then one in which they have
exchanged the second, then one in which they
have exchanged the fourth, with the result that
Adam in this new possible world will be called
"Noah" and Noah "Adam. " Proceeding in this
way, we arrive finally at a possible world W"
which would seem to be exactly like our present
world WI, except for the fact that the Adam ofW"
may be traced back to the Noah of WI and the
Noah ofW" may be traced back to the Adam of WI.
Should we say of the Adam of W" that he is
identical with the Noah of WI and should we say of
the Noah of W" that he is identical the Adam of
WI? In other words, is there an x such that x is
Adam in WI and x is Noah in W", and is there ay
such that y is Noah in W I and y is Adam in W"?
And how are we to decide?
But let us suppose that somehow we have arrived
at an affirmative answer. Now we must ask our­
selves: How is one to tell the difference between the
two worlds WI and W n? Shall we say that, though
they are diverse, they are yet indiscernible from
each other ~ or, at any rate, that the Adam of WI is
indiscernible from the Adam ofW n (who is in fact
the Noah of WI) and that the Noah of WI is
indiscernible from the Noah of W" (who is in fact
the Adam of WI)? There is a certain ambiguity in
"discernible" and in "indiscernible. " The two
Adams could be called "discernible" in that the
one has the property of being Noah in the other
world and the other does not, and similarly for the
two Noahs. But in the sense of "indiscernible" that
allows us to say that "indiscernibles are identical"
tells us more than merely "identicals are identical, "
aren't the two Adams, the two Noahs, and the two
worlds indiscernible? Could God possibly have had
a sufficient reason for creating WI instead of W n?
If W I and wn are two different possible worlds,
then, of course, there are indefinitely many others,
equally difficult to distinguish from each other and
from WI and W n. For what we have done to Adam
and Noah, we can do to any other pair of entities.
Therefore, among the possible worlds that would
seem to be indiscernible from this one, there are
those in which you play the role that I play in this
one and in which I play the role that you play in
this one. 4 (If this is true, there may be good ground
for the existentialist's angst; since, it would seem,
God could have had no sufficient reason for choos­
ing the world in which you play your present role
instead of one in which you play mine. )
Is there really a good reason for saying that this
Adam and Noah are identical, respectively, with
that Noah and Adam? We opened the door to this
conclusion by assuming that Adam could be found \nin more than one possible world - by assuming that
there is an x such that x is Adam in Wi and lives
here for 930 years and x is also Adam in W2 and
lives there for 931. If it is reasonable to assume that
Adam retains his identity through the relatively
slight changes involved in the transition from Wi
to W 2, and so, too, for Noah, then it would also
seem reasonable to assume that each retains his
identity through the equally slight changes
involved in all the other transitions that took us
finally to W". (These transitions, of course, may be
as gradual as one pleases. Instead of it being a year
that we take away from Noah in our first step and
give to Adam, it could be only a day, or a fraction of
a second. ) But identity is transitive. And therefore,
one might argue, once we allow Adam to exist in
more than one possible world, we commit ourselves
to affirmative answers to the puzzling questions we
have encountered.
Is there a way, then, in which we might reason­
ably countenance identity through possible worlds
and yet avoid such extreme conclusions? The only
way, so far as I can see, is to appeal to some version
of the doctrine that individual things have essential
properties. One possibility would be this:
For every entity x, there are certain properties N
and certain properties E such that: x has N in some
possible worlds and x has non-N in others; but x
has E in every possible world in which x exists; and,
moreover, for every y, if y has E in any possible
world, then y is identical with x. (If "being ident­
ical with x" refers to a property of x, then we
should add that E includes certain properties
other than that of being identical with x. ) The
properties E will thus be essential to x and the
properties N nonessential, or accidental. 5
To avoid misunderstanding, we should contrast
this present use of "essential property" with two
others.
(I) Sometimes the "essential properties" of a
thing are said to be just those properties that the
thing has necessarily. But it is not implausible to say
that there are certain properties which are such that
everything has those properties necessarily; the
properties, the example, of being either red or
non-red, of being colored if red, and of being self­
identical. 6 Thus the Eiffel Tower is necessarily red
or non-red, necessarily colored if red, and neces­
sarily self-identical; and so is everything else. 7
(2) And sometimes it is said (most unfortunately,
it seems to me) that each individual thing is such
that it has certain properties that are essential or
Identity through Possible Worlds
necessary to it "under certain descriptions of it"
and that are not essential or necessary to it "under
certain other descriptions of it. " Thus "under one
of his descriptions, " the property of being Presi­
dent is said to be essential to Mr Johnson, whereas
"under that description" the property of being the
husband of Lady Bird is not; and "under another
one of his descriptions, " it is the other way around.
Presumably every property P of every individual
thing x is such that, "under some description of x, "
P is essential or necessary to x.
But if E is the set of properties that are essential
to a given thing x, in the sense of "essential" that
we have defined above, then: E will not be a uni­
versal property (indeed, nothing but x will have E);
some of the properties of x will not be included in
E; and E will not be such that there are descriptions
of x "under which" E is not, in the sense defined,
essential to x.
If we accept this doctrine of essential properties,
we may say, perhaps, that the property ofliving for
just 930 years is essential to Adam and therefore
that he may inhabit other possible worlds without
living for just 930 years in each of them. And so,
too, perhaps, for having a name which, in English,
ends with the letter "m. " But, we may then go on
to say, somewhere in the journey from Wi to W n,
we left the essential properties of Adam (and there­
fore Adam himself) behind. But where? What are
the properties that are essential to Adam? Being the
first man? Having a name which, in English, begins
with the first letter of the alphabet? But why these
properties? If we can contemplate Adam with
slightly different properties in another possible
world, why can't we think of him as having ances­
tors in some possible worlds and as having a dif­
ferent name in others? And similarly for any other
property that might be proposed as being thus
essential to Adam.
It seems to me that even if Adam does have such
essential properties, there is no procedure at all for
finding out what they are. And it also seems to me
that there is no way of finding out whether he does
have any essential properties. Is there really a good
reason, then, for supposing that he does?
The distinction between essential and nonessen­
tial properties seems to be involved in one of the
traditional ways of dealing with the problem of
knowing who. 8 If this way of dealing with that
problem were satisfactory, then the doctrine of
essential properties might have a kind of inde­
pendent confirmation. But I am not sure that is \nRoderick M. Chisholm
satisfactory. The problem of knowing who may be
illustrated in this way. I do not know who it was
who robbed the bank this morning, but I do know,
let us assume, that there is someone who robbed
the bank and I also know that that person is the
man who drove off from the bank at 9: 20 A. M. in a
Buick sedan. For me to know who he is, therefore,
it is not enough for me to have information
enabling me to characterize him uniquely. What
kind of information, then, would entitle me to say
that I know who he is? The essentialistic answer
would be: "You know who the bank robber is,
provided that there is a certain set of properties E
which are essential to the x such that x robbed the
bank and you know that x has E and x robbed the
bank. " But if my doubts about essential properties
are well-founded, this solution to the problem of
knowing who would imply that the police, though
they may finally "learn the thiefs identity, " will
never know that they do. For to know that one
knows who the thief is (according to the proposed
solution), one must know what properties are
essential to the thief; and if what I have said is
correct, we have no way of finding out what they
are. How are the police to decide that they know
who the thief is if they have no answer to the
metaphysical question 'What are the essential
properties of the man we have arrested? ,9
It is assumed, in many writings on modal logic,
that "Necessarily, for every x, x is identical with x"
Notes
Jaakko Hintikka, Knowledge and Belief An Introduc~
tion to the Logic oj the Two Notions (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1962), p. 152.
2 Roderick M. Chisholm, "The logic of knowing, "
Journal oj Philosophy 60 (1963), pp. 773-95; see esp.
pp. 787-95.
3 It should be noted that the possible world in question
is not one that Hintikka would call epistemical~y poss­
ible, for it could be said to contain certain states of
affairs (Adam living for 931 years) that are incompat­
ible with what we know to hold of this world; hence it
is not one of the worlds Hintikka is concerned with in
the passage quoted above. But it is logicalry possible,
and that is all that matters for purposes of the present
discussion.
4 "She (lvich) looked at the glass, and Mathieu looked
at her. A violent and undefined desire had taken
possession of him; a desire to be for one instant that
unconsciousness. .. to feel those long slender arms
from within. .. To be Ivich and not to cease to be
himself" (Sartre, The Age oj Reason, trans. E. Sutton
implies "For every x, necessarily x is identical with
x, " and therefore also "For every x and y, if x is
identical withy, then necessarily x is identical with
y. " But is the assumption reasonable? It leads us to
perplexing conclusions: for example, to the conclu­
sion that every entity exists in evet: y possible world
and therefore, presumably, that everything is an ens
necessarium.
Why assume that necessarily the evening star is
identical with the evening star? We should remind
ourselves that "The evening star is identical with
the evening star" is not a logical truth, for it implies
the contingent proposition "There is an evening
star, " and that its negation is not "The evening star
is diverse from the evening star. " Wouldn't it be
simpler to deny that "Necessarily, for every x, x is
identical with x" implies "For every x, necessarily
x is identical with x"? Then we could deny the
principle de dicto, "Necessarily the evening star is
identical with the evening star, " and also deny the
principle, de re, "The evening star is necessarily
identical with the evening star. " 10 We could still do
justice to the necessity that is here involved, it
seems to me, provided we continued to affirm
such principles, de dicto, as "Necessarily, for
every x, x is identical with x" and "Necessarily,
for every x and y, if x is identical with y then y is
identical with x, " and such principles, de re, "The
evening star, like everything else, is necessarily
self-identical. "
(New York: Vintage Books, 1973). Compare N. L.
Wilson, "Substance without substrata, " Review oj
Metaphysics 12 (1959), and A. N. Prior, "Identifiable
individuals, " Review oj Metaphysics 13 (1960).
We could put the doctrine more cautiously by saying
that the distinction between the two types of property
holds, not for every entity x, but only for some entities
x. But what reason could there be for thinking that it
holds of some entities and not of others?
6 Sometimes these properties are called "analytic prop­
erties" or "tautological properties"; but the property
of being colored if red should not be so-called if, as
some have argued, "Everything that is red is colored"
is not analytic.
7 From the proposition that the Eiffel Tower is red and
necessarily colored if red, it would be fallacious to
infer that the Eiffel Tower is necessarily colored;
this is the fallacy of inferring necessitate consequentis
from necessitate consequentiae. And from the proposi­
tion that the Eiffel Tower is necessarily red or non­
red, it would be fallacious to infer that the proposition \nthat the Eiffel Tower is red or non-red is a necessary
proposition; the proposition could hardly be neces­
sary, for it implies the contingent proposition that
there is an Eiffel Tower. This latter fallacy might be
called the fallacy of inferring necessitate de dicto from
necessitate de reo
8 Compare Aristotle, De Sophisticis Elenchis, l79b3;
Petrus Hispanus, Summulae Logicales, ed. I. M.
Bochenski (Turin: La Scuola, 1947), 7. 41; Franz
Brentano, Kategorienlehre (Leipzig: Felix Meiner
Verlag, 1933), p. 165.
9 Hintikka says that we know who the thief is provided
that there exists an x such that we know that the thief
is identical with x (Knowledge and Belief, p. 153). But
under what conditions may it be said that there exists
an x such that we know that the thief is identical with
x' Presumably, if ever, when we catch him in the act­
when we see him steal the money. But the teller saw
him steal the money, and she doesn't know who he is.
Identity through Possible Worlds
I have suggested elsewhere a slightly different way
of looking at these questions; compare "Believing
and intentionality, " Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research 25 (1964), pp. 266--9, esp. p. 268.
10 I have discussed this possibility in "Q! Iery on substi­
tutivity, " in Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky
(eds. ), Boston Studies in the Philosophy o[Science, vol. 2
(New York: Humanities Press, 1965), pp. 275-8.
If we deny that "Necessarily, for every x, x is F"
implies "For every x, necessarily x is F, " then pre­
sumably we should also deny that "It is possible that
there exists an x such that x is F" implies "There
exists an x such that it is possible that x is F. " But isn't
this what we should do? One could hold quite con­
sistently, it seems to me, that though it is possible that
there exists something having the properties that
Christians attribute to God, yet nothing that does
exist is such that it is possible that that thing has the
properties that Christians attribute to God. \n13
David Lewis
1 Good Questions and Bad
Peter van Inwagen has written that anyone who is
rightly taught - that is, anyone who has read Plan­
tinga -
will see that there is no problem of trans-world
identity. He will find that all attempts he knows
of to formulate the supposed problem are either
incoherent or else have such obvious 'solutions'
that they do not deserve to be called problems.
He will realize that it was all done with mirrors
- that is, with empty words and confused pic­
tures. There is, therefore, no longer any excuse
for talking as if there were a 'problem of trans­
world identity, .l
Nevertheless, I shall devote the whole of this chap­
ter to the problem of trans-world identity.
Still, to a great extent I agree with van Inwagen's
harsh judgement. Very often we do meet formula­
tions that probably manifest confusion, and that are
apt to cause it. I shall begin by separating ques­
tions. I think there are some good ones to be found,
as well as the incoherent ones and the ones with
uncontroversial 'solutions'.
The first thing to say is that our topic, like the
Holy Roman Empire, is badly named; we may
continue to use the customary name, but only if
we are careful not to take it seriously. In the first
Originally published in David Lewis, On the Plurality of
Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), ch. 4. Reprinted by
permission of the author.
place we should bear in mind that Trans-World
Airlines is an intercontinental, but not as yet an
interplanetary, carrier. More important, we should
not suppose that we have here any problem about
identity.
We never have. Identity is utterly simple and
unproblematic. Everything is identical to itself;
nothing is ever identical to anything else except
itself. There is never any problem about what
makes something identical to itself; nothing can
ever fail to be. And there is never any problem
about what makes two things identical; two things
never can be identical. There might be a problem
about how to define identity to someone suffi­
ciently lacking in conceptual resources - we note
that it won't suffice to teach him certain rules of
inference - but since such unfortunates are rare,
even among philosophers, we needn't worry much
if their condition is incurable.
We do state plenty of genuine problems in terms
of identity. But we needn't state them so. Therefore
they are not problems about identity. Is it ever
so that an F is identical to a G? That is, is it ever
so that the same thing is an F, and also a G? More
simply, is it ever so that an F is a G? The identity
drops out. Thus it is a good question whether a
river is something you can bathe in twice; or
whether a restaurant is something that can con­
tinue to exist through a simultaneous change in
ownership and location and name; or whether
numbers are von Neumann ordinals; or whether
there is something that all charged particles have in
common; or whether there could be a time traveller
who meets his younger self; or whether there was \never a genuine nation that included both Austria
and Hungary. All of these questions could be stated
in terms of identity - harmlessly, unless that way of
stating the questions confused us about where to
seek for answers.
Likewise for the question whether worlds ever
overlap; that is, whether two worlds ever have a
common part; that is, whether any part of one
world is ever part of another as well; that is,
whether there is ever identity between parts of
different worlds. This is a good question, but not
a question about identity. Or rather, it is a good
question for genuine modal realists; it makes little
sense as a question for ersatzers. I consider this
question in section 2, where I shall defend a quali­
fied negative answer.
It is also a good question, but it is a different
good question, whether there is anything that over­
laps two different worlds, and so is in both in the
way that a highway may be in two different states.
Again, I could state it in terms of identity: is there
ever identity between things that are (partly) in
different worlds? Really it is not a question about
identity, but about mereology: is there any reason
to restrict mereological summation so that several
things have a mereological sum only if all of them
are parts of a single world? The follow-up question
concerns semantics: if summation is unrestricted,
so that indeed there are trans-world individuals,
are these mere oddities? Are they nameless, do they
fall outside the extensions of ordinary predicates
and the domains of ordinary quantification? Or do
they include things of importance to us, such as
ourselves? I consider these questions in section 3,
where I shall acknowledge the existence of trans­
world individuals but dismiss them as oddities.
It is yet another good question, and this time it is
a good question for genuine modal realists and
ersatzers alike, whether it ever happens that any­
thing exists according to two different (genuine or
ersatz) worlds. If you like, I can state this question
too in terms of identity: does it ever happen that
something which exists according to one world and
something which exists according to another are
identical? The answer to that ought to be uncon­
troversial: yes, that very often happens. Take our
world-mate Hubert Humphrey, for instance. The
Humphrey who exists according to our world and
the Humphrey who exists according to some other
worlds are identical. (It is too bad that grammar
demands the plural. ) That is, Humphrey exists
according to many different (genuine or ersatz)
worlds. According to ours, he exists and he lost
Counterparts or Double Lives?
the presidential election; according to others,
he exists and he won. This is a question that, as
van Inwagen says, does not deserve to be called a
problem.
But what does deserve to be called a problem is
the follow-up question: what is it for Humphrey to
exist according to a world? What is representation
de re? How does a world, genuine or ersatz, repres­
ent, concerning Humphrey, that he exists? This
one is not a question for genuine modal realists
and ersatzers alike. Or rather, it is not one question
for both. The available answers for genuine and for
ersatz worlds will look quite different.
A genuine world might do it by having Hum­
phrey himself as a part. That is how our own world
represents, concerning Humphrey, that he exists.
But for other worlds to represent in the same way
that Humphrey exists, Humphrey would have to
be a common part of many overlapping worlds, and
somehow he would have to have different proper­
ties in different ones. I reject such overlap, for
reasons to be considered shortly. There is a better
way for a genuine world to represent, concerning
Humphrey, that he exists. Humphrey may be
represented in absentia at other worlds, just as he
may be in museums in this world. The museum can
have a waxwork figure to represent Humphrey, or
better yet an animated simulacrum. Another world
can do better still: it can have as part a Humphrey
of its own, a flesh-and-blood counterpart of our
Humphrey, a man very like Humphrey in his ori­
gins, in his intrinsic character, or in his historical
role. By having such a part, a world represents de
re, concerning Humphrey - that is, the Humphrey
of our world, whom we as his worldmates may call
simply Humphrey - that he exists and does thus­
and-so. By waving its arm, the simulacrum in the
museum represents Humphrey as waving his arm;
by waving his arm, or by winning the presidential
election, the other-worldly Humphrey represents
the this-worldly Humphrey as waving or as win­
ning. That is how it is that Humphrey - our Hum­
phrey - waves or wins according to the other world.
This is counterpart theory, the answer I myself
favour to the question how a world represents de re. 2
(The same goes in reverse. Our Humphrey is a
counterpart of many Humphreys of many other
worlds. I deny that the counterpart relation is
always symmetrical, but surely it often is. So here
are many other-worldly Humphreys who win the
presidency, but who lose according to this world.
They are represented as losing by the presence here
of Humphrey the loser. ) \nDavid Lewis
There are various ways that an ersatz world
might represent, concerning Humphrey, that he
exists, or that he waves, or that he wins. It depends
on what sort of ersatz world we are dealing with. A
linguistic ersatz world might include English sen­
tences that mention Humphrey by name: 'Hum­
phrey exists', 'Humphrey waves', 'Humphrey
wins'. Or it might include sentences of some
other world-making language, which mention
Humphrey by some other name. Or it might
instead include sentences of the world-making lan­
guage which say explicitly that there is someone of
a certain description who exists, and waves, and
wins; and this could qualify as representation de re
concerning Humphrey if the description suffi­
ciently resembles the description of Humphrey as
he actually is. Or, instead of saying explicitly that
there is someone of the appropriate description, a
linguistic ersatz world might say it implicitly, by
means of many sentences having to do with the
vacancy or occupation of space-time points, or
with the instantiating of various elementary uni­
versals by various elementary particulars. A pictor­
ial ersatz world might have a part which is a
picture, made out of stuff that is in some myster­
ious sense abstract, of Humphrey waving and win­
ning. A magical ersatz world might represent that
Humphrey exists and waves and wins by having
some ineffable distinctive intrinsic nature. Or it
might do it by means of brute necessary connec­
tions: necessarily, if some simple element stands in
some unanalysable relation to the concrete world,
then Humphrey exists and waves and wins.
It is sometimes thought that ersatzism is better
off than counterpart theory in respecting certain
intuitions: intuitions that de re modality has to do
with the res itself, not some imitation or substitute
or counterpart. Thus Kripke makes his famous
complaint that on my view. .. if we say 'Humphrey might have won the
election (if only he had done such-and-such)"
we are not talking about something that might
have happened to Humphrey, but to someone
else, a 'counterpart'. Probably, however, Hum­
phrey could not care less whether someone else,
no matter how much resembling him, would
have been victorious in another possible world. 3
Coming from an advocate of genuine modal realism
with overlap, this complaint might have some
force. But here it comes only a page away from
Kripke's equally famous remark that
A possible world isn't a distant country that we
are coming across, or viewing through a tele­
scope. 4
Joking aside (he does say that 'another possible
world is too far away'), Kripke's point seems to
be that we are supposed to respect Humphrey's
intuition that it is he himself who would have been
victorious in another world, and we are supposed to
do this by declining to think of that other world as
the sort of thing that he himself could even be part
ofl What is going on?
I think counterpart theorists and ersatzers are in
perfect agreement that there are other worlds (genu­
ine or ersatz) according to which Humphrey - he
himselfl (stamp the foot, bang the table) - wins the
election. And we are in equal agreement that Hum­
phrey - he himself - is not part of these other
worlds. Somehow, perhaps by containing suitable
constituents or perhaps by magic, but anyhow not
by containing Humphrey himself, the other world
represents him as winning. If there were any genu­
ine modal realists who believed in overlap of
worlds, they would indeed be in a position to insist
that at another world we have Humphrey himself
winning the presidency. That might indeed be a
point in their favour. But it is not a point in favour
of any other view but theirs, and in particular it is
not a point in favour of any kind of ersatzism.
Counterpart theory does say (and ersatz ism does
not) that someone else - the victorious counterpart
- enters into the story of how it is that another
world represents Humphrey as winning, and
thereby enters into the story of how it is that
Humphrey might have won. In so far as the intuit­
ive complaint is that someone else gets into the act,
the point is rightly taken. But I do not see why that
is any objection, any more than it would be an
objection against ersatzism that some abstract
whatnot gets into the act. What matters is that the
someone else, or the abstract whatnot, should not
crowd out Humphrey himself. And there all is well.
Thanks to the victorious counterpart, Humphrey
himself has the requisite modal property: we can
truly say that he might have won. There is no need
to deny that the victorious counterpart also makes
true a second statement describing the very same
possibility: we can truly say that a Humphrey-like
counterpart might have won. The two statements
are not in competition. Therefore we need not
suppress the second (say, by forbidding any mix­
ture of ordinary modal language with talk of coun­
terparts) in order to safeguard the first. s \nI said that counterpart theory and ersatzism are
alike in denying that Humphrey himself is part of
the other world which represents him as winning.
But that was a little too quick. Counterpart theory
and ersatz ism are also alike in having trick ways to
dodge the conclusion. In both cases there is a loop­
hole to exploit, but exploiting the loophole does
nothing to satisfy the alleged intuition that it must
be Humphrey himself who wins. For the counter­
part theorist, the trick is to say that 'Humphrey'
names not the Humphrey of our world, and not the
Humphrey of another, but rather the trans-world
individual who is the mereological sum of all these
local Humphreys. If that is what Humphrey is (but
I shall argue in section 3 that it isn't), then indeed
he himself is partly in this world and partly in that
and not wholly in any. Part of him loses, and part of
him wins. But presumably the losing part cares
what might have happened to it; it could not care
less what happens to some other slice off the same
great salami - unless, of course, the world contain­
ing that other-worldly slice of Humphrey can be
taken as a world that represents the this-worldly
slice as winning.
For the ersatzer (ofthe linguistic persuasion) the
trick is to remember that anything you please can
serve as a word of the world-making language.
Humphrey might as well be used as his own
name, in Lagadonian fashion. Then he will be, if
not a part, at least a set-theoretic constituent of the
ersatz world which is a set of sentences saying inter
alia that he wins. So what? Presumably he could
not care less what words of what languages are
assembled with him into what set-theoretic struc­
tures - unless, of course, we get a linguistic struc­
ture that represents him as winning. Let him by all
means care how he can be consistently represented,
but not about the words of the representation. It is
perfectly arbitrary whether he serves as a word.
And if he does, it is perfectly arbitrary what he
means. If Humphrey is to be made a word, there is
no need to make him be his own name. He would
do just as well as a name for Checkers, or as a
preposition or adverb. Or he could be the negation
sign in a sentence that denies his existence.
There are at least two more good questions that
can be extracted from the topic of trans-world
identity, though again they have nothing special
to do with identity. I merely state these questions
here; I shall take them up in sections 4 and 5. 6
Again they are questions for genuine modal realists
and ersatzers alike. For the sake of neutrality, I shall
formulate them in terms of representation de re;
Counterparts or Double Lives?
that is, in terms of truth according to a world,
genuine or ersatz, concerning some actual indi­
vidual such as Humphrey.
One is the question of haecceitism. We can dis­
tinguish representation of the way things are qua­
litatively (in a broad sense of that word) from
representation de reo It may be the case according
to a world that there are things of certain kinds,
arranged in certain ways, and with certain causal
relationships; these are matters of qualitative char­
acter. But also it may be the case, according to a
world, concerning the individual Humphrey, that
he exists and waves and wins. Can these two kinds
of representation vary independently? Or does
what a world represents concerning matters of
qualitative character determine what that world
represents de re?
The other is the question of constancy. Do we
have a settled answer, fixed once and for all, about
what is true concerning a certain individual accord­
ing to a certain (genuine or ersatz) world? Or can
different answers be right in different contexts?
Can two opposed answers even be right together,
in a single context? Can it happen sometimes that
no answer is determinately right?
2 Against Overlap
The simplest way that part of another world could
represent Humphrey - our Humphrey - is by
identity. He might lead a double life, in two worlds
at once. He himself, who is part of the actual world,
might be part of the other world as well. He could
be a common part of both, in the same way that a
shared hand might be a common part of two Si­
amese twins. The other world represents him as
existing because he is part of it. He exists at the
other world because, restricting our quantification
to the parts of that world, he exists. This leading of
double lives is what best deserves to be called
'trans-world identity'.
I cannot name one single philosopher who
favours trans-world identity, thus understood.
The philosophers' chorus on behalf of 'trans­
world identity' is merely insisting that, for
instance, it is Humphrey himself who might have
existed under other conditions, who might have
been different, who might have won the presid­
ency, who exists according to many worlds and
wins according to some of them. All that is uncon­
troversial. The controversial question is how he
manages to have these modal properties. The \nDavid Lewis
answer now mooted is that he has them by being a
shared part common to many worlds, and by hav­
ing different properties relative to different worlds
that he is part of. Despite its lack of supporters, this
answer deserves our attention. First, because it is
agreeably simple. Second, because it is the only
view that fully respects the 'he himself intuition:
rival views say that Humphrey himself might have
won, and that he himself is somehow represented as
winning, but only this view says that he himself
does win. And third, because it is congenial to
haecceitism; but I shall postpone that issue to sec­
tion 4. 7
The advantages are genuine. Nevertheless,
trans-world identity, in the sense of overlap of
worlds, is to be rejected. Or rather, it is to be
rejected as a general theory of representation de
reo There are one or two special cases of overlap
that might be tolerated, but they fall far short of
meeting all our needs for representation de reo
My main problem is not with the overlap itself.
Things do have shared parts in common, as in the
case of the Siamese twins' hand. Given the unrest­
ricted mereology I favour, sharing of parts is alto­
gether commonplace. Indeed, any part of any
world is part of countless mereological sums that
extend beyond that world. But what I do find
problematic - inconsistent, not to mince words -
is the way the common part of two worlds is sup­
posed to have different properties in one world and
in the other.
Hubert Humphrey has a certain size and shape,
and is composed of parts arranged in a certain way.
His size and shape and composition are intrinsic to
him. They are simply a matter of the way he is.
They are not a matter of his relations to other
things that surround him in this world. Thereby
they differ from his extrinsic properties, such as
being popular, being Vice-President of the United
States, wearing a fur hat, inhabiting a planet with a
moon, or inhabiting a world where nothing goes
faster than light. Also, his size and shape and
composition are accidental, not essential, to him.
He could have been taller, he could have been
slimmer, he could have had more or fewer fingers
on his hands. 8
Consider the last. He could have had six fingers
on his left hand. There is some other world that so
represents him. We are supposing now that repres­
entation de re works by trans-world identity. So
Humphrey, who is part of this world and there
has five fingers on the left hand, is also part of
some other world and there has six fingers on his
left hand. Qua part of this world he has five fingers,
qua part of that world he has six. He himself - one
and the same and altogether self-identical-has five
fingers on the left hand, and he has not five but six.
How can this be? You might as well say that the
shared hand of the Siamese twins has five fingers as
Ted's left hand, but it has six fingers as Ned's right
hand! That is double-talk and contradiction. Here
is the hand. Never mind what else it is part of. How
many fingers does it have? What shape is it?
(You might say that five fingers and the palm are
common to Ted and Ned, however the sixth finger
belongs to Ned alone; and likewise with Hum­
phrey. But no: a proper five-fingered hand differs
in shape and composition from a proper six­
fingered hand less one of its fingers, and likewise
a proper six-fingered hand differs from a proper
five-fingered hand with an extra finger stuck on. )
I expect protest: though it would be contradic­
tion to say, simply, that Humphrey had five fingers
on the left hand and also that he had not five but
six, that is not what was said. He has five at this
world; he has six at that world. - But how do the
modifiers help? There are several ways for modi­
fiers to remove a contradiction. But none of them
apply here.
(1) If a tower is square on the third floor and
round on the fourth floor, no worries; it's just that
one segment differs in cross-sectional shape from
another. The modifiers direct us to consider the
shapes of the segments, not of the whole tower. But
the thesis we are considering is that the whole of
Humphrey is part of different worlds, with differ­
ent properties at different ones. It is exactly the
trans-world identity that spoils this way out.
(2) If a man is honest according to the News and
crooked according to The Times, no worries; differ­
ent papers tell different stories about him, they
represent him differently, and at least one of them
gets it wrong. But the thesis we are considering is a
form of genuine, not ersatz, modal realism: the way
that Humphrey has a property according to a world
is that Humphrey himself, having that very prop­
erty, is a part of that world.
(3) If a man is father of Ed and son of Fred, no
worries; he bears different relations to different
individuals, and the extrinsic properties he thereby
has - being a father, being a son - are compatible.
Likewise if the wisest man in the village is by no
means the wisest man in the nation. But our pro­
blem does not concern Humphrey's relationships
to the things that accompany him in one or another \nworld. Rather, we are dealing with his intrinsic
nature; and the only relations relevant to that are
those that obtain between his own parts. (And ifhe
is part of two worlds, so in turn are his parts. ) If you
say that Humphrey has five fingers at this world
and six fingers at that, and you take the modifiers to
cure the contradiction, most likely you mean to
suggest that having five or six fingers is not an
intrinsic property after all, but a relation. (And an
external relation - not one that supervenes on the
intrinsic properties of the relata. ) Then the right
thing to say would be that Humphrey bears the
five-finger relation to this world and the six-finger
relation to that world. Or you might say it by
coining transitive verbs: he five-fingers this
world, but he six-fingers that world. But what are
these relations? I know what to say if I want to
make-believe formally that shapes are relations
rather than intrinsic properties, but I know
better. If you say that a shape - sphericality, or
five-fingered ness - is just what we always thought
it was, except that it is a relation which something
may bear to some but not all of the wholes of which
it is part, that will not do. What would it be to five­
finger one thing while six-fingering another? How
can these supposed relations be the shape of some­
thing?
They cannot be; and so there is no solution. If
indeed Humphrey - he himself, the whole of him
- is to lead a double life as part of two different
worlds, there is no intelligible way for his intrinsic
properties to differ from one world to the other.
And it will not do just to declare, when we know
better, that such things as his size and shape and
composition are after all not among his intrinsic
properties.
Call this the problem of accidental intrinsics. It
would not arise for Humphrey's essential proper­
ties, however intrinsic. For the problem is how he
can have different properties as part of different
worlds, and in the case of essential properties there
is no variation to worry about. It is very hard to see
how Humphrey could be a man as part of one
world and an angel as part of another; but if he is
essentially human, that difficulty does not arise.
Neither would it arise for Humphrey's extrinsic
properties, however accidental. There are two ways
to think of his extrinsic properties: as relations in
disguise, or as genuine properties. 9 First, take them
as relations. He is related to his surroundings, and
we are not supposing that his surroundings also are
common from world to world. Perhaps he owns
Counterparts or Double Lives?
four dogs who are part of this world, and he owns
only three dogs who are part of that other world.
That is how the accidental extrinsic 'property' of
owning four dogs can be a property that he has at
this world, but lacks at that other world of which he
is also a part. Owning four dogs is covertly a rela­
tion: Humphrey bears it to the worlds that have
himself and four dogs he owns as parts, and not to
any other worlds. It is as easy for him to have this
'property' at one world and not another as it is for a
man to be father of Ed and not of Fred.
Second, take his extrinsic properties instead as
genuine properties. Then he has them simpliciter,
and they cannot vary from world to world. But
what can vary from world to world is the way we
name them, and predicate them of him - which
may give an illusion that the properties themselves
vary. Thus he has, simpliciter, the extrinsic prop­
erty of owning four dogs who are part of this world;
and he has, simpliciter, the property of not owning
four dogs who are part of that world. These prop­
erties are compatible, if indeed there is overlap;
having both of them is part of what it is to lead a
double life in two worlds. But the restricting modi­
fier 'at this world' or 'at that world' enables us to
refer to these two extrinsic properties by shortened
names. In the scope of 'at this world', we can drop
the final clause from the name 'the property of
owning four dogs who are part of this world', and
in the scope of 'at that world', we can likewise drop
the final clause from the name 'the property of not
owning four dogs who are part of that world', and
that is how it can be true at this world that he has
the property of owning four dogs, and true at that
world that he has the property of not owning four
dogs, although his extrinsic properties - properties
rightly speaking, as opposed to disguised relations
- do not vary from world to world.
There is no problem of accidental intrinsics for
rival theories. Not for my own theory, genuine
modal realism with counterparts instead of overlap:
counterparts need not be exact intrinsic duplicates,
so, of course, Humphrey and his counterparts can
differ in their intrinsic properties. Not for the
theory that Humphrey is a vast trans-world indi­
vidual, composed of distinct parts from different
worlds: one part of the vast Humphrey can differ in
its intrinsic properties from other parts. Not for
any sort of ersatzism: in whatever way it is that
ersatz worlds represent or misrepresent Hum­
phrey, they can misrepresent him as having intrin­
sic properties that in fact he does not have, just as
lying newspapers can do. \nDavid Lewis
Our question of overlap of worlds parallels the this­
worldly problem of identity through time; and our
problem of accidental intrinsics parallels a problem
of temporary intrinsics, which is the traditional
problem of change. 1O Let us say that something
persists iff, somehow or other, it exists at various
times; this is the neutral word. Something perdu res
iff it persists by having different temporal parts, or
stages, at different times, though no one part of it is
wholly present at more than one time; whereas it
endures iff it persists by being wholly present at
more than one time. Perdurance corresponds to
the way a road persists through space; part of it is
here and part of it is there, and no part is wholly
present at two different places. Endurance corres­
ponds to the way a universal, if there are such
things, would be wholly present wherever and
whenever it is instantiated. Endurance involves
overlap: the content of two different times has the
enduring thing as a common part. Perdurance does
not.
(There might be mixed cases: entities that per­
sist by having an enduring part and a perduring
part. An example might be a person who consisted
of an enduring entelechy ruling a perdu ring body;
or an electron that had a universal of unit negative
charge as a permanent part, but did not consist
entirely of universals. But here I ignore the mixed
cases. And when I speak of ordinary things as
perduring, I shall ignore their enduring universals,
if such there be. )
Discussions of endurance versus perdurance
tend to be en darkened by people who say such
things as this: 'Of course you are wholly present
at every moment of your life, except in case of
amputation. For at every moment all your parts
are there: your legs, your lips, your liver. .. . ' These
endarkeners may think themselves partisans of
endurance, but they are not. They are perforce
neutral, because they lack the conceptual resources
to understand what is at issue. Their speech betrays
- and they may acknowledge it willingly - that they
have no concept of a temporal part. (Or at any rate
none that applies to a person, say, as opposed to a
process or a stretch of time. ) Therefore they are on
neither side of a dispute about whether or not
persisting things are divisible into temporal parts.
They understand neither the affirmation nor the
denial. They are like the people - fictional, I hope -
who say that the whole of the long road is in their
little village, for not one single lane of it is missing.
Meaning less than others do by 'part', since they
omit parts cut crosswise, they also mean less than
others do by 'whole'. They say the 'whole' road is
in the village; by which they mean that every 'part'
is; but by that, they only mean that every part cut
lengthwise is. Divide the road into its least length­
wise parts; they cannot even raise the question
whether those are in the village wholly or only
partly. For that is a question about crosswise
parts, and the concept of a crosswise part is what
they lack. Perhaps 'crosswise part' really does
sound to them like a blatant contradiction. Or
perhaps it seems to them that they understand it,
but the village philosophers have persuaded them
that really they couldn't, so their impression to the
contrary must be an illusion. At any rate, I have the
concept of a temporal part; and for some while I
shall be addressing only those of you who share it. "
Endurance through time is analogous to the
alleged trans-world identity of common parts of
overlapping worlds; perdurance through time is
analogous to the 'trans-world identity', if we may
call it that, of a trans-world individual composed of
distinct parts in non-overlapping worlds. Perdur­
ance, which I favour for the temporal case, is closer
to the counterpart theory which I favour for the
modal case; the difference is that counterpart the­
ory concentrates on the parts and ignores the trans­
world individual composed of them.
The principal and decisive objection against
endurance, as an account of the persistence of
ordinary things such as people or puddles, is the
problem of temporary intrinsics. Persisting things
change their intrinsic properties. For instance,
shape: when I sit, I have a bent shape; when I
stand, I have a straightened shape. Both shapes
are temporary intrinsic properties; I have them
only some of the time. How is such change poss­
ible? I know of only three solutions.
(It is not a solution just to say how very common­
place and indubitable it is that we have different
shapes at different times. To say that is only to
insist - rightly - that it must be possible somehow.
Still less is it a solution to say it in jargon - as it
might be, that bent-on-Monday and straight-on­
Tuesday are compatible because they are 'time­
indexed properties'-if that just means that,
somehow, you can be bent on Monday and straight
on Tuesday. )
First solution: contrary to what we might think,
shapes are not genuine intrinsic properties. They
are disguised relations, which an enduring thing
may bear to times. One and the same enduring
thing may bear the bent-shape relation to some
times, and the straight-shape relation to others. In \nitself, considered apart from its relations to other
things, it has no shape at all. And likewise for all
other seeming temporary intrinsics; all of them
must be reinterpreted as relations that something
with an absolutely unchanging intrinsic nature
bears to different times. The solution to the prob­
lem of temporary intrinsics is that there aren't
any temporary intrinsics. This is simply incred­
ible, if we are speaking of the persistence of
ordinary things. (It might do for the endurance
of entelechies or universals. ) If we know what
shape is, we know that it is a property, not a
relation.
Second solution: the only intrinsic properties of
a thing are those it has at the present moment.
Other times are like false stories; they are abstract
representations, composed out of the materials of
the present, which represent or misrepresent the
way things are. When something has different
intrinsic properties according to one of these ersatz
other times, that docs not mean that it, or any part
of it, or anything else, just has them ~ no more so
than when a man is crooked according to The
Times, or honest according to the News. This is a
solution that rejects endurance, because it rejects
persistence altogether. And it is even less credible
than the first solution. In saying that there are no
other times, as opposed to false representations
thereof, it goes against what we all believe. No
man, unless it be at the moment of his execution,
believes that he has no future; still less does anyone
believe that he has no past.
Third solution: the different shapes, and the
different temporary intrinsics generally, belong to
different things. Endurance is to be rejected in
favour of perdurance. We perdure; we are made
up of temporal parts, and our temporary intrinsics
are properties of these parts, wherein they differ
one from another. There is no problem at all about
how different things can differ in their intrinsic
properties.
Some special cases of overlap of worlds face no
problem of accidental intrinsics. One arises on the
hypothesis that there are universals, wholly present
recurrently as non-spatio-temporal parts of all their
particular instances. If so, these universals must
recur as freely between the worlds as they do within
a world. For there is qualitative duplication
between the worlds, by the principle of recombina­
tion; and universals are supposed to recur when­
ever there is duplication. Doubtless there are
electrons in other worlds than ours. If a universal
Counterparts or Double Lives?
of unit negative charge is part of each and every
this-worldly electron, then equally it is part of
the other-worldly electrons; in which case, since
parthood is transitive, it is a common part of all the
worlds where there are electrons; and that is over­
lap. We expect trouble with the accidental intrinsic
properties of the common part. But what are those
properties in this case? I cannot think of an y. There
isn't much to the intrinsic nature of a universal.
Maybe it's intrinsically simple, or maybe it's
intrinsically composed, somehow, of other univer­
sals; but if so, that seems to be an essential matter,
so we still have no intrinsic accidents to trouble us.
(Likewise there seem to be no temporary intrinsics
to trouble us, so there is no problem about univer­
sals enduring through time. ) If indeed there are
no accidental intrinsics to raise a problem, then
overlap confined to the sharing of universals
seems entirely innocent. And also it seems inevita­
ble, if there are universals at all. So my rejection of
overlap must be qualified: whatever the universals
may do, at any rate no two worlds have any parti­
cular as a common part.
If there are universals, identical between worlds
as they are between instances within a world, then
for them we may as well help ourselves to the
simplest method of representation de re: what is
true of a universal according to a world is what
is true of it, when we restrict quantifiers to that
world. What is true of it at a world will then be,
first, that it has its constant essential intrinsic na­
ture; and, second, that it has various relationships ~
notably, patterns of instantiation ~ to other things
of that world. For instance, it will be true of unit
negative charge, at one world, that it is instantiated
by exactly seventeen things, which are close
together; and at another world, that it is instan­
tiated by infinitely many widely scattered things.
Thus its extrinsic 'properties', taken as disguised
relations, vary. Its extrinsic properties, properly
speaking, do not. But the way we name them
does, so that for instance we can say that at one
world but not the other, the universal has the
property of being instantiated by seventeen close­
together things. 12
Another special case of overlap would be, if not
altogether innocent, at least safe from the problem
of accidental intrinsics. This is simply the case in
which something does have accidental intrinsic
properties, but they are constant within a limited
range of worlds, and the proposed overlap is
confined to the worlds in that limited range.
Such limited overlap could not give us all we \nDavid Lewis
need by way of representation de reo For the thing
does have some accidental intrinsic properties; so
there must be some world which represents it as
lacking some of these properties; that must be a
world outside the limited range of overlap; so
when that world represents the thing as lacking
the properties, that representation de re must
work not by trans-world identity but in some
other way. Limited overlap would have to be
combined with some other treatment of represen­
tation de re, presumably some form of counterpart
theory.
Even so, limited overlap might be wanted. The
most likely case would be limited overlap when
branching worlds share a common initial segment.
I distinguish branching of worlds from divergence.
In branching, worlds are like Siamese twins. There
is one initial spatio-temporal segment; it is contin­
ued by two different futures - different both
numerically and qualitatively - and so there are
two overlapping worlds. One world consists of
the initial segment plus one of its futures; the
other world consists of the identical initial segment
plus the other future.
In divergence, on the other hand, there is no
overlap. Two worlds have two duplicate initial
segments, not one that they share in common. I,
and the world I am part of, have only one future.
There are other worlds that diverge from ours.
These worlds have initial segments exactly like
that of our world up to the present, but the later
parts of these worlds differ from the later parts of
ours. (Or we could make it relativistic: what is
duplicated is the past cone from some space-time
point, as it might be from here and now. ) Not I, but
only some very good counterparts of me, inhabit
these other worlds.
I reject genuine branching in favour of diver­
gence. However, there might be some reason to go
the other way. Consider the philosophers who say
that the future is unreal. It is hard to believe they
mean it. If ever anyone is right that there is no
future, then that very moment is his last, and
what's more is the end of everything. Yet when
these philosophers teach that there is no more time
to come, they show no trace of terror or despair!
When we see them planning and anticipating, we
might suspect that they believe in the future as
much as anyone else does. Maybe they only insist
on restricting their quantifiers, and all they mean is
that nothing future is present? - No, for they seem
to think that what they are saying is controversial.
What is going on?
Perhaps their meaning is clearer when they turn
linguistic, and say that there is no determinate
truth about the future. A modal realist who
believed in genuine branching, in which his world
overlaps with others by having initial segments in
common, could agree with that. To have determ­
inate truth about the future, it helps to have a
future; but also, it helps to have only one future.
If there are two futures, and both are equally mine
with nothing to choose between them, and one
holds a sea fight and the other doesn't, what
could it mean for me to say that the future holds a
sea fight? Not a rhetorical question: we have three
options. (I) It is false that the future holds a sea
fight, because 'the future' is a denotationless
improper description. (2) It is true that the future
holds a sea fight, because 'the future' denotes
neither of the two partial futures but rather their
disunited sum, which does hold a sea fight. (3) It is
neither true nor false that the future holds a sea
fight, because 'the future' has indeterminate deno­
tation, and we get different truth-values on differ­
ent resolutions of the indeterminacy. OfThand, the
third option - indeterminacy - seems best. (At least
it lets us talk in the ordinary way about matters on
which the futures do not differ; what has the same
truth-value on all resolutions is determinately true
or false. ) But whichever way we go, our customary
thought about 'the' future is in bad trouble.
Against the common-sense idea that we have one
single future, advocates of many may join forces
with advocates of none; but the advocates of many
have the better of it, for they have no cause to
despair. I do not suggest that philosophers of the
unreal or indeterminate future are, in fact, modal
realists who accept branching. But modal realists
can make good sense of much that they say. So
whatever motivates these philosophers to deny that
we have a single future might equally motivate a
modal realist to accept branching.
Why not, given that the overlap is limited
enough not to raise the problem of accidental
intrinsics? Well, one man's reason is another
man's reductio. The trouble with branching exactly
is that it conflicts with our ordinary presupposition
that we have a single future. If two futures are
equally mine, one with a sea fight tomorrow and
one without, it is nonsense to wonder which way it
will be - it will be both ways - and yet I do wonder.
The theory of branching suits those who think
this wondering is nonsense. Or those who think
the wondering makes sense only if reconstrued:
you have leave to wonder about the sea fight, pro-\nvided that really you wonder not about what
tomorrow will bring but about what today prede­
termines. But a modal realist who thinks in the
ordinary way that it makes sense to wonder what
the future will bring, and who distinguishes this
from wondering what is already predetermined,
will reject branching in favour of divergence. In
divergence also there are many futures; that is,
there are many later segments of worlds that
begin by duplicating initial segments of our
world. But in divergence, only one of these futures
is truly ours. The rest belong not to us but to our
other-worldly counterparts. Our future is the one
that is part of the same world as ourselves. It alone
is connected to us by the relations - the (strictly or
analogically) spatio-temporal relations, or perhaps
natural external relations generally - that unify a
world. It alone is influenced causally by what we do
and how we are in the present. We wonder which
one is the future that has the special relation to
ourselves. We care about it in a way that we do not
care about all the other-worldly futures. Branch­
ing, and the limited overlap it requires, are to be
rejected as making nonsense of the way we take
ourselves to be related to our futures; and diver­
gence without overlap is to be preferred. 13
There is a less weighty argument against branch­
ing, and indeed against overlap generally. What
unifies a world, I suggested, is that its parts stand
in suitable external relations, preferably spatio­
temporal. But if we have overlap, we have
spatio-temporal relations between the parts of dif­
ferent worlds. For instance, let P be the common
part - say, a shared initial segment - of two differ­
ent worlds WI and Wz, let RI be the remainder of
WI and let Rz be the remainder of W z. Then the
appropriate unifying relations obtain between P
and RI, and also between P and R z. But now the
relations obtain between parts of two different
worlds: between P, which is inter alia a part of
the world WI and Rz, which is part of the different
world W z.
Of course, it is also true that P and Rz are parts of
a single world Wz. So at least we can still say that
whenever two things are appropriately related,
there is some world they are both parts of, even if
they may be parts of other worlds besides. Or can
we say even that? In a sense, even RI and Rz are
related, in a stepwise back-and-forward way, via P.
For instance, RI and Rz might stand to one another
in the complex temporal relation: successor-of-a­
predecessor-of. Yet RI and Rz are not both parts of
anyone world. Thus overlap complicates what we
Counterparts or Double Lives?
must say in explaining how worlds are unified by
spatio-temporal interrelation, and thereby differ
from trans-world individuals composed of parts
of several worlds. The complication is unwelcome,
but I think it's nothing worse. Overlap spoils the
easiest account of how worlds are unified by inter­
relation: namely, the mereological analogue of the
definition of equivalence classes. But alternative
accounts are available (as in the parallel problem
about time discussed in my 'Survival and iden­
tity, )I\ so I presume that a modal realist who
wished to accept overlap would not be in serious
difficulty on this score. Still less is there any prob­
lem if the only overlap we accept is the sharing of
universals; we need only say that a world is unified
by the spatio-temporal (or whatever) interrelation
of its particular parts.
If we stay with the simple account of how worlds
are unified, we will conclude that where there is
branching, there is one single world composed of
all the branches. That would not be branching of
worlds, but branching within worlds; and so the
overlap of branches would not be overlap of worlds.
Branching within worlds, I think, is to be accepted:
it is possible that the space-time of a world might
have such a shape, and if that is a possible way for a
world to be, then it is a way that some world is.
Some world; but there is no reason to think that
such a world is ours. Respect for common sense
gives us reason to reject any theory that says that
we ourselves are involved in branching, or that if
we are not, that can only be because (contrary to
accepted theory) our world is governed by deter­
ministic laws. But we needn't reject the very pos­
sibility that a world branches. The unfortunate
inhabitants of such a world, if they think of 'the
future' as we do, are of course sorely deceived, and
their peculiar circumstances do make nonsense of
how they ordinarily think. But that is their prob­
lem; not ours, as it would be if the worlds generally
branched rather than diverging.
I noted that our special cases of trans-world
identity, sharing of universals and sharing of initial
segments in branching, avoid the problem of acci­
dental intrinsics. They avoid another well-known
problem as well. A friend of overlap might wish to
say that trans-world identity follows lines of qualit­
ative similarity. Or he might not; whether to say
this is part of the topic of haecceitism, to be con­
sidered in section 4. 15 But ifhe does, his problem is
that identity is transitive, similarity in general is
not. But it is approximate similarity that fails to
be transitive; whereas the supposed sharing of \nDavid Lewis
universals, and likewise the supposed sharing of
initial segments in branching, would follow lines
of exact similarity. When we have the exact simi­
larity in a respect between two instances of unit
negative charge, or the perfect match when two
worlds start out exactly alike in their history, there
is no discrepancy of formal character to stop us
from taking these as cases of trans-world identity.
3 Against Trans-World Individuals
The Hume Highway runs between the capital cities
of two adjacent states. Thus it is present in one
state and in the other. Call this a case of 'interstate
identity' if you like: a highway that runs through
one state is identical with a highway that runs
through the other; there is one highway that runs
through them both. But the states do not overlap
thereby; they share no (particular) part in common.
The highway consists of parts, one part in one state
and another in the other. It is partly in each state.
The parts are not identical; they don't even over­
lap. But the highway which includes the one part is
identical with the highway which includes the
other. More simply: there is a highway they are
both parts of.
Likewise Hume (no relation) runs between 1711
and 1776. He is present in the early half of the
century and in the later half. Call this a case of
'identity over time' if you like: a man who runs
through the early years is identical with a man who
runs through the later years, there is one man who
lives both early and late. But the times do not
overlap thereby; they share no (particular) part in
common. Hume consists of parts, different parts in
different times. He is partly in each of the times
during his life. The parts of him are not identical;
they don't even overlap. But the man which
includes one part is identical with the man which
includes the other. More simply: there is a man
they are both parts of.
Or so say 1. (And he. ) Of course, this account of
Hume's perdurance through time is controversial;
many would favour the view that he endures,
wholly present at every time of his life, so that
those times do overlap by having him as a shared
part. That would be 'identity over time' in a truer
sense. Such endurance may appeal to intuition, but
- so I argued in the previous section - it creates a
disastrous problem about Hume's temporary
intrinsic properties. The enduring Hume, multiply
located in time, turns out to be intrinsically shape-
less; he bent-shapes one time, he straight-shapes
another, but these relations are no part of the way
he is, considered in himself. I call that a reductio.
Likewise 'trans-world identity' in the truest sense­
overlap of worlds - creates a disastrous problem
about the accidental intrinsic properties of the
alleged common parts. But when we therefore
reject overlap of worlds, we need not reject trans­
world identity in the lesser sense which corres­
ponds to the interstate identity of the Hume
Highway or to (what I take to be) the identity
over time of Hume.
I shall argue that indeed there are things that
enjoy trans-world identity in this sense. But then I
shall argue that we ourselves, and other things that
we ordinarily name, or classify under predicates, or
quantify over, are not among them. So I oppose
trans-world individuals not by denying their exist­
ence - not when I quantify without restriction -
but rather by denying that they deserve our atten­
tion.
I do not deny the existence of trans-world indi­
viduals, and yet there is a sense in which I say that
they cannot possibly exist. As should be expected,
the sense in question involves restricted quantifica­
tion. It is possible for something to exist iff it is
possible for the whole of it to exist. That is, iff there
is a world at which the whole of it exists. That is, iff
there is a world such that, quantifying only over
parts of that world, the whole of it exists. That is,
iff the whole of it is among the parts of some world.
That is, iff it is part of some world - and hence not
a trans-world individual. Parts of worlds are poss­
ible individuals; trans-world individuals are there­
fore impossible individuals.
To call the trans-world individuals 'impossible'
in this sense is not an argument for ignoring them -
that comes later. It is only a terminological stipula­
tion. If we thought they should not be ignored,
perhaps because we thought that we ourselves
were trans-world individuals, it would be appro­
priate and easy to give 'possible individual' a more
inclusive sense. We could say that an individual
exists at a world iff, quantifying only over parts of
that world, some part of that individual exists - that
way, the trans-world individuals would count as
possible. If>
I claim that mereological compOSitIOn is unres­
tricted: any old class of things has a mereological
sum. Whenever there are some things, no matter
how disparate and unrelated, there is something
composed of just those things. Even a class of \nthings out of different worlds has a mereological
sum. That sum is a trans-world individual. It over­
laps each world that contributes a part of it, and so
is partly in each of many worlds.
We are happy enough with mereological sums of
things that contrast with their surroundings more
than they do with one another; and that are adja­
cent, stick together, and act jointly. We are more
reluctant to affirm the existence of mereological
sums of things that are disparate and scattered
and go their separate ways. A typical problem
case is a fleet: the ships contrast with their sur­
roundings more than with one another, they act
jointly, but they are not adjacent, nor do they stick
together. A class of things from different worlds
might do well on the first desideratum, but it will fail
miserably on the other three. Far from being adja­
cent, these things will not be spatio-temporally
related in any way; they can exert no cohesive
forces whatever on one another, nor can they have
any joint effects. So if composition could be
restricted in accordance with our intuitions about
this-worldly cases, then doubtless trans-world
composition would fall under the ban.
But composition cannot be restricted in accord­
ance with our intuitions about this-worldly cases,
as I shall shortly argue. Therefore a ban on trans­
world composition, though unproblematic in itself,
would be unmotivated and gratuitious. The simple
principle of absolutely unrestricted composition
should be accepted as trueY
The trouble with restricted composition is as
follows. It is a vague matter whether a given class
satisfies our intuitive desiderata for composition.
Each desideratum taken by itself is vague, and we
get still more vagueness by trading them off against
each other. To restrict composition in accordance
with our intuitions would require a vague restric­
tion. It's not on to say that somewhere we get just
enough contrast with the surroundings, just
enough cohesion, .. . to cross a threshold and per­
mit composition to take place, though if the
candidate class had been just a little worse it
would have remained sumless. But if composition
obeys a vague restriction, then it must sometimes
be a vague matter whether composition takes place
or not. And that is impossible.
The only intelligible account of vagueness
locates it in our thought and language. The reason
it's vague where the outback begins is not that
there's this thing, the outback, with imprecise bor­
ders; rather there are many things, with different
borders, and nobody has been fool enough to try to
Counterparts or Double Lives?
enforce a choice of one of them as the official
referent of the word 'outback, 18 Vagueness is
semantic indecision. But not all of language is
vague. The truth-functional connectives aren't,
for instance. Nor are the words for identity and
difference, and for the partial identity of overlap.
Nor are the idioms of quantification, so long as they
are unrestricted. How could any of these be vague?
What would be the alternatives between which we
haven't chosen?
The question whether composition takes place
in a given case, whether a given class does or does
not have a mereological sum, can be stated in a part
of language where nothing is vague. Therefore it
cannot have a vague answer. There is such a thing
as the sum, or there isn't. It cannot be said that,
because the desiderata for composition are satisfied
to a borderline degree, there sort of is and sort of
isn't. What is this thing such that it sort of is so,
and sort of isn't, that there is any such thing? No
restriction on composition can be vague. But unless
it is vague, it cannot fit the intuitive desiderata. So
no restriction on composition can serve the intu­
itions that motivate it. So restriction would be
gratuitous. Composition is unrestricted, and so
there are trans-world individuals.
(To be sure, a ban against trans-world composi­
tion would not itself be a vague restriction, so it
would not fall victim to the argument just given.
But taken by itself it would be unmotivated. To
motivate it, we have to subsume it under a broader
restriction. Which can't be done, because a well­
motivated broader restriction would be vague. )
Restrict quantifiers, not composition. Vague
existence, speaking unrestrictedly, is unintelligible;
vague existence, speaking restrictedly, is unproble­
matic. Is it so, ignoring things that don't measure
up to certain standards of unification of their parts,
that this class has a mereological sum? Definitely
yes, if the sum definitely does measure up; defin­
itely no, if it definitely doesn't; not definitely one
way or the other, if the sum, is a borderline case
with respect to unification. There is a sum, unres­
trictedly speaking, but it can perfectly well be a
vague matter whether this sum falls within a
vaguely restricted domain of quantification. Speak­
ing restrictedly, of course we can have our intu­
itively motivated restrictions on composition. But
not because composition ever fails to take place;
rather, because we sometimes ignore some of all the
things there really are.
We have no name for the mereological sum of
the right half of my left shoe plus the Moon plus \nDavid Lewis
the sum of all Her Majesty's ear-rings, except for
the long and clumsy name I just gave it; we have no
predicates under which such entities fall, except for
technical terms like 'physical object' (in a special
sense known to some philosophers) or blanket
terms like 'entity' and maybe 'thing', we seldom
admit it to our domains of restricted quantification.
It is very sensible to ignore such a thing in our
everyday thought and language. But ignoring it
won't make it go away. And really making it go
away without making too much else go away as well
- that is, holding a theory according to which
classes have mereological sums only when we intu­
itively want them to - turns out not to be feasible.
If unrestricted composition is granted, I can refor­
mulate counterpart theory in terms of trans-world
individuals. This will begin as an exercise in defi­
nition-mongering, nothing more. For the time
being, I shall continue to suppose that ordinary
individuals - we ourselves, and other things we
have ordinary names and predicates and quantified
variables for - never exist at more than one world.
Of course, an ordinary individual will exist accord­
ing to other worlds, thanks to its other-worldly
counterparts. Still, it is a part of one world only,
and neither the whole nor any (particular) part of it
is part of any other world. In short: my usual
doctrines. Only the formulation will change.
(Almost my usual doctrines. For simplicity I
shall impose one extra assumption: that the coun­
terpart relation is symmetric. Also, I shall leave one
assumption in force that I would sometimes be
willing to drop: that nothing is a counterpart of
anything else in its own world. I take both of these
assumptions to be correct for some but not all
reasonable candidate counterpart relations, so that
imposing them amounts to somewhat narrowing
down what the counterpart relation might be, and
thus giving up a little of the built-in flexibility of
counterpart theory. )
As suggested above, let us call an individual
which is wholly part of one world a possible indivi­
dual. 19 If a possible individual X is part of a trans­
world individual Y, and X is not a proper part of
any other possible individual that is part ofY, let us
call X a stage of Y. The stages of a trans-world
individual are its maximal possible parts; they are
the intersections of it with the worlds which it
overlaps. It has at most one stage per world, and
it is the mereological sum of its stages. Sometimes
one stage of a trans-world individual will be a
counterpart of another. If all stages of a trans-
world individual Yare counterparts of one another,
let us call Y counterpart-interrelated. IfY is counter­
part-interrelated, and not a proper part of any other
counterpart-interrelated trans-world individual
(i. e. , if Y is maximal counterpart-interrelated),
then let us call Y a '"-possible individual.
Given any predicate that applies to possible
individuals, we can define a corresponding starred
predicate that applies to '"-possible individuals
relative to worlds. A '"-possible individual is a
'"-man at W iff it has a stage at W that is a man; it
'"-wins the presidency at W iff it has a stage at W that
wins the presidency; it is a '"-ordina~y individual at
W iff it has a stage at W that is an ordinary indivi­
dual. It '"-exists at world W iff it has a stage at W
that exists; likewise it '"-exists in its entirety at world
W iff it has a stage at W that exists in its entirety, so
- since any stage at any world does exist in its
entirety - a '"-possible individual '"-exists in its
entirety at any world where it '"-exists at all.
(Even though it does not exist in its entirety at
any world. ) It '"-is not a trans-world individual at
W iff it has a stage at W that is not a trans-world
individual, so every '"-possible individual (although
it is a trans-world individual) also '"-is not a trans­
world individual at any world. It is a '"-possible
individual at W iff it has a stage at W that is a
possible individual, so something is a '"-possible
individual simpliciter iff it is a '"-possible individual
at every world where it '"-exists. Likewise for rela­
tions. One '"-possible individual '"-kicks another at
world W iff a stage at W of the first kicks a stage at
W of the second; two '"-possible individuals are
'"-identical at W iff a stage at W of the first is
identical to a stage at W of the second; and so on.
Two further conventions for the starred lan­
guage. I shall often omit 'at W' when the world in
question is ours; and I shall use starred pronouns as
variables over '"-possible individuals, saying, as it
might be, that if one '"-man '"-kicks '"-another, then
the '"-latter '"-kicks '"-him back.
To any name of a possible individual, there
corresponds a predicate: 'Humphrey' and 'is Hum­
phrey', or 'Socrates' and 'Socratizes'. Our schema
for defining starred predicates applies as much to
these predicates as to any other. A '"-possible indi­
vidual '"-is Humphrey at W iff it has a stage at W
that is Humphrey. If'Humphrey' names our Hum­
phrey and not his other-worldly counterparts, this
means that a '"-possible individual '"-is Humphrey
iff Humphrey is its stage at the actual world. We
could try defining names for '"-possible indivi­
duals, saying for instance that '"-Humphrey is the \none that "'-is Humphrey. The problem is that, since
Humphrey has twin counterparts at some worlds,
many different possible individuals "'-are Hum­
phrey, and so are equally candidates to bear the
name ''''-Humphrey'. We can say in the plural that
all of them are "'-Humphreys. As for the name in
the singular, let us regard it as ambiguous: its
different disambiguations make it name different
"'-Humphreys. But often its ambiguity will not
matter. The "'-Humphreys, though different, are
all "'-identical at this world. Therefore all or none
of them are "'-men at this world, all or none of them
"'-win the presidency at this world, and so on. The
things we might say using the starred name in non­
modal contexts will have the same truth-value on
all disambiguations. Such a sentence is true, or is
false, for every way of disambiguating its starred
names. (For short: every way. ) For instance it is
true, every way, that "'-Humphrey is a "'-man. It is
false, every way, that "'-Humphrey "'-wins.
As for modal contexts, we should note that two
possible individuals are counterparts iff there is
some "'-pus sible individual of which they both are
stages. (Here I use the two simplifying assumptions
I imposed on the counterpart relation. ) Then
Humphrey has some other-worldly stage as a coun­
terpart iff, for some way of disambiguating the
starred name (for short: some way) that stage
belongs to "'-Humphrey. I would ordinarily say
that Humphrey might have won iff he has some
counterpart who wins; and that he is essentially a
man iff all his counterparts are men. Now I can say,
equivalently, that Humphrey might have won iff,
some way, there is a world where "'-Humphrey
"'-wins; and he is essentially a man iff, every way,
"'-Humphrey is a "'-man at every world where "'-he
"'-exists.
But 'might have won' and 'is essentially a man'
are predicates that apply to possible individuals. So
we can star them: a "'-possible individual "'-might
have won at world W iff it has a stage at W that
might have won; a "'-possible individual is "'-essen­
tiallya man at world W iff it has a stage there that is
essentially a man. Now we can say that "'-Hum­
phrey "'-might have won iff, some way, there is a
world where "'-Humphrey "'-wins; and "'-Hum­
phrey is "'-essentially a man iff, every way, "'-Hum­
phrey is a "'-man at every world where "'-he "'-exists.
We have very little remaining use for the
unstarred predicates and names and pronouns of
ordinary things, since we can use the starred voca­
bulary even when talking entirely about what goes
on at this world. 2o At this point somebody - as it
----------------------
Counterparts or Double Lives?
might be, the long-suffering compositor - might be
heard to suggest a new convention for our lan­
guage, at least when it is used outside the philo­
sophy room: leave off all the stars. Do it: then here
are some doctrines I take to be true.
Humphrey is a possible individual; he is an
ordinary individual; he is not a trans-world
individual. He exists; he exists at many worlds;
he exists in his entirety at any world where he
exists at all. He is a man; he is essentially a man
because, every way, he is a man at every world
where he exists. He lost; but he might have won
because, some way, there is a world where he
wins. Every way, Humphrey is identical to
Humphrey. But, some way, there are some
worlds where Humphrey is not identical to
Humphrey.
I dare say a fan of 'trans-world identity' might like
this new theory better than he liked counterpart
theory. That would be a mistake. It is counterpart
theory. 21 New terminology is not a new theory.
Saying that a horse's tail is a leg does not make
five-legged horses. Saying that Humphrey exists in
his entirety at many worlds does not make overlap
of worlds. I told you just what my words were
meant to mean, and I'm their master, so you
needn't hope that really they mean something else.
There's a question whether this fan of trans­
world identity ought to like counterpart theory
any better when he finds out how it can be restated.
Probably not. Sometimes it can indeed enhance the
plausibility of a theory to gain verbal agreement
with what opponents want to say, even at the cost
of a bit of gentle reinterpretation, but in the case at
hand the reinterpretation is much too violent to
buy any plausibility. Further, if what's wanted is
trans-world identity, I have all along agreed to it in
the uncontroversial sense: Humphrey - he himself,
the whole of him - exists (in his entirety) according
to many worlds. Many worlds represent de re of
him that he exists. They do it by counterparts, but
they do it. This is a less devious way to give the fan
what he says he wants.
So far, counterpart theory reworded, first harm­
lessly and then deceptively. But now someone
might say that I have made one mistake, as follows.
When I worked my way around to the starless
abbreviation of the starred language, I did not
forge a deceptive imitation of our ordinary lan­
guage. Rather, that was our ordinary language. I
returned home and knew the place for the first \nDavid Lewis
time. We ourselves, and other things that we ord­
inarily name, or classify under predicates, or quan­
tify over, are trans-world individuals unified by
counterpart relations. It is quite wrong to ignore
such things; we would be ignoring, inter alia, our­
selves. If anything, it is the stages that we should
ignore and leave out of our restricted quantifying.
The theory that ordinary things are trans-world
individuals, unified by counterpart relations among
their stages, really is a different theory from mine.
But the difference is limited. There is no disagree­
ment about what there is; there is no disagreement
about the analysis of modality. Rather, there is
extensive semantic disagreement. It is a disagree­
ment about which of the things my opponent and I
both believe in are rightly called persons, or sticks,
or stones.
In his 'Worlds away', Quine portrays a form of
modal realism that treats ordinary things as trans­
world individuals, perduring through nonoverlap­
ping worlds in just the way they perdure through
time and space. It isn't that he advocates such a
view; rather, he takes for granted that this is what
modal realism would be. 22 The reason is that he
takes the analogy of time and modality as his guide.
In the case of time we do not think of ourselves as
momentary stages, but rather as trans-time sums of
stages. (I agree. ) So we should say the same in the
case of modality. (Why? ) But it turns out that the
analogy is not so very good after all; the unification
of the sums is much more problematic for modality
than it is for time. (Again I agree. ) So much the
worse for modal realism. (No - so much the worse
for following the analogy wherever it may lead. )
Grant me, what is controversial, that we perdure
through time by having distinct temporal stages at
different times; else Q]. !ine's analogy of time and
modality doesn't even begin. (Then if in addition
we are trans-world individuals, there is a double
summation: we are composed of stages at different
worlds, which stages in turn are composed of stages
at different times within the same world. And of
course those are composed in turn of spatial parts. )
Even so, the unification of the sums would be more
problematic for modality than it is for time, in three
different ways.
(l) The temporal parts of an ordinary thing that
perdures through time are united as much by rela­
tions of causal dependence as by qualitative sim­
ilarity. In fact, both work together: the reason the
thing changes only gradually, for the most part, is
that the way it is at any time depends causally on
the way it was at the time just before, and this
dependence is by and large conservative. However,
there can be no trans-world causation to unite
counterparts. Their unification into a trans-world
individual can only be by similarity.
(2) To the extent that unification by similarity
does enter into perdurance through time, what
matters is not so much the long-range similarity
between separated stages, but rather the linkage of
separated stages by many steps of short-range sim­
ilarity between close stages in a one-dimensional
ordering. Change is mostly gradual, but not much
limited overall. There is no such one-dimensional
ordering given in the modal case. So any path is as
good as any other; and what's more, in logical space
anything that can happen does. So linkage by a
chain of short steps is too easy: it will take us
more or less from anywhere to anywhere. There­
fore it must be disregarded; the unification of
trans-world individuals must be a matter of direct
similarity between the stages. (Quine rests his
objection on this point. )
(3) In the case of temporal perdurance, it is
possible to get pathological cases: fission, fusion,
and people who gradually turn into different peo­
ple. These arise when the relation that unites the
stages is intransitive, so that different perduring
people overlap. Then what do we say when a
stage shared between two (or more) people is pres­
ent? Strictly speaking, two people are present there
by way of that one stage, but the fact that there are
two is extrinsic to the time in question. It seems for
all the world that there is only one. We will have to
say something counter-intuitive, but we get a
choice of evils. We could say that there are two
people; or that there is one, but really we're count­
ing stages rather than people; or that there is one,
and we're counting people, but we're not counting
all the people who are present; or that there is one,
and we're counting people, but we're not counting
them by identity. 2. 1 It really isn't nice to have to say
any of these things - but after all, we're talking
about something that doesn't really ever happen to
people except in science fiction stories and philo­
sophy examples, so is it really so very bad that
peculiar cases have to get described in peculiar
ways? We get by because ordinary cases are not
pathological. But modality is different: pathology is
everywhere. Whenever something in this world has
two counterparts that are not counterparts of each
other, we get two different maximal counterpart­
interrelated trans-world individuals which share a \ncommon stage at this world. That could happen
because the this-worldly stage has twin counter­
parts at some world - and I'd like to know how
anything could ever fail to have twin counterparts
somewhere, except under some very restrictive
notion about what eligible candidates for a counter­
part relation there are. Or it could happen still
more easily that something has two counterparts
at different worlds that are not counterparts of each
other. The counterpart relation is a matter of some
sort of similarity, little differences add up to big
differences, so of course there is intransitivity. So
the modal case will always, or almost always, give
us the same choice of evils about how to count that
the temporal case gives us only in connection with
far-fetched stories. If trans-world individuals are
oddities we mostly ignore, no harm done if we have
puzzles about how to count them from the stand­
point of a world where they share stages. But if they
are said to be ordinary things that we cannot
ignore, then these puzzles are much more obnox­
IOUS.
These three considerations are general. They apply
against the doctrine that we ourselves are trans­
world individuals, and equally against the doctrine
that sticks and stones are trans-world individuals.
But in the case of ourselves, there is a fourth con­
sideration. Consider the various desires of my vari­
ous temporal stages in this world. They differ, of
course; but there is plenty of common purpose to
it. To some extent, stages want to fulfil the remem­
bered desires of earlier stages: I strive for some­
thing today mainly because I wanted it yesterday.
Notes
Peter van Inwagen, 'Plantinga on trans-world iden­
tity' in J. Tomberlin and P. van Inwagen (eds), Alvin
Plantinga: A Profile (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985), p. 101.
2 See my 'Counterpart theory and quantified modal
logic', Journal 0/ Philosophy 65 (1968), pp. 113-26;
idem, 'Counterparts of persons and their Bodies',
Journal 0/ Philosopky 68 (1971), pp. 203-11; and
idem, Counter/actuals (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973), pp.
39-43; also David Kaplan, 'Transworld heir lines', in
Michael Loux (ed. ) The Possible and the Actual (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1979).
3 Saul Kripke, Naming and Necessity (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1980), p. 45.
4 Ibid. , p. 44.
5 Here I am indebted to Fabrizio Mondadori; see his
'Counterpartesc, counterpartese", Counterpartese',
Counterparts or Double Lives?
That is what it means not to be a quitter. To a
greater extent, stages want to fulfil the foreseen
desires of later stages: that is prudence. It isn't
quite all for one and one for all, of course - how I
envy my future self who is sending this manuscript
away! - but it is so to a great extent. Even if it is in
the first instance the momentary stages that do the
desiring, still a person perduring through time is
capable of collective self-interest. Not so across
worlds. My this-worldly self has no tendency to
make the purposes of its other-worldly counter­
parts its own. Far from wishing good fortune to
all the counterparts alike, what it wants is that it
should be one of the most fortunate among them.
There is no common purpose. The supposed trans­
world person, no matter how well unified by coun­
terpart relations, is not the sort of integrated self
that is capable of self-interest. How could it be, in
view of the absolute lack of causal connection
between its parts, and the non-contingency of its
total allotment of good and ill fortune? It would be
strange and pointless to think of the trans-world
sums in the way we are accustomed to think of
ourselves. That is further reason to set the trans­
world individuals aside as oddities best ignored.
The final, and simplest, reason is that a modal
realism which makes ordinary things out to be
trans-world individuals disagrees gratuitously
with common opinion. After all, not all of us are
modal realists; and those who are not (even the
ersatzers) couldn't possibly think of ordinary
things as having parts in many worlds. Surely it is
better for modal realists if they can think of people,
sticks, and stones exactly as others do.
Histoire. epistemologie, langage 5 (1983), pp. 69-94.
But I disagree with him at one point. He grants that
I may truly say that Humphrey himself might have
won; but then he insists that if we ask 'who would
have had the property of winning', my answer must be
'not Humphrey, but one of his counterparts' (p. 81).
Not so. The modal predicate 'would have had the
property of winning' is on a par with the modal
predicate 'might have won'. I can apply either
predicate in one sense to Humphrey, in another
sense to the victorious counterpart. If there is an
objection to be raised, it must be that I can say
unwanted things, not that I cannot say wanted things.
I reply that the unwanted things are not seriously
objectionable in the way the lack of the wanted things
would be. \nDavid Lewis
6 These sections are omitted in this volume; see David
Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell,
1986), pp. 220-63.
7 Omitted in this volume; see ibid. , pp. 220-48.
8 The next several paragraphs are mostly adapted from
my 'Individuation by acquaintance and by stipula­
tion', pp. 21-2, with the kind permission of the edi­
tors of Philosophical Review 92 (1983), pp. 3-32, at
Philosophical Review.
9 See my discussion in ibid. , sect. 1. 5 (pp. 50--69) of
'properties' that are had relative to this or that.
10 My discussion of this parallel problem is much
indebted to D. M. Armstrong, 'Identity through
time', and to Mark Johnston. I follow Johnston in
terminology. In, Peter van Inwagen (ed. ) Time and
Cause, (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1980).
II I attempt to explain it to others in Philosophical Papers
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1983), vol. I, pp.
76--7. But I have no great hopes, since any competent
philosopher who does not understand something will
take care not to understand anything else whereby it
might be explained.
12 A universal can safely be part of many worlds because
it hasn't any accidental intrinsics. But mightn't the
same be said of some simple particulars - tropes, if
such there be, or fundamental particles, or momentary
slices thereof? Maybe these things have no accidental
intrinsic properties - it certainly seems hard to think
of plausible candidates. If they haven't, then they too
could safely be shared between overlapping worlds.
We would not face a problem of accidental intrinsics.
But I suggest that we would face a parallel problem of
accidental external relations. Suppose we have a pair
of two of these simple particulars A and B, both of
which are common parts of various worlds. A and B
are a certain distance apart. Their distance, it seems, is
a relation of A and B and nothing else - it is not really a
three-place relation of A, B, and this or that world.
That means that A and B are precisely the same dis­
tance apart in all the worlds they are both part of. That
means (assuming that we explain representation de re
in terms of trans-world identity when we can) that it is
impossible that A and B should both have existed and
been a different distance apart. That seems wrong: it is
hard to suppose that the distance is essential to the
pair, equally hard to suppose that distance is not the
plain two-place relation that it seems to be. So trans­
world identity, even for simple particulars without
accidental intrinsic properties, is prima facie trouble.
An advocate of it will have some explaining to do, both
as to how he gets around the problem of accidental
external relations, and also as to what motivates it
when it cannot provide a fully general account of
representation de reo Such explaining may be found
in Mark Johnston, 'Particulars and Persistence'
(Ph. D. diss. , Princeton University, 1983), ch. 4.
13 In his 'Theories of actuality', Nous 8 (1974), pp. 211-
31, Robert M. Adams makes the same point; but while
I use it in favour of modal realism without overlap,
Adams uses it in favour of ersatzism.
14 In Amdie O. Rorty (ed. ) The Identities of Persons,
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976);
repr. , with added postscripts, in Lewis, Philosophical
Papers, vol. I.
15 Omitted in this volume; see Lewis, Plurality, pp. 220-
48.
16 Indeed, I think that in this sense, there would be
no impossible individuals. No individual is wholly
distinct from all the worlds; so every individual
is divisible into parts which are parts of worlds.
What of an individual that stands in none of the
external relations that unify worlds? - According to
what I said in Plurality, sect. 1. 6, it cannot be a
worldmate of anything else; but without world­
mates it can still be a world all on its own. Or, if its
parts are not suitably interrelated, it can divide into
several individuals each of which is a world all on
its own.
17 I really do mean absolutely unrestricted - for instance,
I see no bar to composition of sets with individuals, or
particulars with universals, or casts with numbers.
But here it will be enough to consider the composition
of particular individuals.
18 I realize that one can construct a so-called vague
object as a class of precise objects - i. e. , objects sim­
pliciter - and then quantify over these classes. I take
that project to be part of an analysis of vagueness in
language, not an alternative to it.
19 I avoid the convenient phrase 'world-bound indi­
vidual' because it often seems to mean an individual
that exists according to one world only, and I very
much doubt that there are any such individuals.
20 At this point, we have something resembling various
systems of quantified modal logic that quantify over
individual concepts: functions from worlds to indivi­
duals. Carnap's Meaning and Necessity system is of
this kind; but there is more of a resemblance to later
systems that quantify only over certain selected indi­
vidual concepts. See, for instance, Kaplan, 'Trans­
world heir lines'; Richmond Thomason, 'Modal logic
and metaphysics', in Karel Lambert (ed. ), The Logical
Way of Doing Things, (New Haven, Conn. : Yale Uni­
versity Press, 1969) (the system 0)); Gibbard, this
volume, ch. 9; and many papers by Hintikka from the
sixties and seventies. If worlds never overlap, then
there is a one-to-one correspondence between my
trans-world individuals and functions from worlds
to parts of themselves. So if those functions were the
only individual concepts we wanted to quantify over,
we might as well replace set-theoretic construction by
mereology. It is sometimes hard to tell how these
systems are meant to be understood - whether ordin­
ary things are supposed to be the world-to-individual
functions or the values of those functions, whether the
worlds or the individuals or both are supposed to be
ersatz. \n21 Plus unrestricted composition, plus two slightly
restrictive assumptions on the counterpart relation.
22 W. V. Quine, 'Worlds away', Journal of Philosophy 73
(1976), pp. 859-63, appears to be about genuine
modal realism. There is no connection with the math­
ematical construction of ersatz worlds he had consid-
Counterparts or Double Lives?
ered in 'Propositional objects', in Quine, Ontological
Relativity and other Essays (New York: Columbia
University Press, 1969), unless it be a subterranean
connection by way of Pythagorean reduction and
ontological relativity.
23 See my 'Survival and identity'. \n14
Robert M. Adams
Is the world - and are all possible worlds - con­
stituted by purely qualitative facts, or does thisness
hold a place beside such ness as a fundamental
feature of reality? Some famous philosophers -
Leibniz, Russell, and Ayer, for example - have
believed in a purely qualitative constitution of
things; others, such as Scotus, Kant, and Peirce,
have held to primitive thisness. Recent discussions
of direct, non descriptive reference to individuals
have brought renewed interest in the idea of pri­
mitive, non qualitative thisness.
I am inclined to accept primitive thisness, but
for reasons that do not depend very heavily on
recent semantics. In the present essay I will try to
justify my position - but even more to sort out
some issues that are easily and often confused. I
will begin (in section I) by trying to elucidate some
terms that will be important in the discussion.
Leibniz will be discussed in section 2 as the arche­
typal believer in a purely qualitative universe. I will
argue that his position is not inconsistent with the
semantics of direct reference, and that proponents
of primitive thisness must attack rather a certain
doctrine of the Identity of Indiscernibles. Two
types of argument against that doctrine will be
analyzed and defended in sections 3 and 4.
Primitive this ness has been associated or even
identified, in recent discussion, with primitive
identity and non-identity of individuals in different
possible worlds. I The association is appropriate,
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 76 (1979).
pp. 5-26. Copyright 1') by Journal of Philosophy. Inc.
Reprinted by permission of Columbia University.
but the main issue about primitive transworld
identity is quite different from that about primitive
this ness, as will be argued in section 5, where I will
also defend the primitiveness of transworld ident­
ity. The sixth and final section of the paper will be
devoted to some problems about necessary connec­
tions between qualitative properties and primitive
thisnesses.
1 Thisness and Suchness
Three notions that we will use call for some eluci­
dation at the outset. They are the notions of an
individual, of a thisness, and of a purely qualitative
property or (as I shall call it) a suchness.
By "individual" here I mean particulars such as
persons, physical objects, and events. It is assumed
that numbers and universals are not individuals in
this sense, and that particular places and times are
individuals if they have an absolute being and
identity independent of their relation to particular
physical objects and events.
A thisness2 is the property of being identical
with a certain particular individual - not the prop­
erty that we all share, of being identical with some
individual or other, but my property of being
identical with me, your property of being identical
with you, etc. These properties have recently been
called "essences, ". 1 but that IS historically
unfortunate; for essences have normally been
understood to be constituted by qualitative proper­
ties, and we are entertaining the possibility of non­
qualitative thisnesses. In defining "thisness" as I \nhave, I do not mean to deny that universals have
analogous properties - for example, the property of
being identical with the quality red. But since we
are concerned here principally with the question
whether the identity and distinctness of individuals
is purely qualitative or not, it is useful to reserve
the term "thisness" for the identities of individuals.
It may be controversial to speak of a "property"
of being identical with me. I want the word "prop­
erty" to carry as light a metaphysical load here as
possible. "Thisness" is intended to be a synonym
or translation of the traditional term "haecceity"
(in Latin, haecceitas), which so far as I know was
invented by Duns Scotus. Like many medieval
philosophers, Scotus regarded properties as com­
ponents of the things that have them. He intro­
duced haecceities (thisness), accordingly, as a
special sort of metaphysical component of indivi­
duals: I am not proposing to revive this aspect of
his conception of a haecceity, because I am not
committed to regarding properties as components
of individuals. To deny that thisnesses are purely
qualitative is not necessarily to postulate "bare
particulars, " substrata without qualities of their
own, which would be what was left of the indivi­
dual when all its qualitative properties were sub­
tracted. Conversely, to hold that thisnesses are
purely qualitative is not to imply that individuals
are nothing but bundles of qualities, for qualities
may not be components of individuals at all.
We could probably conduct our investigation, in
somewhat different terms, without referring to
thisnesses as properties; but the concept of a such­
ness is not so dispensable. Without the distinction
between the qualitative and the nonqualitative, the
subject of this paper does not exist. I believe the
concept, and the distinction, can be made clear
enough to work with, though not, I fear, clear
enough to place them above suspicion.
We might try to capture the idea by saying that a
property is purely qualitative - a suchness - if and
only if it could be expressed, in a language suffi­
ciently rich, without the aid of such referential
devices as proper names, proper adjectives and
verbs (such as "Leibnizian" and "pegasizes"),
indexical expressions, and referential uses of defi­
nite descriptions. That seems substantially right,
but may be suspected of circularity, on the ground
that the distinction between qualitative and non­
qualitative might be prior to the notions of some of
those referential devices. I doubt that it really is
circular, in view of the separation between seman­
tical and metaphysical issues for which I shall argue
Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity
in section 2; but it would take us too far afield to
pursue the issue of circularity here.
There is another and possibly more illuminating
approach to the definition of "suchness". All the
properties that are, in certain senses, general (cap­
able of being possessed by different individuals)
and nonrelational are suchnesses. More precisely,
let us say that a basic suchness is a property that
satisfies the following three conditions. (I) It is not
a thisness and is not equivalent to one. (2) It is not a
property of being related in one way or another to
one or more particular individuals (or to their
thisnesses). This is not to deny that some basic
suchnesses are in a sense relational (and thus do
not fall in the Aristotelian category of Quality,
though they count as "purely qualitative" for pres­
ent purposes). An example may help to clarify this.
The property of owning the house at 1011 Rose
Avenue, Ann Arbor, Michigan, is not a basic such­
ness, although several different individuals have
had it, because it involves the this ness of that
particular house. But the property of being a
home-owner is a basic suchness, although rela­
tional, because having it does not depend on
which particular home one owns. (3) A basic such­
ness is not a property of being identical with or
related in one way or another to an extensionally
defined set that has an individual among its mem­
bers, or among its members' members, or among
its members' members' members, etc. Thus, if
being an American is to be analyzed as a relation
to a set of actual people and places, it is not a basic
suchness.
These three conditions may be taken as jointly
sufficient for being a suchness, but it is not clear
that they are also necessary for being a suchness.
For it seems intuitively that any property that is
constructed by certain operations out of purely
qualitative properties must itself be purely
qualitative. The operations I have in mind for the
construction are of two sorts. (I) They may be
logical, such as those expressed by "not", "or",
and 1('3X)¢(, x)l, where the property ascribed to
x by 1('3y)¢(y, x)l is a basic suchness or con­
structed by allowed operations out of basic such­
nesses. Or (2) they may be epistemic, such as those
expressed by I believes that p 1 and I wishes that p 1,
where p is a proposition constructed, by allowed
operations, solely out of basic suchnesses. So if
your thisness, or a property equivalent to the prop­
erty of being (identical with) you, could be con­
structed in these ways as a complex of basic
suchnesses, it would seem intuitively to be a \nRobert M. Adams
suchness, although (by definition) it is not a basic
suchness. Indeed, as we shall see, this is precisely
the way in which Leibniz attempts to account for
individuality in a purely qualitative universe.
So as not to beg the question against him, let us
define a suchness as a property that is either a basic
suchness or constructed out of basic suchnesses in
such a way as I have indicated. This recursive
definition of "suchness" seems to me to capture
the notion I want to discuss; but it depends on
notions of property construction and of being a
relation to a particular individual which may them­
selves be somewhat unclear or otherwise debatable.
In any event, I am prepared to accept the notion of
a suchness, and related notions of qualitativeness of
facts, similarities, differences, etc. , as primitive if
they cannot be satisfactorily defined. Some philo­
sophers may entirely reject this distinction between
the qualitative and the nonqualitative, or may
doubt that there are any properties that really
ought to count as suchnesses under it. We shall
not be concerned here with these doubts, but rather
with what can be said, within the framework of the
distinction, against those philosophers who think
that all properties are suchnesses and all facts
purely qualitative.
2 The Leibnizian Position
Leibniz held, as I have suggested, that the thisness
of each particular individual is a suchness. "Singu­
lars, " he said, "are in fact infimae species, " the
lowest or final species, the most specific members
of the system of kinds. In this, as he sometimes
remarked, he was extending to all individuals the
doctrine of Thomas Aquinas about angels, that
each one constitutes a separate species. 5
The idea behind this claim is fairly simple,
though the structure it postulates for thisnesses is
infinitely complex. According to Leibniz, the
terms of all propositions, at least as they are appre­
hended by the omniscience of God, are analyzable
into simple, purely qualitative concepts. The con­
struction of complex concepts out of simple ones is
by logical operations; Leibniz thinks principally of
conjunction and negation. The concept of an indi­
vidual, which as we may put it expresses the prop­
erty of being that individual, differs from more
general concepts in being complete. 6 What makes a
thing an individual, in other words, is that, in the
logical construction of its concept, differentia is
added to differentia until a concept is reached so
specific that no new content can consistently be
added to it.
Leibniz expresses this notion of completeness by
saying that the concept of an individual implies
every predicate of the individual. He inferred,
notoriously, that alternative careers cannot be pos­
sible for the same individual. If a man never mar­
ries, for example, the concept of him must contain
the predicate of never marrying, and so it would
have been contradictory for him to have married. 7 I
see no need to incorporate this implausible thesis in
the theory of purely qualitative thisnesses. For if
God can form complete concepts in the way that
Leibniz supposes, he can also form the concept of a
being that satisfies either one or another or
another. .. of them. 8 If individuals are defined by
disjunctive concepts of the latter sort, there are
alternative careers, in different possible worlds,
that they could have had. And if Leibnizian com­
plete concepts are purely qualitative, so are dis­
junctions of them. The completeness of
individual concepts, at least in the form actually
maintained by Leibniz, is therefore not to be
regarded as an integral part of the "Leibnizian
position" under discussion here.
If we want an up-to-date argument for primitive,
nonqualitative thisnesses, we may be tempted to
seek it in the semantics of direct reference. Several
philosophers have made a persuasive case for the
view that we often succeed in referring to a part­
icular individual without knowing any clearly qua­
litative property, or even any disjunction of such
properties, that a thing must possess in order to be
that individual. Such direct reference is commonly
effected by the use of proper names and indexical
expressions, and sometimes by what has been
called the "referential" use of descriptions. 9 If
these claims are correct (as I believe they are),
doesn't it follow that thisnesses are primitive and
non qualitative?
Yes and no. It follows that thisnesses are semant­
icalzy primitive - that is, that we can express them
(and know that we express them) without under­
standing each thisness (the property of being this
or that individual) in terms of some other property
or properties, better known to us, into which it
can be analyzed or with which it is equivalent.
But it does not follow that thisnesses are not ana­
lyzable into, equivalent with, or even identical
with, purely qualitative properties or suchnesses,
as claimed by Leibniz. Thus it does not follow
that we are entitled to say that thisnesses are meta­
physicalry primitive in the sense that interests \nus here, or (more precisely) that they are non­
qualitative.
For Leibniz could certainly accept direct refer­
ence without giving up his conception of thisnesses
as qualitative properties. All he must say is that we
can refer to individuals, and thus express their
thisnesses, without understanding the analyses
that show the thisnesses to be qualitative. And
that he believed in any case. On his view the com­
plete, definitive concept of an individual is infin­
itely complex and, therefore, cannot be distinctly
apprehended by any finite mind, but only by
God. Hence we must refer to the concept of the
individual by reference to the individual (as "the
individual notion or haecceity of Alexander, " 10 for
example), rather than referring to the individual as
the one who satisfies the concept.
We may rely intuitively on direct reference in
arguing for nonqualitative thisnesses, but the issue
of direct reference is not the center of our meta­
physical inquiry. The purely qualitative concep­
tion of individuality stands or falls, rather, with a
certain doctrine of the Identity of Indiscernibles.
The Identity ofIndiscernibles might be defined,
in versions of increasing strength, as the doctrine
that no two distinct individuals can share (l) all
their properties, or (2) all their suchnesses, or (3) all
their nonrelational suchnesses. Leibniz takes no
pains to distinguish these three doctrines, because
he holds all of them; but it is only the second that
concerns us here. The first is utterly trivial. If
thisnesses are properties, of course two distinct
individuals, Castor and Pollux, cannot have all
their properties in common. For Castor must
have the properties of being identical with Castor
and not being identical with Pollux, which Pollux
cannot share. II The third doctrine, rejecting the
possibility of individuals differing in relational
suchnesses alone, is a most interesting thesis, but
much more than needs to be claimed in holding
that reality must be purely qualitative. Let us
therefore here reserve the title "Identity of Indis­
cernibles" for the doctrine that any two distinct
individuals must differ in some suchness, either
relational or nonrelational.
I say, the doctrine that they must so differ. Leib­
niz commonly states this principle, and the stron­
ger principle about relations, in the language of
necessity. And well he might; for he derives them
from his theory of the nature of an individual
substance, and ultimately from his conception of
the nature of truth, which he surely regarded as
absolutely necessary. 12 He was not perfectly con-
Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity
sis tent about this. He seemed to admit to Clarke
that there could have been two perfectly indiscern­
ible things. But, as Clarke remarked, some ofLeib­
niz's arguments require the claim of necessity. 13
And it is only if necessity is claimed, that philoso­
phically interesting objections can be raised to the
Identity of Indiscernibles. For surely we have no
reason to believe that there actually are distinct
individuals that share all their qualitative proper­
ties, relational as well as nonrelational.
Here we are concerned with the necessary con­
nection between the Identity of Indiscernibles, in
the sense I have picked out, and Leibniz's concep­
tion of thisnesses as suchnesses. If individuals are
infimae species, then "the principle of individuation
is always some specific difference, ,; 14 individuals
must be distinguished by their suchnesses. Con­
versely, the clearest way of proving the distinctness
of two properties is usually to find a possible case in
which one would be exemplified without the other.
In order to establish the distinctness of thisnesses
from all suchnesses, therefore, one might try to
exhibit possible cases in which two things would
possess all the same suchnesses, but with different
thisnesses. That is, one might seek counter­
examples to refute the Identity of Indiscernibles.
Indeed a refutation of that doctrine is precisely
what is required for the defense of nonqualitative
thisnesses. For suppose the Identity of Indiscern­
ibles is true. And suppose further, as Leibniz did
and as believers in the doctrine may be expected to
suppose, that it is true of possible worlds as well as
of individuals, so that no two possible worlds are
exactly alike in all qualitative respects. Then for
each possible individual there will be a suchness of
the disjunctive form:
having suchnesses Sci in a world that has such­
nesses Swl, or
having suchnesses S, 2 in a world that has such­
nesses Sw2, or. ..
which that individual will possess in every world in
which it occurs, and which no other individual will
possess in any possible world. IS This suchness will,
therefore, be necessarily equivalent to the property
of being that individual, and, since there will be
such a suchness for every individual, it follows that
every individual's thisness will be equivalent to a
suchness.
Perhaps it does not follow immediately that
every possible individual's thisness will be a
suchness. If being an even prime and being the \nRobert M. Adams
successor of I may be distinct though necessarily
equivalent properties, some thisness and some
suchness might also be distinct though necessarily
equivalent. But if every thisness must be necessa­
rily equivalent to a suchness, it will be hard to show
that thisnesses distinct from suchnesses cannot be
dispensed with, or that possible worlds cannot all
be constituted purely qualitatively.
On the other hand, if it is possible for there to be
distinct but qualitatively indiscernible individuals,
it is possible for there to be individuals whose
thisnesses are both distinct from all suchnesses
and necessarily equivalent to no suchness. And in
that case there is some point to distinguishing the
thisnesses of individuals systematically from their
suchnesses. For it is plausible to suppose that the
structure of individuality is sufficiently similar in
all cases that, if in some possible cases thisnesses
would be distinct from all suchnesses, then this­
nesses are universally distinct from suchnesses -
even if some thisnesses (including, for all we know,
those of all actual individuals) are necessarily
equivalent to some suchnesses.
3 The Dispersal Arguments against the
Identity of Indiscernibles
The standard argument against the Identity of
Indiscernibles, going back at least to Kant, 16 is
from spatial dispersal. Max Black's version17 is
fairly well known. We are to imagine a universe
consisting solely of two large, solid globes of iron.
They always have been, are, and always will be
exactly similar in shape (perfectly spherical), size,
chemical composition, color - in short, in every
qualitative respect. They even share all their rela­
tional suchnesses; for example, each of them has the
property of being two diameters from another iron
globe similar to itself. Such a universe seems to be
logically possible; hence it is concluded that there
could be two qualitatively indiscernible things and
that the Identity of Indiscernibles is false.
Similar arguments may be devised using much
more complicated imaginary universes, which may
have language-users in them. Such universes may
be perfectly symmetrical about a central point, line,
or plane, throughout their history. Or they may
always repeat themselves to infinity in every direc­
tion, like a monstrous three-dimensional wallpaper
pattern.
The reason that is assumed to show that the
indiscernibles in these imaginary universes are
not identical is not that they have different proper­
ties, but that they are spatially dispersed, spatially
distant from one another. The axiom about identity
that is used here is not that the same thing cannot
both have and lack the same property, but that the
same thing cannot be in two places at once - that is,
cannot be spatially distant from itself. 18
An argument for the possibility of non-identical
indiscernibles, very similar to the argument from
spatial dispersal, and as good, can also be given
from temporal dispersal. For it seems that there
could be a perfectly cyclical universe in which
each event was preceded and followed by infinitely
many other events qualitatively indiscernible from
itself. Thus there would be distinct but indiscern­
ible events, separated by temporal rather than spa­
tial distances. And depending on our criteria of
transtemporal identity, it might also be argued
that there would be indiscernible persons and phy­
sical objects, similarly separated by temporal dis­
tances.
In a recent interesting article Ian Hacking argues
that "it is vain to contemplate possible spatiotem­
poral worlds to refute or establish the identity of
indiscernibles. ,, 19 He holds that
Whatever God might create, we are clever
enough to describe it in such a way that the
identity of indiscernibles is preserved. This is a
fact not about God but about description,
space, time, and the laws that we ascribe to
nature. 20
The dichotomy between what God might create
and our descriptions is important here. Hacking
allows that there are consistent descriptions of
non-identical indiscernibles and that there are pos­
sible states of affairs in which those descriptions
would not exactly be false. On the other h~nd, he
thinks that those same possible states of affairs
could just as truly (not more truly, but just as
truly) be described as containing only one thing
in place of each of the sets of indiscernibles. The
two descriptions are very different, but there is no
difference at all in the possible reality that they
represent. Thus Hacking is not exactly asserting
the Identity of Indiscernibles. But his rejection of
primitive, nonqualitative thisness runs at least as
deep as Leibniz's. He thinks that there cannot be
any objective fact of the matter about how many
individuals are present in the cases that seem to be
counterexamples to the Identity of Indiscernibles.
And on his view the constitution of reality, of what \n"God might create, " as distinct from our descrip­
tions of it, is purely qualitative.
Hacking's criticisms are directed against both
the spatial-and the temporal-dispersal arguments
for the possibility of non-identical indiscernibles.
The most telling point he makes against them is
that they overlook the possibility of alternative
geometries and chronometries. If we have a space
or time that is curved, then an individual can be
spatially or temporally distant from itself, and dis­
tance does not prove distinctness. Hacking makes
this point most explicitly about time, 21 but he
could also use it to criticize the spatial argument,
as follows: "The most that God could create of the
world imagined by Black is a globe of iron, having
internal qualities Q, which can be reached by tra­
veling two diameters in a straight line from a globe
of iron having qualities Q This possible reality can
be described as two globes in Euclidean space, or as
a single globe in a non-Euclidean space so tightly
curved that the globe can be reached by traveling
two diameters in a straight line from itself. But the
difference between these descriptions represents
no difference in the way things could really be. "
There are at least two possible replies to Hack­
ing. (1) He acknowledges that if "absolute space­
time" is accepted, the spatial and temporal disper­
sal arguments are quite successful in refuting the
Identity of Indiscernibles. But to hold, as he seems
to, 22 that no weaker assumption would vindicate
the arguments is to demand more than is needed.
The dispersal arguments hold up very well even if
places and times are defined in terms of relations of
objects, provided that certain spatiotemporal rela­
tional properties of objects are accepted as primi­
tive. For example, if it is a primitive feature of a
possible reality that an iron globe such as Black
describes can be reached by traveling some distance
in one direction on a Euclidean straight line from
an exactly similar globe, then non-identical indis­
cernibles are possible in reality and not just in
description.
In order to reply to Hacking in this way, one
must assume that a difference in geometries makes,
in its own right, a difference in possible worlds, so
the same paths in the same universe could not be
described, without error, both as Euclidean
straight paths and as non-Euclidean straight
paths. One must assume that facts about what
geometry the universe has are not reducible to
facts about what laws of nature best explain other,
more primitive facts about objects in space; in
particular, one must assume that what geometry
Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity
the universe has does not depend on a determina­
tion of the number of objects in space. Some phi­
losophers may accept these assumptions, and I do
not have any better than intuitive grounds for
rejecting them. Like Hacking, nonetheless, I am
inclined to reject them.
(2) The most obvious and fundamental differ­
ence between Black's imaginary Euclidean (or
gently Riemannian) two-globe universe and its
tightly curved one-globe counterpart seems to be
that in one of them there are two iron globes, and in
the other only one. Why can't that be a difference
between possible realities in its own right? Indeed,
I think it is extremely plausible to regard it SO. 23
To give this answer, of course, is to hold that the
thisnesses of the two globes are metaphysically
primitive. The function of the imaginary spatio­
temporal world here is not to show how individual
distinctness can be explained by spatiotemporal
relations; no such explanation is needed if this­
nesses are metaphysically primitive. The imaginary
world simply provides an example in which it
seems intuitively that two individuals would be
distinct although it is clear that they would have
all the same suchnesses.
The intuition involved here is akin to those
which support belief in direct reference. This will
be clearer if we imagine that we are on one of the
two globes, with indiscernible twins on the other,
so that the use of demonstratives will be possible.
Then we can appeal to the intuition that it means
something, which we understand quite well and
which if true expresses a metaphysical reality, to
say that this globe is not identical with that one,
even in a situation in which we are not able to
distinguish them qualitatively. But the argument
goes beyond direct reference in one important
respect: it incorporates a judgment that the asser­
tion of individual distinctness is not only intelligi­
ble independently of qualitative difference, but also
consistent with the assumption that there is no
qualitative difference.
4 Arguments from the Possibility of
Almost Indiscernible Twins
We may just have an intuition that there could be
distinct, though indiscernible, globes in these cir­
cumstances. But there may also be an argument for
this view - which will depend in turn on other
intuitions, like all arguments in these matters.
The argument might rest on an intuition that the \nRobert M. Adams
possibility of there being two objects in a given
spatiotemporal relation to each other is not affected
by any slight changes in such features as the color
or chemical composition of one or both objects. 24 If
we accept that intuition, we can infer the possibility
of indiscernible twins from the uncontroversial
possibility of almost indiscernible twins. No one
doubts that there could be a universe like the uni­
verse of our example in other respects, if one of the
two globes had a small chemical impurity that the
other lacked. Surely, we may think, the absence of
the impurity would not make such a universe
impossible.
Spatiotemporal dispersal still plays a part in this
argument. But one can argue against the Identity of
Indiscernibles from the possibility of almost indis­
cernible twins in quite a different way, using an
example that has to do primarily with minds rather
than with bodies. Suppose I have an almost indis­
cernible twin. The only qualitative difference
between him and me, and hence between his part
of the universe and mine, is that on one night of our
lives (when we are 27 years old) the fire-breathing
dragon that pursues me in my nightmare has ten
horns, whereas the monster in his dream has only
seven. I assume that the number of horns is little
noted nor long remembered, and that any other,
causally associated differences between his and my
lives and parts of the world are slight and quite
local. No doubt there is a possible world (call it w)
in which there are almost indiscernible twins of this
sort; it is only an expository convenience to assume
that I am one of them and that w is actual. But if
such a world is even possible, it seems to follow that
a world with perfectly indiscernible twins is also
possible. For surely I could have existed, and so
could my twin, if my monster had had only seven
horns, like his. And that could have been even if
there were no other difference from the lives we
live in w, except in the details causally connected
with the number of horns in my dream. In that case
we would have been distinct but qualitatively indis­
cernible - a relation which seems therefore to be
logically possible.
Several points in this argument call for further
mention or explanation. (l) The non-identity
obtaining between me and my twin in w is proved
by a qualitative difference between us there. (2)
The argument depends on an intuition of trans­
world identity - that in a possible world (call it w'),
otherwise like w, but in which my dragon has only
seven horns, there could exist an individual ident­
ical with me and an individual identical with my
twin, even though we would not be qualitatively
different in that case. (3) The transitivity of ident­
ity is relied on in arguing that since my twin and I
are not identical in w (as shown by the difference in
our suchnesses there), it follows that we are not
identical in any possible world, and therefore are
distinct in w', if we both exist in it.
(4) Because differences in modal properties can
be purely qualitative, the conclusion that my twin
and I would be qualitatively indiscernible in w'
depends, additionally, on the assumption that in
w' he as well as I would be a person who could have
dreamed of a ten-horned monster in the circum­
stances in which I did in w. In other words, it is
assumed that if wand w' are possible, so is a world
wI! just like w except that in wI! it is my twin's beast
that has ten horns and mine that has seven. (More
precisely, it is assumed that wand wI! would be
equally possible if w' were actual. ) The implica­
tions of the supposition that there are possible
worlds that differ, as wand wI! do, only by a
transposition of individuals will be studied further
in section 5 below.
(5) But we may notice here a consideration about
time that seems to me to support assumptions (2)
and (4). The mutual distinctness of two individual
persons already existing cannot depend on some­
thing that has not yet happened. The identity and
non-identity of most individuals, and surely of
persons, are conceived of as determined, at any
time of their existence, by their past and present.
This is doubtless connected with the importance
that origins seem to have in questions of trans world
identity. Consider the state of w when my twin and
I are 22, five years before the distinctive dreams.
We are already distinct from each other, though
nothing has yet happened to distinguish us
qualitatively. I think it follows that our mutual
distinctness is independent of the qualitative dif­
ference arising from our later dreams. We would be
distinct, therefore, even if our dreams did not differ
at age 27 - that is, even if we were perfectly indis­
cernible qualitatively, as we would be in w'. More­
over, since my twin and I have our identities
already established by age 22, which of us is
which cannot depend on which has which dream
five years later; it is possible that the seven-horned
monster trouble my sleep, and the ten-horned his,
when we are 27, as in wI! . This argument depends,
of course, on the assumption that in w my twin and
I have histories that differ qualitatively during a
certain period after we are 22, but not before then.
It follows that w is not completely deterministic, \nbut that does not keep IJ} from being at least logi­
cally possible. 25
5 Primitive Trans-world Identity
Issues of modality de re turn on identity questions.
To say that a certain individual is only contingently
a parent, but necessarily an animal, for example, is
to say that there could have been a non parent, but
not a non-animal, that would have been the same
individual as that one. It has become customary,
and has been at least heuristically helpful, to
represent such identities as identities of individuals
in different possible worlds - "transworld identi­
ties" for short - although (as we have just seen)
modal claims de re can be understood as identity
claims even without the imagery of possible worlds.
Whether modality de re really adds anything
important to the stock of modal facts depends, I
think, on whether there are transworld identities or
non-identities, and if so, whether they are primit­
ive or are rather to be analyzed in terms of some
more fundamental relation(s) among possible
worlds. I will try to show here that, if we are
prepared to accept non qualitative thisnesses, we
have a very plausible argument for primitive trans­
world identities and non-identities.
It might be thought, indeed, that we would have
a more than plausible argument - that if, by refut­
ing the Identity ofIndiscernibles, we can show that
thisnesses are metaphysically primitive, it will fol­
low trivially that transworld identity of individuals
is also primitive. For the property of being ident­
ical with (for example) Aristotle is the same prop­
erty in every possible world in which it occurs.
Hence it cannot be distinct from all suchnesses
when possessed by a famous philosopher in the
actual world if it is identical with a suchness when
possessed by one of Alexander the Great's tax
collectors in some other possible world.
This argument is correct insofar as it makes the
point that the thisness or identity of a particular
individual is non qualitative either at all places,
times, and possible worlds at which it occurs, or
at none of them. By the same token, however, there
is nothing special about transworld identity in this
connection. But the issue on which I wish to focus
here is specifically about the primitiveness of trans­
IJ}orld identities. It therefore cannot be the issue of
whether they are purely qualitative.
When we ask about the primitiveness of a kind of
identity, we typically want to know, about a certain
Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity
range of cases, whether the belonging of two prop­
erties to a single subject can be explained as con­
sisting in other, more basic relations obtaining
between distinct subjects of the same or related
properties. 26 Thus Aristotle is the subject of the
diverse properties expressed by "is a philosopher"
and "could have been a tax collector". In asking
whether the identity of the actual philosopher with
the possible tax collector is primitive, we want to
know whether it consists in some more fundamen­
tal relation between Aristotle's actual career and a
career in which he would have been a tax collector.
This issue is quite distinct from that of the quali­
tative or nonqualitative character of Aristotle's
identity, in the same or in different worlds, as
may be seen by reflecting on some other sorts of
identity.
The claim that there are non qualitative this­
nesses does not clearly entail that transtemporal
identity, for example, is primitive. For suppose
there are two persisting individuals, Indi and
Scerni, acknowledged to be qualitatively indiscern­
ible, and therefore to possess nonqualitative this­
nesses. It is not obvious that the identity of Indi at
time t\ with Indi at time t2 (or the belonging of
Indi's t\ states and t2 states to a single individual)
cannot be explained as consisting in other, more
basic relations among successive events or states or
stages of Indi, without presupposing the transtem­
poral identity of any individual. Perhaps this can be
done in terms of spatiotemporal continuity or
memory links or causal connections or some other
relation. The property of being Indi at any given
time would still not be equivalent to any suchness.
It could be analyzed in terms of the more basic
relations among Indi's temporal stages. But the
distinctness of those stages from the corresponding
stages of Scerni would still be irreducibly nonqua­
litative, and this nonqualitative character would be
passed on to the property of being Indi (at any
time). The transtemporal aspect ofIndi's identity,
however, would not be indispensably primitive. In
the present state of philosophical research it is
probably unclear whether any transtemporal ident­
ity is indeed primitive; my point here is just that
the thesis of the nonqualitativeness of thisnesses
can be separated from that of the primitiveness of
transtemporal identity.
If, to complete the separation of issues, we seek
an example of a philosopher who is committed,
with apparent consistency, both to the purely qua­
litative character of all thisnesses and to the primit­
iveness of some sort of individual identity, we can \nRobert M. Adams
find it in Leibniz. He regards thisnesses as con­
junctions of simpler, logically independent such­
nesses. That the combination of properties is
effected by the logical operation of conjunction is
an essential part of his conceptual atomism. He
assumes that there are some cases in which the
instantiation of a conjunction of properties cannot
be analyzed as consisting in any more fundamental
fact. But if it is a primitive fact that the property F
and G is instantiated, the identity of some possessor
of F with a possessor of G must also be primitive,
rather than analyzable as consisting in some more
basic relation obtaining between distinct possessors
of F and of G or related properties. The primitive­
ness of identity in such cases is in no way incon­
sistent with Leibniz's opinion that thisnesses are
suchnesses; it is indeed required by the way in
which he thinks thisnesses are constructed out of
simpler suchnesses.
The primitive identities for Leibniz would prob­
ably not be transtemporal, and would certainly not
be transworld. But no distance in space, time, or
"logical space" is needed for questions of identity.
Suppose one of Aristotle's momentary perceptual
states includes both tasting an olive and hearing a
bird sing. In this supposition it is implied, and not
yet explained by any more basic relation, that some
individual that is tasting an olive is identical with
one that is hearing a bird sing. And it seems that
this sort of identity (identity of the individual sub­
ject of simultaneous qualities) could be primitive in
a purely qualitative construction of reality.
So questions of the primitiveness of identity
relations are in general distinct from the question
of the qualitativeness or nonqualitativeness of this­
nesses. But, in the case of transworld identity in
particular, I think that primitive identities are
much more plausible if nonqualitative thisnesses
are accepted than if they are rejected. Suppose, on
the one hand, that all thisnesses are purely qualitat­
ive. Then the thisness of any individual can be
constructed as a disjunction of suchnesses, each
suchness representing one possible career of the
individual (as explained in section 2 above). It
seems quite possible that in every case the grouping
of disjuncts as alternative careers of a single indi­
vidual could be explained by general principles
about trans world identity of one or another kind
of individuals, and the transworld identity of the
particular individual could be analyzed as consist­
ing in the satisfaction of the general principles by
the relevant disjuncts. And if there should be bor­
derline cases, in which the issue of trans world
identity is not settled by general principles, one
might well conclude that trans world identity or
non-identity is undefined, rather than primitive,
in those cases.
If, on the other hand, we reject the Identity of
Indiscernibles in favor of nonqualitative thisnesses,
it will not be hard to find examples that will pro­
vide support of great intuitive plausibility for prim­
itive transworld identities and non-identities.
Consider, again, a possible world WI in which
there are two qualitatively indiscernible globes;
call them Castor and Pollux. Z7 Being indiscernible,
they have of course the same duration; in WI both of
them have always existed and always will exist. But
it seems perfectly possible, logically and metaphy­
sically, that either or both of them cease to exist.
Let Wz then, be a possible world just like WI up to a
certain time t at which in Wz Castor ceases to exist
while Pollux goes on forever; and let W3 be a pos­
sible world just like Wz except that in W3 it is Pollux
that ceases to exist at t while Castor goes on forever.
That the difference between Wz and W3 is real, and
could be important, becomes vividly clear if we
consider that, from the point of view of a person
living on Castor before t in WI and having (of
course) an indiscernible twin on Pollux, it can be
seen as the difference between being annihilated
and somebody else being annihilated instead. But
there is no qualitative difference between Wz and
W3. And there are no qualitative necessary and
sufficient conditions for the trans world identity or
non-identity of Castor and Pollux; for every qualit­
ative condition satisfied by Castor in Wz is satisfied
by Pollux in WI and vice versa. 2M
A similar example can be constructed for trans­
world identity of events. Suppose all that happens
in WI is that Castor and Pollux approach and recede
from each other in an infinite series of indiscernible
pulsations ofthe universe. In WI their pulsations go
on forever, but they might not have. For every pair
of them there is surely a possible world in which
one member of the pair is the last pulsation, and a
different possible world in which the other is the
last pulsation. But there is no qualitative difference
between these possible worlds; each contains the
same number (~o the first infinite number) of
exactly similar pulsations. There are therefore no
qualitative necessary and sufficient conditions for
the transworld identities and non-identities of the
events in these possible worlds.
Any case of this sort, in which two possible
worlds differ in the transworld identities of their
individuals but not in their suchnesses, provides us \nat once with a clearer proof of a primitive trans­
world identity than has yet been found for a primit­
ive trans temporal identity. 29 For the geometrical,
topological, psychological, and causal relations out
of which philosophers have hoped to construct
transtemporal identity do not obtain among the
alternative possible careers of an individual. 'Logi­
cal space' is not a space to which the concepts of
physical space apply literally. There is no causal
interaction between different possible worlds. One
cannot remember events in another possible world
in the same sense in which one's memory of
events in the actual past might be important to
personal identity. The most important transworld
relations of individuals, which seem to be the
foundation of all their other transworld relations,
are qualitative similarity - which cannot explain
different transworld identities in worlds that are
qualitatively indiscernible - and identity itself. One
might try to analyze the trans world identity of an
individual in terms of qualitative similarities plus
having the same parts, or the same parents; but
then the trans world identity of some individuals
(the parts or the parents) is presupposed. If the
Identity of Indiscernibles is rejected, there seems
to be no plausible way of analyzing trans world
identity and non-identity in general in terms of
other, more basic relations.
6 Thisness and Necessity
I have argued that there are possible cases in which
no purely qualitative conditions would be both
necessary and sufficient for possessing a given this­
ness. It may be thought that this is too cautious a
conclusion - that if thisnesses are non qualitative,
there cannot be any qualitative necessary condi­
tions at all for possessing them. The following
argument could be given for this view.
Let T be a thisness, and let S be a suchness.
Many philosophers have believed that all necessary
truths are analytic, in the sense that they are either
truths of formal logic or derivable by valid logical
rules from correct analyses of concepts or proper­
ties. This may be regarded as a broadly Leibnizian
conception of necessity. Suppose it is right; and
suppose that thisnesses are irreducibly nonqualitat­
ive. We may well wonder, then, how it could be a
necessary truth that whatever has T has S. For it is
surely not a truth of formal logic. And suchnesses
are not analyzable in terms of thisnesses; so if
thisnesses are not analyzable in terms of such-
Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity
nesses, how can any connection between T and S
fail to be synthetic?
The conclusion, that there cannot be any purely
qualitative necessary condition for the possession
of any given thisness, is absurd, however. It implies
that you and I, for example, could have been indi­
viduals of any sort whatever - plutonium atoms,
noises, football games, places, or times, if those are
all individuals. 30 If we cannot trust our intuition
that we could not have been any of those things,
then it is probably a waste of time to study de re
modalities at all. If there are any transworld ident­
ities and non-identities, there are necessary con­
nections between thisnesses and some suchnesses.
But it is difficult to understand what makes these
connections necessary; and that difficulty has
doubtless motivated some philosophical doubts
about de re modality. 3! Those who accept nonqua­
litative thisnesses but cling to the dogma that all
necessary truths are analytic in the sense explained
above may suppose that every nonqualitative this­
ness that is necessarily connected with suchnesses
is analyzable as a conjunction of some or all of the
suchnesses it implies, plus a relation to one or more
particular individuals of some more fundamental
sort. Either the latter individuals (or others still
more basic to which one would come by recursive
applications of the view) would have no qualitative
necessary conditions of their identity at all, or there
would be an infinite regress (perhaps virtuous) of
thisnesses analyzable in terms of more fundamental
thisnesses. Neither alternative seems particularly
plausible.
It is better to abandon the identification of
necessity with analyticity and suppose that neces­
sities de re are commonly synthetic. Perhaps the
best answer that can be given to the question, What
makes it necessary that Jimmy Carter (for example)
is not a musical performance? is this: It is a fact,
which we understand very well to be true, though
not analytic, that Jimmy Carter is a person. And
there are necessary conditions of intra-and trans­
world identity which follow (analytically, indeed)
from the concept or property of being a person and
which entail that no individual that is in fact a
person could under any circumstances be a musical
performance.
There are many notoriously perplexing ques­
tions about what suchnesses belong necessarily to
which individuals. "Could Cleopatra have been
male? " "Could I (who am blue-eyed) have been
brown-eyed? " And so forth. It may be that some of
these questions call for conceptual legislation \nRobert M. Adams
rather than metaphysical discovery, for some of
our concepts of kinds of individual may be some­
what vague with respect to necessary conditions
of transworld identity. The acceptance of nonqua­
litative thisnesses does not oblige us to settle
doubtful cases in favor of contingency. Indeed, I
am inclined to decide a very large proportion of
Notes
Versions of this paper were read to colloquia at UCLA,
uc Irvine, and Stanford. I am indebted to many, and
particularly to Marilyn Adams, Kit Fine, Dagfinn Fol­
lesdal, Ian Hacking, Robert Hambourger, David Kaplan,
Kenneth Olson, John Perry, and Peter Woodruff, for
discussion that helped in writing and rewriting the
paper. My interest in the project grew out of discussions
with Kaplan.
See David Kaplan, "How to Russell a Frege­
Church, " Journal of Philosophy 72 (1975, Nov. 6),
pp. 716-29, at pp. 722-7.
2 "Thisness" is the inevitable and historic word here.
But we must not suppose that everything important
that is expressed by a demonstrative is caught up in
the relevant thisness. You might know many facts
involving the thisness (in my sense) of Gerald Ford,
for example, and yet be ignorant that that man
(disappearing over the hill in a golf cart) is Ford. I
believe this is a translation into my terminology of
a point John Perry has made; see his "Frege on
demonstratives, " Philosophical Review 86/4 (Oct.
1977), pp. 474--97, and "Indexicality and belief, "
unpublished.
3 E. g. , by Alvin Plantinga, The Nature of Necessi~y
(Oxford; Clarendon Press, 1974), pp. 71f.
4 Johannes Duns Scotus, Quaestiones in libros metaphy­
sicorum, VII. xii. schol. 3; cf. Ordinatio, II. 3. 1. 2, 57. I
am indebted to Marilyn McCord Adams for acquaint­
ing me with these texts and views of Scotus, and for
much discussion of the topics of this paragraph.
5 Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Fragmente zur Logik, ed.
Franz Schmidt (Berlin: Akademie-Verlag, 1960),
p. 476; cf. Leibniz, Discourse on Metaphysics, trans.
P. G. Lucas and L. Griut (Manchester: Manchester
University Press, 1953), sect. 9. This is not the place
to debate points of interpretation, and I will some­
times speak of "properties" where Leibniz usually
restricts himself to "concept" and "predicate"; but I
think I do not substantially misrepresent him on the
points that concern us.
6 Discourse on Metaphysics, sect. 8.
7 See Leibniz's letter of 4/14 July, 1686 to Antoine
Arnauld, in The Leibniz-Arnaud Correspondence,
trans. H. T. Mason, (Manchester: Manchester Uni­
versity Press, 1967), pp. 53-66.
them in favor of necessity (or impossibility, as the
case may be).
If a name is desired for the position I have
defended here, according to which thisnesses and
transworld identities are primitive but logically
connected with suchnesses, we may call it Moderate
Haecceitism.
8 This point could also be put in terms of constructing
complete concepts from predicates that are indexed to
possible worlds. This possible amendment of Leib­
niz's position, and its analogy with Leibniz's commit­
ment to the indexing of predicates to times, were
noted by Benson Mates, "Individuals and modality
in the philosophy of Leibniz, " Studia Leibnitiana 4
(1972), p. 109.
9 Cf. Keith S. Donnellan, "Reference and definite
descriptions, " Philosophical Review, 75/3 Ouly
1966), pp. 281-304, and idem, "Proper names and
identifying descriptions, " in D. Davidson and G.
Harman (eds), The Semantics of Natural Languages,
2nd edn. (Boston: Reidel, 1972), pp. 356-79; Saul
Kripke, "Naming and necessity, " in Davidson and
Harman (eds), pp. 253-355.
10 Leibniz, Discourse on Metaphysics, sect. 8.
II This way of establishing a trivial version of the
Identity of Indiscernibles was noticed by Whitehead
and Russell, Principia Mathematica, vol. I, 2nd
edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1957), p. 57. It is the initial topic in Max Black's
"The identity of indiscernibles, " this volume, ch. 6,
and I think that Black does not quite distinguish
it from any interesting version of the doctrine,
because he does not explicitly distinguish relational
properties that are suchnesses from those which are
not.
12 See esp. his famous paper "First truths, " and his
Discourse on Metaphysics, sects. 8, 9.
13 The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence, ed. H. G. Alex­
ander (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
1956), Leibniz's fifth letter, sects. 25, 26, and Clarke's
fifth reply, sects. 21-5 and 26-32. Clarke could not
have seen the papers in which Leibniz most clearly
implied the claim of necessity.
14 Leibniz, Fragmente zur Logik, p. 476.
IS Of course the suchness will be constituted by a single
disjunct if, as Leibniz held, each individual exists in
only one possible world.
16 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, A263f =
B319f.
17 This volume, ch. 6, pp. 66ff.
18 This axiom might be doubted, but I simply assume it
here. Occam denied that it is a necessary truth (Repor­
tatio, IV, q. 4N and q. 5), in Opera Plurima (Lyon, \n1494-6); I am indebted to Marilyn Adams for this
information).
19 Ian Hacking, "The identity of indiscernibles, " Jour­
nal of Philosophy 72, 9 (8 May 1975), pp. 249-56, at
p. 249.
20 Ibid. , pp. 255-6.
21 Ibid. , p. 255. The point was also suggested, about
space, by Black, this volume, ch. 6.
22 Hacking, "Identity of indiscernibles, " pp. 251f, 254f.
23 Strictly speaking, I think it is highly plausible to
regard it so if physical objects are accepted as primitive
features of reality. Like Leibniz, I am inclined to take a
phenomenalistic view of physical objects, and hence
doubt the primitiveness of their thisnesses. Unlike
Leibniz, I think there could be distinct but indiscern­
ible sentient beings and mental events; cases that help
to show the plausibility of this view may be provided
by temporal dispersal arguments, or by another type
of argument to be discussed in section 4 below.
24 If we assume that differences in color or chemical
composition necessarily involve microscopic differ­
ences in spatiotemporal configuration, the intuition
would have to be that slight differences of that sort do
not affect the logical or metaphysical possibility of a
given macroscopic configuration of objects.
25 I do not claim that Leibniz would accept this judg­
ment of possibility.
26 Cf. John Perry, "Can the self divide? ," Journal of
Philosophy 59/6 (7 Sept. 1972), pp. 463-88, at pp.
466-8.
27 The question may be raised whether giving names to
the globes is consistent with their qualitative indis­
cernibility (cf. Black, this volume, ch. 6). Two
answers may be given. The imaginative answer is
that we may suppose that the globes have (indiscern­
ible) societies of language-users on them and we are
speaking the language of the Castor-dwellers; in the
language of the Pollux-dwellers, of course, "Castor"
names Pollux and "Pollux" Castor, but that does not
keep Castor from being Castor and Pollux Pollux. The
Primitive Thisness and Primitive Identity
sober answer is that "Castor" and "Pollux" are infor­
mal equivalents of variables bound by the existential
quantifiers that would be used to introduce the ex­
ample in a formal way.
28 We rely here on an intuition that the Castor-dweller
can refer directly to the same individual (namely
herself) in different possible worlds, despite the
absence of qualitative necessary and sufficient condi­
tions for the identity. This is related, in ways that
should by now be familiar to us, to intuitions that have
been used to support the semantics of direct reference
- as, for example, that when we say, "Nixon might
have lost the 1968 election, " we refer to the actual
individual, Nixon, in a non-actual situation even if we
do not know any clearly qualitative property that the
possible loser must have in order to be identical with
the actual President. (The example is Kripke's; see his
"Naming and necessity, " pp. 264ff. )
29 It is not essential to the argument to start from a world
in which (as in wd there are non-identical indiscern­
ibles. An essentially similar argument can be based on
the case presented in section 4 above, in which I have
an almost indiscernible twin. But, since the crux of the
argument will be that every qualitative condition
satisfied by me in w is satisfied by him in wI! , and
vice versa, we must still be prepared to accept non­
qualitative thisnesses. And, as we saw in section 4, the
case can also be used to argue for the possibility of a
world containing perfectly indiscernible twins.
30 In his Examination of McTaggarti's Philosophy, vol. I
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1933),
p. 177, C. D. Broad pointed out that rejection of the
Identity of Indiscernibles does not imply "that it is
logically possible that [a particular 1 P, which in fact
has the nature N, should instead have had some other
nature Nt; e. g. , that I might have been born in Rome
in 55 Be, or that the Albert Memorial might have
been a volcano in South America. "
31 Cf. W. V. Quine, From a Logical Point of View, 2nd
edn (New York: Harper Torchbooks, 1963), p. ISS. \n15
D. M. Armstrong
1 Introductory
I want to defend a combinatorial theory of possibi­
lity. Such a view traces the very idea of possibility
to the idea of the combinations - all the combina­
tions which respect a certain simple form - of
given, actual, elements. Combination is to be
understood widely enough to cover the notions of
expansion and contraction. (My central metaphysical
hypothesis is that all there is, is the world of space
and time. It is this world which is to supply the
actual elements for the totality of combinations. So
what is proposed is a naturalistic form of a combi­
natorial theory. )
The combinatorial idea is not new, of course.
Wittgenstein gave a classical exposition of it in the
Tractatus. Perhaps its charter is 3. 4: 'A proposition
determines a place in logical space. The existence
of this logical place is guaranteed by the mere exis­
tence o/the constituents. 'l There is a small additional
combinatorial literature. I myself was converted to
a combinatorial view by Brian Skyrms' brief but
fascinating article 'Tractarian nominalism, .2
It is convenient to develop the position in stages.
I begin in Wittgensteinian fashion with a world of
simple objects whose recombinations determine
the possibilities. After that, ladders have to be
kicked away. Expansion and contraction have to
be allowed for, as does the (at least doxastic) pos-
Originally published in Canadian Journal of Philosophy
16 (1986), pp. 575-94. Reprinted by permission of
the University of Calgary.
sibility that there are no simple objects III the
world.
2 Ontological Sketch
The world that I begin with contains a number of
simple individuals, a, b, c, .. .. The number is not
specified. It might be finite, or be one of the infinite
cardinals. It is an a posteriori, scientific question
how many individuals the world contains.
These individuals may have indefinitely many
properties, and stand in indefinitely many relations
to other individuals. Their simplicity is constituted
by the fact that they have no proper parts, where
parts of individuals are individuals. Candidates for
such individuals would be propertied point­
instants.
The world also contains, in finite or infinite
number, simple properties, F, G, H, .. . and simple
relations, R, S, T, .. . (Their simplicity is consti­
tuted by the fact that they have no properties or
relations as proper parts. ) The relations may be
dyadic, triadic, .. . n-adic. In agreement with
Skyrms, these properties and relations are con­
ceived of as universals. The identical property F
can be possessed by two or more distinct indivi­
duals. The identical dyadic relation R can hold
between two or more distinct pairs.
I pause here to indicate briefly some of my views
on universals. The central contention is that there
is no automatic inference from n-adic predicates to
n-adic universals. What universals, what true prop­
erties and relations, the world contains is not to be \ndetermined a priori on a semantic basis. The ques­
tion must rather be settled a posteriori on the basis
of total science.
If UI and U z are universals, then the predicate
iUlvUzl will apply truly to various individuals.
But there is no universal Either VI or V z. Simi­
larly, it is likely that the predicate iNot-Ull will
apply truly to some individuals. But there is no
universal Not being VI. This latter contention,
worked out before I arrived at my combinatorial
view, turns out to be a vital part of a combinatori­
alism involving universals. ] For U I and Not-U I is
an impossible combination. But what resource
would there be in combinatorial ism to exclude it?
Conjunctions of universals, however, seem to be
acceptable (complex) universals. Provided only
that some individual exists which is both F and
G, and these are universals, then we can treat F II G
as a universal, identical in different instances. The
same holds for the very important category of
structural universal. If a compound individual con­
sists of an F-part having R to a G-part, with F, R
and G universals, then the individual instantiates
the structural universal an F having R to a C.
I have postulated individuals, properties and
relations, the latter two being monadic and
polyadic universals respectively (forming, if the
hypothesis of naturalism is correct, a single spatio­
temporal system). But this may suggest that I am
thinking of reality, of actuality, like a tinker-toy
construction from three different parts. Instead, I
hold that these 'elements' are essentially aspects of,
abstractions from, what Wittgenstein and Skyrms
call facts and what I shall call states oj affairs: a's
being F, b's having R to c, and so on, constitute
states of affairs. If it is simples that we are dealing
with the whole time, then we can speak of these as
atomic states of affairs.
The choice between the phrases 'states of affairs'
and 'facts' is a little delicate. 'Facts' may seem to
have the advantage that there cannot be false facts,
whereas language does permit talk of non-existent
states of affairs. But, as we shall see shortly, this
apparent advantage is not really an advantage. It is
in fact useful to have a relaxed sense of 'state of
affairs' in which one can speak of states of affairs
that are non-existent.
Now consider the totality of atomic states of
affairs. As Skyrms suggests, we may think of an
individual, such as a, as no more than an abstraction
from all those states of affairs in which a figures, F
an abstraction from all those states of affairs in
which F figures, and similarly for relation R. By
The Nature of Possibility
'abstraction' is not meant that a, F and R are in any
way other-worldly, still less 'mental' or unreal.
What is meant is that, while by an act of selective
attention they may be considered apart from the
states of affairs in which they figure, they have no
existence outside states of affairs.
Properties may be thought of as ways that (some)
individuals are, and relations as ways that indivi­
duals stand to each other. This makes it clear why
they exist in states of affairs, and so why there can
be no uninstantiated properties and relations. A
possible property or relation, even if empirically
possible, is not ipso Jacto a property or relation.
To be individuals, individuals must be an indi­
vidual, must be one thing. But this demands that
they 'fall under a concept' as Frege would put it,
that they have some unit-making property. Hence,
I think, we can reject bare individuals as well as
uninstantiated properties and relations. States of
affairs rule.
3 The Wittgenstein Worlds
Given the notion of an atomic state of affairs, we
can introduce the notion of a molecular state of
affairs. These are confined to conjunctive states of
affairs. Disjunctive and negative states of affairs are
not admitted. But the conjunctions may be infinite.
The world is a certain conjunction of states of
affairs, perhaps an infinite one.
We can also introduce the notion of a possible
atomic state of affairs, and, in particular, a merely
possible atomic state of affairs. The world 'possi­
ble' here modifies the sense of the phrase 'state of
affairs'. For, as the phrase was introduced in the
previous section, all states of affairs are actual.
The notion of a possible state of affairs is intro­
duced semantically, via the notion of an atomic
statement. Suppose that a is F, but is not G. Con­
sider the statements 'a is F' and 'a is G'. The
former is true, and may be called an atomic state­
ment. But the latter may also be called an atomic
statement. For while failing to correspond to an
atomic state of affairs, it does respect the form of
an atomic state of affairs.
I pause here to note that no particular knowledge
of what in fact these individuals and properties are
is assumed. What we have here is a thought-experi­
ment in which we imagine ourselves formulating a
false atomic statement. In my view, Wittgenstein's
avowal of ignorance here was a stroke of genius,
and not, as is often thought, a cowardly evasion. It \nD. M. Armstrong
pays tribute to the fact that we have no a priori
insight into, and, even nowadays, only a little a
posteriori insight into, the building-blocks of the
world, in particular the true properties and rela­
tions. What does somewhat muddy Wittgenstein's
insight is the thought that it should still be possible,
by logical analysis alone, to get from ordinary true or
false statements down to the atomic bed-rock. This
in turn is connected with the idea that necessities
must one and all be analytic or tautological. Kripke
has shown us the way ahead here. Some of his ideas
about necessities of identity that are established a
posteriori seem to cast much light on the situation.
Returning to the line of the argument, 'a is G' is
a false atomic statement. What it states, that a is G,
is false. But we can also say that a's being G is a
possible (merely possible) atomic state of affairs. A
merely possible state of affairs does not exist, sub­
sist, or have any sort of being. It is no addition to
our ontology. But we can refer to it, or, better,
make ostensible reference to it.
Now that we have the notion of molecular or
conjunctive states of affairs, and of possible atomic
states of affairs, we can form the notion of conjunc­
tions, including infinite conjunctions, of possible
atomic states of affairs, that is, molecular
possible states of affairs.
The simple individuals, properties and relations
may be combined in all ways to yield possible
atomic states of affairs, provided only that the
form of atomic facts is respected. That is the com­
binatorial idea. Such possible atomic states of
affairs may then be combined in all ways to yield
possible molecular states of affairs. If such a possi­
ble molecular state of affairs is thought of as the
totality of being, then it is a possible world.
Wittgenstein, besides postulating a world of
simple objects (whether they included universals
is unclear) also adopted what Skyrms calls a 'fixed
domain' account of possible worlds. Putting it into
our terms, for him each possible world must con­
tain each simple individual, property and relation
and no others. I will call such worlds Wittgenstein
worlds. It is convenient to start from this set of
worlds, and then consider what sorts of world
require to be added to give all possible worlds.
It is to be noted also that Wittgenstein holds (as
does Skyrms) that first-order objects combined
into first-order facts (states of affairs) are all that
we need postulate. I think that that is too optimis­
tic. Properties and relations of properties and rela­
tions may well be required for a satisfactory
ontology. Again, states of affairs concerning states
of affairs may be required. Indeed, as Russell in
effect pointed out, just to say that a certain con­
junction of states of affairs exhausts the world is not
something which can itself be analyzed purely in
terms of first-order states of affairs. The notion of a
possible world is not a first-order notion.
But in this paper I propose to prescind from
these complications. My hope and trust is that,
from the point of view of a combinatorial theory,
they are mere complications.
4 Haecceities and Quiddities
Suppose, then, that one is a naturalist, believing
that the space-time world is all there is. Suppose
further that one holds that this space-time world
has an ultimate structure: individuals having (uni­
versal) properties and relations, the identification
of these universals being an a posteriori matter.
Suppose, finally, that one holds a combinatorial
theory of possibility, holding in particular that all
mere possibilities are recombinations of actual ele­
ments.
Two difficulties present themselves. First, is it
not possible that there should be individuals which
are neither identical with actual individuals, nor
composed of actual individuals. Following
Lewis, 4 call such individuals alien individuals. Sec­
ond, is it not possible that there should be univer­
sals which are neither identical with actual, that is,
instantiated, universals, nor composed of actual
universals? Call such universals alien universals.
Alien universals and individuals seem to be ruled
out by our original premisses.
Skyrms, in his 1981 paper, says that to deal with
these alien possibilities we must desert combina­
tion for 'analogy'. Analogy, as he explains it, turns
out to be the use of the existential quantifier. Can
we not understand the statement that there might
have been individuals which are neither identical
with, nor composed of, actual individuals? Can we
not understand the statement that there might
have been universals which are neither identical
with, nor composed of, actual universals? Such
alien individuals and universals would be like actual
individuals and universals in being individuals and
universals (that, I take it, is the 'analogy'), even if
unlike them in being 'other'.
In the case of universals, at least, I do not think
that this treatment will serve. In particular, it will
involve deserting naturalism. Suppose that it is said
that actually existing individual a might have had \nan alien property. What is it in the world that
makes this statement true? What is its truth­
maker, or ontological ground? If alien properties
are possible, then each of them will have its own
nature, its quiddiZy as we may put it. (Suppose a
had had an alien property, and b had had another.
The supposition that a had the property b had
while b had a's property will be a different supposi­
tion. Each alien property must have its own na­
ture. ) But these natures, these quiddities, are not to
be found in the space-time world. Lewis can
instantiate them in other possible worlds. A Platon­
ist could give them un instantiated existence 'along­
side' the natural world. But what can the naturalist­
combinatorialist do? For universals, I think the way
of analogy fails.
It might be suggested that one might use actual
universals to 'triangulate' alien universals. The
inspiration is Hume's 'missing shade of blue'. Con­
sider the (putative) universals, red, orange, yellow,
and again red, purple, blue. Suppose orange to
have never been instantiated. Would it not then
have been alien? But, even so, could we not 'fix' it
as the property between red and yellow, in the same
way that purple is between red and blue?
The first point to notice, in criticism of this
suggestion, is that the ploy is of limited value
only. Orange would not be totally alien (orange is
a colour). By hypothesis, the totallY alien could not
be triangulated thus.
But in any case I doubt whether orange is in any
degree alien relative to the other colours. If a phy­
sicalist reduction of some sort gives the true nature
of colour, as I believe to be the case, then the
colours are different positions on a scale or scales
of quantities. Quantities in turn are structural
properties, and a 'missing structure' can be con­
structed directly from instantiated structures.
Sterner measures are necessary for genuine
aliens. I believe that a naturalist-combinatorialist
should deny the possibility of genuinely alien uni­
versals. For a combinatorialist, the possible is
determined by the actual. So the actual universals
set a limit, a limit given by the totality of their
recombinations, to the possible universals. It may
be allowed that alien universals are conceivable,
that is, doxastically possible, in the same sort of
way that the falsity of Goldbach's conjecture is
conceivable. But just as (it may be) that Goldbach's
conjecture is a necessary truth, so the denial of alien
universals is a necessary truth.
The strongest way to mobilize intuition in
favour of alien universals is this. Consider a 'con-
The Nature of Possibility
tracted' world, contracted by removing, say, cer­
tain simple properties from this world. From the
standpoint of this contracted world, these simple
properties will be alien properties. But if, relative
to a contracted world, properties in our world
could be alien, are there not possible worlds relative
to which our world is contracted, contracted with
respect to universals? Such a world will contain
alien universals, alien, that is, to our world.
But this line of thought covertly depends upon
taking all worlds as equal. The combinatorialist is an
actual world chauvinist. The actual world, and it
alone, is genuinely a world. The possible is deter­
mined by the actual, and so, saving recombination,
cannot outrun the actual. To consider a contracted
world is to suppose, falsely suppose, that the actual
world is contracted. If the possible is determined
by the actual, with the actual supposed contracted,
the possible must be supposed contracted, and
certain actual universals supposed alien. But that
does not licence expanded worlds.
What then of alien individuals? Here the problem
for the combinatorialist is rather more severe. It
seems very hard to deny that it is possible that the
world should contain more individuals than it actu­
ally contains. There is no mouse in my study.
Nevertheless, it is possible that there should be
one. But why does this mouse have to be one of
the world's mice? Why not an additional mouse?
And if additional, why not made up of particles (I
assume a materialist theory of mice) which are
additional to the world's particles? The supposition
is much less recherche than the supposition of alien
universals. It seems to be a genuine possibility.
What I want to suggest is that in the case of alien
individuals Skyrm's appeal to 'analogy' can be
upheld. But in order to uphold it, it is necessary
to reject a doctrine that Skyrms accepts (for actual
individuals): the doctrine of haecceitism. So first a
discussion of that doctrine.
Let us use as an example a contracted world, as a
substitute for our actual rich and complicated
world, which contains nothing but the simple indi­
viduals a and b, along with the properties, also
simple, F and G. The world is exhausted by the
states of affairs:
Fa & Gb.
What will the combinatorialist say are the possi­
ble worlds relative to actuality thus thinly con­
ceived? Omitting further contractions, for
simplicity, we seem to have: \nD. M. Armstrong
II Ga&Fb
III Fa&Ga&Fa
IV Fa&Fb&Gb
V Fa & Ga & Gb
VI Ga & Fb & Gb
VII Fa&Ga&Fb&Gb
Consider now the pairs I and II, III and IV, V and
VI. Carnap would say that, although the members
of each pair had different state-descriptions, they
had the same structure-description. The question
is: are I and II the very same world differently
described, or are they the same world? The same
question holds for the other two pairs. A haecceitist
holds that the members of each pair differ from
each other. The anti-haecceitist denies it. A com­
binatorialist anti-haecceitist therefore allows fewer
possible worlds than the haecceitist does.
The haecceitist holds that, apart from repeatable
properties (F and G), a and b each have a unique
inner essence, a metaphysical signature tune as it
were, which distinguishes a and b. Even abstracted
from their repeatable properties, a and b differ in
nature.
The anti-haecceitist denies this. Notice that
there could be a strong and a weak anti-haecceitism.
A strong anti-haecceitism denies that individuals
are anything more than the 'bundles' of their prop­
erties. For the strong haecceitist 'world' VII would
collapse into a one-individual world, the individual
having the properties F and G. (The 'two' bundles
are the same bundle. ) I reject strong haecceitism,
for a number of reasons, but am inclined to accept
the weak version. 5
Haecceitism for individuals is parallel to quid­
ditism for universals. Furthermore, haecceitism
united with a naturalist-combinatorialism appears
to make alien individuals impossible, just as quid­
ditism makes alien universals impossible. For the
alien individual must be supposed to have some
definite haecceity, different from, and not obtain­
able from, actual haecceities. But how can a natur­
alist provide a truth-maker for the statement that
alien individuals, with their alien haecceities, are
possible?
But the rub is that, while we perhaps can deny
the possibility of truly alien universals, truly alien
individuals seem straightforwardly possible.
I suggest that the naturalist-combinatorialist
should move to a (weak) anti-haecceitist position.
I think that this is a natural and comfortable view.
And then, I hope, we can revive the Skyrms doc­
trine of'analogy' in more favourable circumstances.
The idea is quite simple. If weak anti-haecceit­
ism is true, then individuals, qua individuals, are
merely, barely, numerically different from each
other. They are simp(y other. (Unlike properties
and relations. ) This concept of otherness is deriva­
ble from actuals. When applied to further, alien,
individuals, it encompasses the whole of their na­
ture qua particulars. Nothing is missing, as it would
be missing ifhaecceitism were true. So we can form
afully determinate concept of an indefinite number
of alien individuals 'by analogy'. They are then
available to form worlds additional to the Wittgen­
stein worlds. This is a qualification of combinatori­
alism. But, I hope, 'only a little one'.
5 Contracted W orIds
So the Wittgenstein worlds require to be supple­
mented by worlds which contain further indivi­
duals, but not by worlds which contain further
simple universals.
But there is more to be done. Not only must we
allow this limited expansion, but, as already anti­
cipated in the previous section, we must also coun­
tenance contraction. If there is no contraction, then
every actual individual, and every simple universal,
will appear in every possible world. As has often
been noted, that would make both the individuals
and the universals necessary beings. Of any indivi­
dual in the actual world, it seems true to say that it
might not have existed. Of any universal in the
actual world, it seems true to say that it might not
have been instantiated (at any time), and so, for a
naturalist, that it might not have existed.
The obvious solution is to allow contraction in
the forming of possible worlds. Any given indivi­
dual is contingent. That is, there are worlds which
omit this individual. Any universal is contingent.
Such contraction does not seem unreasonable.
Why, one may ask, in combining elements into
states of affairs, and then conjoining these states
of affairs to make possible worlds, are we forced to
make use of every simple individual, property and
relation? Why not a proper subset?
However, while there seems to be no particular
difficulty about the contraction of individuals, the
contraction of universals does raise problems for
combinatorialism. The difficulty was noted by W.
G. Lycan, who refers to Philip Quinn. "
As the modal logicians say, the Wittgenstein
worlds are all 'accessible' to each other. That is,
each of them is a possible world relative to all the \nothers. In this respect, they form an equivalence
class. The relation of accessibility is reflexive, trans­
itive and symmetrical, and so is governed by an S5
modal logic. Given an anti-haecceitist account of
individuals, the situation does not change if worlds
are added which add and/or subtract individuals.
But suppose that we consider a contracted
world, We, contracted by the absence of the simple
property F, relative to a Wittgenstein world, W w,
which contains F's. We is accessible from W w, that
is, is a possible world relative to W w. However,
given combinatorial theory, W w is not accessible
from We- This is because, relative to We, F is an
alien property. Symmetry of accessibility thus fails.
For a set of worlds which contains both Ww and We
we must content ourselves with an S4 modal logic,
with accessibility reflexive and transitive, but not
symmetrical.
I do not think that this is too difficult to hold.
What we must, but I think can, accept about the
simple property F is this. F might not have existed,
so it is a contingent being. But from the standpoint
of a 'world' where F does not exist, it is impossible
that it should exist. When we go down to the F-less
world, We, then we are pretending that that world
is the actual world. Now if We is taken as the actual
world, then F is alien to it. So why should we not
say that in that world F could not exist? F is actual,
of course. But our supposition was that it is not
actual. That is a new game. The new point of view
makes it unactual, and so alien, and so impossible.
The central point is this. On the view being put
forward, the possible is determined by the actual.
Suppose the actual reduced. Then the sphere of the
possible is also reduced.
But before concluding this section, I note that
there is an ultimate contraction which a combina­
torial theory cannot accept. It cannot countenance
the empty world. The reason is that the empty
world is not a construction from given elements.
For the combinatorialist, then, it is necessary that
there be something. Of course, there is no particu­
lar something which it is necessary that there be. I
do not think that there is any particular paradox in
this rejection of the possibility of the empty world.
6 What If There Are No Atoms?
The combinatorial scheme, as so far developed,
postulates a world of simples: simple individuals,
simple properties and simple relations, all con­
ceived of as abstractions from atomic states of
The Nature of Possibility
affairs. But is the world made up of simples in
this way?
May it not be that some, or all, individuals have
proper parts which in turn have proper parts, ad
infinitum. And may it not be that this process fails
to reach simple individuals even at infinity?
It may be that the property F is nothing but the
conjunction of two wholly distinct properties, G
and H, that G and H, in their turn, are conjunc­
tions of properties, and so on ad in/initum. This
progression, it may be, does not even end 'at infin­
ity'. There are no simple properties involved, even
at the end of an infinite road.
Or, again, it may be that the property F dissolves
into a structure. To be an F may be nothing but to
be a G standing in relation R to an H. To be a G
may be a matter of being a J standing in relation S
to a K. And so on forever. Structures all the way
down, and no escape even at infinity.
The same may be true of some, or all, relations.
For R to hold may be a matter of Sand T both
holding. Sand T may dissolve similarly, with
simple relations never reached.
Is it a contingent matter whether a certain indivi­
dual, property or relation is, or is not, indefinitely
complex in the way just described? I once said this
about properties and relations. 7 But I now think
that this was a bad mistake. I am not sure what to
say about individuals, so will leave them aside here.
But that a certain universal is or is not simple now
seems to me to be a necessary truth. Certainly, it
may be a question to be decided a posteriori to the
extent that it can be decided. But it is not a con­
tingent matter. It is what we might call a Kripkean
necessity.
Here is the simple reductio ad absurdum argu­
ment for this new position. Suppose that it is con­
tingent whether property F is simple or not. There
will then be a possible world where F exists (is
instantiated, presumably) and is simple. There
will be another possible world where F will be
identical with, say, the conjunction G & H. But
this is absurd. What identity across possible worlds
do we have here? Simple F in WI is identical with
G & H in W z! Why not with any other universal,
simple, conjunctive or structural?
Here is what seems the best that one can do for
the contingency thesis. In the actual world, say, a
certain class of individuals has the simple property
F. Properties G and H are not instantiated in this
world. (In order to avoid difficulties about alien
properties, let G and H both be complex proper­
ties. ) In a certain possible world, the individuals \nD. M. Armstrong
that are F in the actual world (or their counterparts,
if you prefer) lack F but do have G & H. The
worlds do not differ in any other way at all.
We may say that F in our world, and G & H in
another world, play exactly the same role. This
includes causal role. Possession of F in this world,
and G & H in the other, has just the same causes
and just the same effects, including effects upon
perceivers and, more generally, minds.
F in this world, G & H in the other, are set in
exactly the same environment. But can one say that
F is G & H? I do not see how we can. They may be
said to be identical for all practical purposes. But I
do not see how a philosopher, at least, can say that
they are really identical. At best, they are counter­
parts of each other.
I conclude that we do have a necessity here, even
if one which has to be established a posteriori. The
conclusion to be drawn is that if there are simple
universals, or if all universals are ultimately made
up of simple universals, then this is a matter of
necessity. The structure, or make-up, of a universal
cannot change from one possible world to another.
I should add that to concede a Kripkean necessity
here does not commit one to underwriting all the
alleged Kripkean necessities. For instance, I am
very dubious about necessities of origin for indivi­
duals.
Nevertheless, it remains doxastically open, a
matter to be decided by natural science if decided
at all, whether or not the world reduces to genu­
inely atomic states of affairs. So our theory of
possibility had better be equipped to deal with the
doxastic possibility that there are no atomic indivi­
duals, properties or relations.
We may so equip the theory by introducing the
notion of relative atoms. Let the states of affairs
whose conjunction makes up the world involve
certain individuals, properties and relations. They
mayor may not be simple (doxastic 'may'). The
totality of recombinations of these 'atoms' yields a
set of possible worlds, which can in addition be
'expanded' and 'contracted' in the usual way. If the
atoms are genuine atoms, then no more remains to
be done. But if the atoms are not genuinely atomic,
then this set is a mere subset of the worlds which
can be formed. With one or more of the 'atoms'
broken up, we can go on to an enlarged set of
worlds. If the breaking-up goes on forever, and
reaches no genuine atoms even at infinity, then at
each point in the break-up new worlds emerge.
Perhaps all this seems too easy. But a vital con­
dition has to be placed upon the relative atoms, a
condition which is satisfied automatically in the
atomic universes which we have considered up to
this point. The relative atoms - the individuals, the
properties, the relations - must not merely be dis­
tinct from each other, they must be whol~y distinct.
Only if the atoms are wholly distinct will each
different recombination yield a different possible
world.
We must distinguish, then, between distinct and
wholly distinct, and demand the latter for our
relative atoms. To give examples: the property F,
the conjunctive property F & G, the conjunctive
property F & H, and the structural property made
up of an F-part having R to a G-part, are all distinct
(different) properties. But they are not wholly dis­
tinct. F is a proper part of F & G and F & H. It is
also a proper part, in a somewhat different fashion,
of the structural property. F & G and F & Hare
distinct, but have overlapping parts. And so on.
This distinction between mere distinctness and
being wholly distinct is a mereological distinction.
Instead of distinct/wholly distinct, we could speak
of partial and complete non-identity.
This leads on to a point of the most far-reaching
importance. When we come in practice to assert
that P is a possible state of affairs, we may assume
that the requirement of wholly distinct relative
atoms is satisfied when in fact it is not. Here is a
schematic case.
Suppose that there is a set of individuals which
has the conjunctive property F & G, a wholly
disjoint set which has G & H, and a third wholly
disjoint set which has F & H. Suppose, however,
that these properties present themselves to us, say
in perception, as different, but unanalysed (and so
for all we know simple) properties. Suppose that
we give them the names 'A', 'B' and 'C'. Taking A,
Band C as property-atoms, as we might feel
entitled to do, we can form the set of possible
properties, {A, B, C, AB, BC, AC, ABC} which
individuals might have. Combinatorialism has
given us distinct, if not wholly distinct, properties.
But suppose that we now feed in the (previously
supposed unknown) analysis of A, Band C. Sub­
stituting in our set of possible properties, we get
{FG, GH, FH, FGH, FGH, FGH, FGH}. The
last four terms are identical. Whatever we might
have thought originally, before being given the
constitution of A, Band C, recombination in fact
yields only four distinct properties.
Nevertheless, given that one cannot analyse
properties A, Band C into their constituents, will
we not naturally form the notion of seven distinct \ncombinations? This in turn allows us to form the
conception of worlds which are epistemically dis­
tinct, or, better, doxastically distinct, but which are
in fact not distinct. (Consider, for instance, worlds
where AB was instantiated, but not AC, BC and
ABC, but contrast with others where BC was
instantiated but not AB, AC and ABC) These
doxastically distinct worlds are not a subset of the
possible worlds. The possible worlds are a subset of
them!
Suppose that we consider the nomically possible
worlds. Here the laws of nature are held fixed, but
anything else which can be recombined (expanded,
contracted, etc. ) is so. Taking the laws of nature to
be contingent (on combinatorial grounds! ), then
the nomically possible worlds are a proper subset
of the possible worlds. The same sort of situation
holds if we keep fixed, not the laws of nature, but
what we know about the world. But we must not
assume that all 'qualified' types of possibility
involve cutting down on the possible worlds in
this way. On the contrary, as we have just seen,
there may be more doxastically possible worlds
than possible worlds.
Doxastically possible worlds may even be impos­
sible worlds. If combinatorialism is correct, then all
distinct simple properties and, more generally, all
wholly distinct properties, are compossible. But, as
will emerge in the next section, in the case of struc­
tural properties, combinatorial ism permits distinct
but incompatible properties. However, if it is not
known that the properties involved are incompa­
tible, impossible combinations may be formed.
I suggest that this is a cause for rejoicing rather
than dismay. We want impossible worlds. For
example, they are reqaired in mathematics where
we want to say, for instance, that it is 'possible' that
Goldbach's conjecture that every number is the
sum of two primes is false, but also 'possible' that
it is true. That we can get them so easily shows the
power of the combinatorial conception. Of course,
impossible worlds would be very bad news for a
realistic theory of these worlds. We could then only
accommodate impossible worlds by holding that
some worlds contain objective contradictions. But
the view being espoused is that possible worlds are
fictions. Impossible worlds are just impossible fic­
tions.
A thoroughgoing scientific realism about this
world gives us, I hope, enough realistic capital to
cover our expenses for the unreal possible worlds.
There are no ideal gases, but it is very convenient,
in investigating the behaviour of actual gases, to
The Nature of Possibility
compare their behaviour to an ideal gas. For the
latter is like a real gas, but is one from which certain
complicating features have been stripped. There
are no worlds over and above the actual one, but
it is very convenient, in many philosophical inves­
tigations, to speak of these extra worlds and hold
them up against the actual world. The worlds are
'constructed' in certain ways from the materials
provided by the actual world. And it is useful, for
certain purposes, to move beyond possible worlds
to merely doxastically distinct worlds, and even to
impossible worlds.
At this point we are in a position to explain why
the postulation of alien universals seems so attract­
ive. I argued that they are impossible, because
combinatorially inaccessible from the actual
world. But, without rejecting that result, we can
now see that such universals are doxastically pos­
sible. After all, we have no a priori insight into the
extent of the realm of universals. The known uni­
versals, if any are known, may be all the universals
that there are. (Remember that the only universals
are the instantiated ones. ) Their recombinations
will then exhaust the realm of the possible. But it
is at least doxastically possible ('conceivable') that
there exist universals completely different, comple­
tely alien, from the known universals.
We could introduce symbols for such unknown
universals, or refer to them indeterminately by
using existential quantifiers. As a result, they
could figure in doxastically possible worlds. Yet,
it might be, there are no such universals. In that
case, the doxastically possible worlds would be
impossible worlds. But that these universals
would be doxastically possible, together with the
fact that their genuine impossibility could not be
established a priori, would convincingly explain
why they seemed to be genuinely possible.
7 A Major Difficulty
I finish this paper by considering what appears to
be a major difficulty for the view put forward.
The combinatorialist scheme depends upon all
combinations of universals being compossible. A
single individual can instantiate any such combina­
tion, provided only that the universals so combined
are wholly distinct. For if we do not have this pro­
miscuous compatibility, then we get logical incom­
patibility not envisaged by the theory.
However, if we consider what pass for properties
(and relations) in our ordinary thinking, then we \nD. M. Armstrong
find that failures of com possibility abound. Con­
sider properties. These characteristically appear in
ranges, so that they form classes of determinates
falling under the one determinable. An individual
can, at one time, instantiate only one member of a
given range. The colour-compatibilities are a
notorious instance of this phenomenon. Histor­
ically, they seem to have furnished one of the
reasons Wittgenstein had for abandoning the meta­
physics of the Tractatus.
I make no promise to solve the problem in a
definitive way. Here the combinatorial theory
goes on the defensive. But I hope to show that the
incompatibility problem does not refute combina­
torialism. I would then appeal to the other merits of
the theory, in particular its subordination of the
possible of the actual.
Of importance here is the already introduced
notion of a structural property. Structural proper­
ties are a species of complex property. But it makes
for ease of exposition if we work with simple indi­
viduals. Suppose, then, that atomic a is F, atomic b
is F, and that a has R to b. F and R are universals.
Now consider the compound individual [a + b].
Call it 'c'. c has the complex property of being made
up of two wholly distinct F-parts which stand in
the relation R. Call this property of c 'S'. S is a good
example of a structural property.
Let there be another compound individual, d,
but this time made up of three atomic individuals,
each of which is F, and where the first atom has R
to the second, and the second has R to the third.
Call this structural property of d 'T'.
Now consider combinatorially formed possible
worlds. Properties Sand T are not suitable proper­
ties for such combinatorial operations. For
although they are distinct properties, they are not
wholly distinct. Furthermore, they are not-wholly­
distinct properties of a sort which cannot be
bestowed on the same individual. For the indivi­
dual would have to be just two-atomed (to be S)
and just three-atomed (to be T). 8 The point can be
put the other way round. For all possible worlds,
for all individuals x and y, if x has Sand y has T,
then x and yare distinct (but not in all cases wholly
distinct) individuals.
A treatment of this sort may perhaps be
extracted from Wittgenstein's remark in the Trac­
tatus, 6. 3751. He writes:
For example, the simultaneous presence of
two colours at the same place in the visual
field is impossible, in fact logically impossible,
since it is ruled out by the logical structure of
colour.
Let us think how this contradiction appears
in physics: more or less as follows - a particle
cannot have two velocities at the same time; that
is to say, particles that are in different places at
the same time cannot be identical.
Our present concern is with the second para­
graph. Suppose that at a certain instant a moves
with uniform velocity in a straight line for a second
and covers a distance of two inches. At the same
instant b moves with uniform velocity in a straight
line for a second and covers a distance of one inch.
a now has the relational property of being two
inches from where it was a second before. But b
has the relational property of being one inch from
where it was a second before.
These relational properties, however, involve a
structural element. A two-inch distance is made up
of two numerically distinct one-inch distances. As a
result, the properties are incompatible. If a and b
have the two properties at the same instant, then a
and b must be different. This, I take it, is the sort of
reasoning that Wittgenstein had in mind. The
numerical difference of a and b is built into the
distinct, but not wholly distinct, properties.
I suggest that this is the solution to the problem
for combinatorialism posed by the typical cases of
incompatible properties. Such properties are struc­
tural properties. In many cases they fall into ranges
of properties: they are determinates falling under a
common determinable. Furthermore, it is the na­
ture of the structure that it involves numerically
different individuals (a two-inch long thing is a
compound individual made up of two wholly dis­
tinct one-inch things). As a result, these properties
are not compossible. Individuals instantiating both
of a pair of such properties will never appear in
possible worlds, that is, in recombinations of wholzv
distinct 'atoms'.
It would seem that the quantities which natural
science deals so extensively in, and in particular the
quantities recognized in physics, can, in many
cases, be treated as structural properties of this
sort. At any rate, such treatment seems a promising
research programme. These quantities are among
the best candidates that we have for organized
classes of universals. Their ranges are a fruitful
source of incompatibilities.
But how are we going to deal with the colour­
incompatibilities? Wittgenstein in the passage
quoted suggests that they can be assimilated to \nthe velocity case. I have interpreted him as adum­
brating a solution to the latter in terms of structural
properties. To complete the solution, a link has to
be forged between colour and structural properties.
What I suggest, and what I think Wittgenstein
was also suggesting, is that the colours are suitable
structural properties. As a result, they immediately
yield the required incompatibilities. But, and here
is an epistemological point, in perception it is not
given to us that they are such structures. The
identity is established a posteriori by empirical
and other scientific reasoning.
We have in fact already envisaged situations of
this sort, where a conjunction of properties, F and
G say, is perceived as a single 'gestalt' property, A.
The epistemology of the situation does not seem to
raise great difficulties. We can understand how F
and G might both be required to stimulate a single,
all-or-nothing, reaction in a perceiver. As a result,
an onto logically complex property would be epis­
temically simple. Structural properties of the sort
discussed could be plugged into this account with­
out difficulty. Research into the physical basis of
colour seems at present so controversial that it is
unwise to speculate just what these properties are.
Notes
L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus fo", 'co-Philosophicus, trans.
D. Pears and B. F. McGuiness (London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul 1922); my italics.
2 B. Skyrms, 'Tractarian nominalism', Philosophical Stu­
dies 40 (1981), pp. 199-206.
3 See D. M. Armstrong, Universals and Scientific Real­
ism, vol. 2: A Theory 0. / Universals (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1978), ch. 14.
4 David Lewis, On Ihe Plurality 0. / Worlds (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1986).
See D. M. Armstrong, Universals and Scientific Real­
ism, vol. I: Nominalism and Rea/Llm (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1978), ch. 9.
The Nature of Possibility
There are phenomenological objections to even an
a posteriori identification of colours (seen colours)
with physical bases of the colours. But without
discussing the matter here, I will say that I think
both that such objections are overrated, and that,
in any case, some rough justice can be done to
them. 9
If colour can be dealt with in this way, so, pre­
sumably, can other cases of incompatibility invol­
ving the other secondary qualities. It may be noted
that we seem to be (a little vaguely) aware of the
incompatibilities while having no idea, in the state
of nature, of their suggested structural basis. This
again seems to be a mere epistemic difficulty. It
seems that we can fairly easily conceive how a
perceptual processing of properties could yield
an awareness of incompatibility without an aware­
ness of the basis of the incompatibility. (Cf. 'I know
that something has been disarranged, although I
am unable to spot the nature of the disarrange­
ment. ')
A combinatorial theory of possibility raises other
questions, and involves further difficulties which
require discussion. But let this suffice for the
present.
6 W. G. Lycan, 'The trouble with possible worlds', in
M. J. Loux (cd. ) The Possible and the Actual (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1979), pp. 274-316,
307n.
7 Armstrong, Theory 0. / Universals, ch. 15, sect. !.
8 What is the basis of this impossibility? I think it is
reasonable to say that this mereological truth is purely
analytic. We see that it holds if we understand what
it means to say that something is a proper part of a
whole.
9 See D. M. Armstrong and Norman Malcolm, Con­
sciousness and Causali~y (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984), pp.
180-1. \n\n\n\nIntroduction
There are individual red things: this paint patch
here, the apple over there, and so on. But, in addi­
tion to these particular red objects, is there also
redness, something had in common by all and only
red things? In general, in addition to particulars
that are F, is there also such a thing as F-ness, a
"universal, " shared by all and only F-things? If
there are such universals, what sort of thing are
they? Is there a universal corresponding to every
meaningful predicative expression ("red, " "not
red, " "red or large, " "located ten miles due north
of Providence, " "being sought by Ponce de Leon, ". .. . )? Are there genuine properties and kinds in
nature independently of languages and systems of
concepts? Are there "natural kinds, " kinds that
reflect genuine similarities and differences in
nature? These are some of the central questions
about universals, properties, and kinds that have
occupied philosophers.
In "Universals as Attributes" (chapter 16),
D. M. Armstrong elucidates his conception of un i­
versals as attributes that are instantiated by parti­
culars. He defends a "sparse" theory that does not
allow a universal for every meaningful predicate,
and also disallows "negative" and "disjunctive"
universals, although he does allow conjunctive uni­
versals.
David Lewis, in "New Work for a Theory of
Universals" (chapter 17), argues that, although we
may not need Armstrong's universals themselves,
we need entities that will do their work. What we
need, according to Lewis, are natural classes of
Further reading
Armstrong, D. M. , Nominalism and Realism (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1978).
--, A Theory of Universals (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1978).
--, A World of" States of AfTairs (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1997).
Bealer, George, Quality and Concept (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1982).
J ubien, Michael, "On properties and property theory, " in
G. Chierchia and B. H. Partee (eds), Properties, Types
and Meaning (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989).
Loux, Michael J. , Substance and Attribute (Dordrecht:
Reidel, 1978).
Mellor, D. H. , "Properties and predicates, " in K. Mulli­
gan (ed. ), Language, Truth and Ontology (Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 1992).
Introduction
possibilia, and he claims that these can help solve a
variety of philosophical problems, including the
problem of "the One over Many, " of defining
duplicate, determinism and materialism, of analyz­
ing causation, lawlikeness, and other important
concepts.
In "Natural Kinds" (chapter 18), W. V. Quine
explains how our innate sensory quality space gets
progressively sharpened by experience and scient­
ific theorizing into a group of properties we recog­
nize as natural kinds, inductively projectable
properties in terms of which we formulate our
theories of the world. The idea of qualitative sim­
ilarity receives a good deal of attention from Quine.
Hilary Putnam, too, subscribes to the "sparse"
ontology of properties, sharply distinguishing
properties from predicates and concepts. In "On
Properties" (chapter 19), he argues that properties
are indispensable to science, and critically discusses
various proposals for an identity criterion for prop­
erties. His own positive proposals are grounded in
considerations of the properties and magnitudes of
fundamental physical theory.
In "Causality and Properties" (chapter 20), Syd­
ney Shoemaker tackles the same question: How do
we individuate properties? His answer is a causal
theory of properties: the identity of properties con­
sists in the identity of the causal powers that the
properties confer on objects that have them. This
approach, if not Shoemaker's specific proposals,
has come to be widely accepted, and it is now a
commonplace closely to associate, or even identify,
properties with causal powers.
Mellor, D. H. , and Oliver, Alex (eds), Properties (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1997).
Oliver, Alex, "The metaphysics of properties, " Mind 105
(1996), pp. 1-80.
Shoemaker, Sydney, "Identity, properties and causality, "
in Identity, Cause and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1984).
Sober, Elliott, "Evolutionary theory and the ontological
status of properties, " Philosophical Studies 40 (1981),
pp. 147-76.
Swoyer, Chris, "Theories of properties: from plenitude
to paucity, " Philosophical Perspectives 10 (1962), pp.
244-64.
Wilson, Mark, "Predicate meets property, " Philosophical
Review 91 (1982), pp. 549-90. \nD. M. Armstrong
1 Uninstantiated Universals?
If we abandon the idea that particulars are nothing
but bundles of universals but still want to recognize
universals, then we must return to the traditional
view that particulars, tokens, instantiate universals:
having properties and standing to each other in
relations. If we do this, then there are a number
of controversial questions that have to be settled.
One key question is this. Should we, or should we
not, accept a Principle of Instantiation for univer­
sals? That is, should we, or should we not, demand
that every universal be instantiated? That is, for
each property universal must it be the case that it is
a property of some particular? For each relation
universal must it be the case that there are par­
ticulars between which the relation holds?
We certainly should not demand that every uni­
versal should be instantiated now. It would be
enough if a particular universal was not instan­
tiated now, but was instantiated in the past, or
would be instantiated in the future. The Principle
of Instantiation should be interpreted as ranging
over all time: past, present, and future. But should
we uphold the principle even in this relatively
liberal form?
This is a big parting of the ways. We can call the
view that there are uninstantiated universals the
Platonist view. It appears to have been the view
Originally published in D. M. Armstrong, Universals: An
Opinionated Introduction (1989), ch. 5. Copyright ©
by Westview Press. Reprinted by permission of the
publisher.
held by Plato, who was also, apparently, the first
philosopher to introduce universals. (He spoke of
Forms or Ideas - but there was nothing psycholo­
gical about the Ideas. )
Once you have uninstantiated universals, you
need somewhere special to put them, a "Platonic
heaven, " as philosophers often say. They are not to
be found in the ordinary world of space and time.
And since it seems that any instantiated universal
might have been uninstantiated - for example,
there might have been nothing past, present, or
future that had that property - then if uninstan­
tiated universals are in a Platonic heaven, it will be
natural to place all universals in that heaven. The
result is that we get two realms: the realm of uni­
versals and the realm of particulars, the latter being
ordinary things in space and time. Such universals
are often spoken of as transcendent. (A view of this
sort was explicitly held by Russell in his earlier davs
before he adopted a bundle-of-universals vie~. l
Instantiation then becomes a very big deal: a rela­
tion between universals and particulars that crosses
realms. The Latin tag used by the Scholastics for a
theory of this sort is universalia ante res, "universals
before things. " Such a view is unacceptable to Nat­
uralists, that is, to those who think that the space­
time world is all the world that there is. This helps
to explain why Empiricists, who tend to be sym­
pathetic to Naturalism, often reject universals.
It is interesting to notice that a separate-realm
theory of universals permits of a blob as opposed to
a layer-cake view of particulars. For on this view,
what is it for a thing to have a property? It is not the
thing's having some internal feature, but rather its \nhaving a relationship, the instantiation relation­
ship, to certain universals or Forms in another
realm. The thing itself could be blob like. It is true
that the thing could also be given a property struc­
ture. But then the properties that make up this
structure cannot be universals but must be par­
ticulars. They would have to be tropes. The par­
ticular involves property tropes, but these property
tropes are put into natural classes by their instan­
tiating a certain universal in the realm of the uni­
versals. At any rate, without bringing in tropes in
addition, it seems that Platonic theories of univer­
sals have to treat particulars as blob like rather than
layer-caked. I think that this is an argument against
Platonic theories.
If, however, we reject un instantiated universals,
then we are at least in a position, if we want to do it,
to bring the universals down to earth. We can adopt
the view whose Latin tag is universalia in rebus,
"universals in things. " We can think of a thing's
properties as constituents of the thing and think of
the properties as universals. This may have been
the position of Aristotle. (The scholars differ.
Some make him a Nominalist. Some think he
believed in this-worldly universals. Certainly, he
criticized Plato's other worldly universals. ) Univer­
salia in rebus is, of course, a layer-cake view, with
properties as universals as part of the internal
structure of things. (Relations will be universalia
inter res, "universals between things. ,, 2
There are difficulties in this position, of course,
objections that can be brought, as with every other
solution to the Problem of Universals. One thing
that has worried many philosophers, including per­
haps Plato, is that on this view we appear to have
multiple location of the same thing. Suppose a is F
and b is also F, with F a property universal. The
very same entity has to be part of the structure of
two things at two places. How can the universal be
in two places at once? I will come back to this
question later.
Just to round things off, I will mention the third
Scholastic tag: universalia post res, "universals after
things. " This was applied to Nominalist theories.
It fits best with Predicate or Concept Nominalism,
where properties, etc. are as it were created by the
classifying mind: shadows cast on things by our
predicates or concepts.
But our present task is to decide whether or not
we ought to countenance un instantiated universals.
The first point to be made is that the onus of proof
seems to be firmly on the side of the Platonists. It
can hardly be doubted that there is a world of space
Universals as Attributes
and time. But a separate realm of universals is a
mere hypothesis, or postulation. If a postulation
has great explanatory value, then it may be a good
postulation. But it has to prove itself. Why should
we postulate uninstantiated universals?
One thing that has moved many philosophers is
what we may call the argument from the meaning
of general terms. Plato, in his Republic, had
Socrates say, "shall we proceed as usual and begin
by assuming the existence of a single essential
nature or Form for every set of things which we
call by the same name? ,, 3 Socrates may have been
thinking along the following lines. Ordinary
names, that is, proper names, have a bearer of the
name. If we turn to general terms - words like
'horse' and 'triangular' that apply to many
different things - then we need something that
stands to the word in the same general sort of
relation that the bearer of the proper name stands
to the proper name. There has to be an object that
constitutes or corresponds to the meaning of the
general word. So there has to be something called
horseness and triangularity. But now consider a
general word that applies to nothing particular at
all, a word like 'unicorn' for instance. It is perfectly
meaningful. And if it is meaningful, must there not
be something in the world that constitutes or cor­
responds to the word? So there must be uninstan­
tiated universals.
This "argument from meaning" is a very bad
argument. (In fairness to Socrates, it is not clear
whether he was using it. Other philosophers have,
though, often at a rather unself-conscious level. )
The argument depends on the assumption that in
every case where a general word has meaning, there
is something in the world that constitutes or corre­
sponds to that meaning. Gilbert Ryle spoke of this
as the 'Fido'-Fido fallacy. Fido corresponds to the
word 'Fido', but there does not have to be some
single thing corresponding to a general word.
To go along with the argument from meaning is
to be led into a very promiscuous theory of uni­
versals. If it is correct, then we know a priori that
for each general word with a certain meaning, there
exists a universal. This lines up predicates and
properties in a nice neat way, but it is a way that
we ought to be very suspicious of. Is it that easy to
discover what universals there are?
Plato had another line of thought that led him
toward uninstantiated universals. This is the
apparent failure of things in the ordinary world to
come up to exact standards. It seems that nothing
in the world is perfectly straight or circular, yet in \nD. M. Armstrong
geometry we discuss the properties of perfectly
straight lines or perfect circles. Again, no thing is
perfectly changeless. Yet again, it may well be that
no act is perfectly just. Certainly no person is
perfectly virtuous, and no state is perfectly just.
Yet in ethical and political discussion (e. g. , in the
Republic) we can discuss the natme of virtue and
justice. In general, we perceive the world as falling
short of certain standards. This can be explained if,
whether we know it or not, we are comparing
ordinary things to Forms, which the ordinary
things can never fully instantiate. (This can lead
one, and perhaps led Plato, to the difficult notion of
degrees of instantiation, with the highest degree
never realized. )
It is interesting to notice that this argument did
not quite lead Plato where he wanted to go in every
case. Consider geometry. In geometry one might
wish to consider the properties of, say, two inter­
secting circles. These circles will be perfectly cir­
cular. But also, of course, there is only one Form of
the circle. So what are these two perfect circles?
Plato, apparently, had to introduce what he called
the Mathematicals. Like the mathematical Forms
they were perfect and thus were unlike ordinary
things. But unlike the Forms, there could be many
tokens of the same type, and in this they were like
ordinary things. They were particulars, although
perfect particulars. But if this is so, though perhaps
the falling away from standards gave Plato an argu­
ment for the Mathematicals, it is not clear that it is
any argument for the Forms.
But in any case, cannot ideal standards simply be
things that we merely think of? We can quite
knowingly form thoughts of that which does not
exist. In the case of ideal standards nothing comes
up to the standard, but by extrapolating from
ordinary things that approximate to the standard
in different degrees, we can form the thought of
something that does come up to the standard. It
turns out to be useful to do so. Why attribute
metaphysical reality to such standards? They
could be useful fictions. As a matter of fact, in the
geometrical case it appears that such notions as that
of a perfectly straight line or a perfectly circular
object may be acquired directly in experience. For
cannot something look perfectly straight or per­
fectly circular, even if it is not in fact so?
One should note that one thing that seems to
keep a theory of uninstantiated universals going is
the widespread idea that it is sufficient for a uni­
versal to exist if it is merely possible that it should
be instantiated. I have found in discussion that this
idea has particular appeal if it is empirically poss­
ible (that is, compatible with the laws of nature)
that the alleged universal should have actual
instances. Suppose, for instance, that somebody
describes a very complex pattern of wallpaper but
does not ever sketch the pattern or manufacture the
wallpaper. Suppose nobody else does either in the
whole history of the universe. It is clear that there
was nothing in the laws of nature that prevented
the pattern's ever having an instance, from ever
having a token of the type. But is not that pattern
a monadic universal, a complex and structural uni­
versal to be sure, but a universal nonetheless?
In this way, apparently, it is natural for philo­
sophers to argue. But for myself I do not see the
force of the argument. Philosophers do not reason
that way about particulars. They do not argue that
it is empirically possible that present-day France
should be a monarchy and therefore that the pres­
ent king of France exists, although, unfortunately
for French royalists, he is not instantiated. Why
argue in the same way about universals? Is it that
philosophers think that universals are so special
that they can exist whether or not particular things,
which are contingent only, exist? If so, I think that
this is no better than a prejudice, perhaps inherited
from Plato.
There is one subtle variation of the argument to
uninstantiated universals from their empirical
possibility that I think has more weight. It has
been developed by Michael Tooley. 4 However, it
depends upon deep considerations about the nature
of the laws of nature, which cannot be discussed
here. And in any case, the argument depends upon
the laws' being found to have a very special struc­
ture, which it is unlikely that they actually have. As
a result, it seems that the best that the argument
shows is that uninstantiated universals are possible
rather than actual. And even this conclusion may
be avoidable. s
It may also be thought that considerations from
mathematics, and the properties and relations pos­
tulated by mathematicians, push toward the recog­
nition of uninstantiated universals. However, the
whole project of bringing together the theory of
universals with the disciplines of mathematics,
although very important, cannot be undertaken
here. I have sketched out, rather broadly, the way
that I think it ought to go in a book on the nature of
possibility. 6
From this point on, therefore, I am going to
assume the truth of the Principle of Instantiation.
As already noted, this does not compel one to \nabandon a two-realm doctrine. It does not compel
one to bring the universals down among ordinary
things. But it does permit one to do this, and to do
so seems the natural way to develop the theory once
one rejects uninstantiated universals.
2 Disjunctive, Negative, and
Conjunctive Universals
For simplicity, in this section I will consider prop­
erty universals only. But the points to be made
appear to apply to relations also. We have already
rejected uninstantiated universals. But it seems that
the potential class of universals needs to be cut
down a great deal further if we are to get a plausible
theory. I will begin by giving reasons for rejecting
disjunctive property universals. By a disjunctive
proper~y I mean a disjunction of (property) univer­
sals. Let us assume that particular electric charges
and particular masses are universals. Then having
charge C or having mass M (with C and M dum­
mies for determinate, that is, definite values) would
be an example of a disjunctive property. Why is it
not a universal? Consider two objects. One has
charge C but lacks mass M. The other lacks charge
C but has mass M. So they have the disjunctive
property having charge C or having mass M. But
surely that does not show that, in any serious sense,
they thereby have something identical? The whole
point of a universal, however, is that it should be
identical in its different instances.
There is another reason to deny that a disjunc­
tion of universals is a universal. There is some very
close link between universals and causality. The
link is of this nature. If a thing instantiates a certain
universal, then, in virtue of that, it has the power to
act in a certain way. For instance, if a thing has a
certain mass, then it has the power to act upon the
scalepan of a balance, or upon scales, in a certain
way. Furthermore, different universals bestow dif­
ferent powers. Charge and mass, for instance, man­
ifest themselves in different ways. I doubt if the
link between universals and powers is a necessary
one, but it seems real. Moreover, if, as seems
abstractly possible, two different universals
bestowed the very same powers, how could one
ever know that they were two different universals?
If they affect all apparatus, including our brains, in
exactly the same way, will we not judge that we are
dealing with one universal only?
Now suppose that a thing has charge C but lacks
mass M. In virtue of charge C, it has certain powers
Universals as Attributes
to act. For instance, it repels things with like
charge. Possession of the disjunctive property C
or M adds nothing to its power. This suggests that
while C may be a genuine universal, C or M is not.
So I think that we should reject disjunctive uni­
versals. A similar case seems to hold against neg­
ative universals: the lack or absence of a property is
not a property. If having charge C is the instantia­
tion of a universal, then not having C is not the
instantiating of a universal.
First, we may appeal to identity again. Is there
really something in common, something identical,
in everything that lacks charge C? Of course, there
might be some universal property that just hap­
pened to be coextensive with lacking charge C. But
the lack itself does not seem to be a factor found in
each thing that lacks charge C.
Second, causal considerations seem to point in
the same direction. It is a strange idea that lacks or
absences do any causing. It is natural to say that a
thing acts in virtue of positive factors alone. This
also suggests that absences of universals are not
universals.
It is true that there is some linguistic evidence
that might be thought to point the other way. We
do say things like "lack of water caused his death. "
At the surface, the statement says that a lack of
water caused an absence of life. But how seriously
should we take such ways of expressing ourselves?
Michael Tooley has pointed out that we are
unhappy to say "lack of poison causes us to remain
alive. " Yet if the surface way of understanding the
first statement is correct, then the second state­
ment should be understood in the same way and
thought to be true. Certain counterfactual state­
ments are true in both cases: If he had had water,
then he would (could) have still been alive; if we
had taken poison, we would have been dead now.
These are causal truths. But they tell us very little
about the actual causal factors operative in the two
cases. We believe, I think, that these actual causal
factors could be spelled out in purely positive
terms.
It is interesting to notice that conjunctions of
universals (having both charge C and mass M)
escape the two criticisms leveled against disjunct­
ive and negative universals. With conjunctions we
do have identity. The very same conjunction of
factors is present in each instance. There is no
problem about causality. If a thing instantiates the
conjunction, then it will have certain powers as a
consequence. These powers will be different from
those that the thing would have had if it had had \nD. M. Armstrong
just one of the conjuncts. It may even be that the
conjunction can do more than the sum of what each
property would do if each was instantiated alone.
(As scientists say: There could be synergism. The
effect could be more than the sum of each cause
acting by itself. )
But there is one condition that ought to be put
on conjunctive universals. Some thing (past, pres­
ent, future) must actually have both properties and
at the same time. This, of course, is simply the
Principle of Instantiation applied to conjunctive
universals.
3 Predicates and Universals
What has been said about uninstantiated univer­
sals, and also about disjunctions and negations of
universals, has brought out a most important point.
It is that there is no automatic passage from
predicates (linguistic entities) to universals. For
instance, the expression "either having charge C
or having mass M" is a perfectly good predicate. It
could apply to, or be true of, innumerable objects.
But as we have seen, this does not mean that there is
a universal corresponding to this predicate.
Wittgenstein made a famous contribution to the
Problem of Universals with his discussion ofJamily
resemblances. Wittgenstein was an anti-metaphysi­
cian, and his object was to dissolve rather than to
solve the Problem of Universals. He seems to have
thought that what he said about family resemb­
lances was (among other things) a step toward
getting rid of the problem. But I think that the
real moral of what he said is only that predicates
and universals do not line up in any simple way.
In his Philosophical Investigations he considered
the notion of a game. He had this to say about it?
66. Consider for example the proceedings that
we call "games. " I mean board-games, card­
games, ball-games, Olympic games, and so on.
What is common to them all? - Don't say:
"There must be something common, or they
would not be called 'games'" - but look and
see whether there is anything common to all -
For if you look at them you will not see some­
thing that is common to all, but similarities,
relationships, and a whole series of them at
that. To repeat: don't think, but look! - Look
for example at board-games, with their multi­
farious relationships. Now pass to card-games;
here you find many correspondences with the
first group, but many common features drop
out, and others appear. When we pass next to
ball-games, much that is common is retained,
but much is lost. - Are they all "amusing"?
Compare chess with noughts and crosses. Or
is there always winning and losing, or competi­
tion between players? Think of patience. In ball
games there is winning and losing; but when a
child throws his ball at the wall and catches it
again, this feature has disappeared. Look at the
parts played by skill and luck; and at the differ­
ence between skill in chess and skill in tennis.
Think now of games like ring-a-ring-a-roses;
here is the element of amusement, but how
many other characteristic features have disap­
peared! And we can go through the many, many
other groups of games in the same way; we can
see how similarities crop up and disappear.
And the result of this examination is: we see a
complicated network of similarities overlapping
and criss-crossing: sometimes overall similari­
ties, sometimes similarities of detail.
67. I can think of no better expression to char­
acterize these similarities than "family resemb­
lances"; for the various resemblances between
members of a family: build, features, colour of
eyes, gait, temperament, etc. etc. overlap and
criss-cross in the same way. - And I shall say:
"games" form a family.
This has been a very influential passage. Witt­
genstein and his followers applied the point to all
sorts of notions besides those of a game, including
many of the central notions discussed by philo­
sophers. But what should a believer in universals
think that Wittgenstein has shown about univer­
sals?
Let us agree, as we probably should, that there is
no universal of gamehood. But now what of this
"complicated network of similarities overlapping
and criss-crossing" of which Wittgenstein speaks?
All the Realist has to do is to analyze each of these
similarities in terms of common properties. That
analysis of similarity is not a difficult or unfamiliar
idea, though it is an analysis that would be con­
tested by a Nominalist. But there will not be any
property that runs through the whole class and
makes them all games. To give a crude and over­
simplified sketch, the situation might be like this:
Particulars: a b d
Their properties: FGHJ GHJK HJKL JKLM KLMN \nHere F to M are supposed to be genuine property
universals, and it is supposed that the predicate
"game" applies in virtue of these properties. But
the class of particulars {a. .. e}, which is the class
of all tokens of games, is a family in Wittgenstein's
sense. Here, though, I have sketched an account of
such families that is completely compatible with
Realism about universals.
However, Wittgenstein's remarks do raise a big
question. How does one decide whether one is or is
not in the presence of a genuine property or rela­
tion? Wittgenstein says of games, "don't think, but
look! " As a general recipe, at least, that seems far
too simple.
I do not think that there is any infallible way of
deciding what are the true universals. It seems clear
that we must not look to semantic considerations.
As I said in section 1, those who argue to particular
universals from semantic data, from predicates to a
universal corresponding to that predicate, argue in
a very optimistic and unempirical manner. I call
them a priori realists. Better, I think, is a posteriori
realism. The best guide that we have to just what
universals there are is total science.
For myself, I believe that this puts physics in a
special position. There seem to be reasons (scient­
ific, empirical, a posteriori reasons) to think that
physics is the fundamental science. If that is cor­
rect, then such properties as mass, charge, exten­
sion, duration, space-time interval, and other
properties envisaged by physics may be the true
monadic universals. (They are mostly ranges of
quantities. Q]. iantities raise problems that will
need some later discussion. ) Spatiotemporal and
causal relations will perhaps be the true polyadic
universals.
If this is correct, then the ordinary types - the
type red, the type horse, in general, the types of the
manifest image of the world - will emerge as pre­
liminary, rough-and-ready classifications of reality.
For the most part they are not false, but they are
rough-and-ready. Many of them will be family
affairs, as games appear to be. To the one type
will correspond a whole family of universals and
not always a very close family. And even where
the ordinary types do carve the beast of reality
along its true joints, they may still not expose
those joints for the things that they are. But let it
be emphasized that any identification of universals
remains rather speculative. In what I have just been
saying I have been trying to combine a philosophy
of universals with Physicalism. Others may have
other ideas.
Universals as Attributes
4 States of Affairs
In the Universals theory that we are examining,
particulars instantiate properties, pairs of particu­
lars instantiate (dyadic) relations, triples of par­
ticulars instantiate (triadic) relations, and so on as
far as is needed. Suppose that a is F, with F a
universal, or that a has R to b, with R a universal.
It appears that we are required to recognize a's
being F and a's having R to b as items in our
ontology. I will speak of these items as states of
affairs. Others have called them facts. 8
Why do we need to recognize states of affairs?
Why not recognize simply particulars, universals
(divided into properties and relations), and, per­
haps, instantiation? The answer appears by consid­
ering the following point. If a is F, then it is
entailed that a exists and that the universal F exists.
However, a could exist, and F could exist, and yet
it fail to be the case that a is F (F is instantiated, but
instantiated elsewhere only). a's being F involves
something more than a and F. It is no good simply
adding the fundamental tie or nexus of instantia­
tion to the sum of a and F. The existence of a, of
instantiation, and ofF does not amount to a's being
F. The something more must be a's being F - and
this is a state of affairs.
This argument rests upon a general principle,
which, following C. B. Martin, I call the truth­
maker principle. According to this principle, for
every contingent truth at least (and perhaps for all
truths contingent or necessary) there must be some­
thing in the world that makes it true. "Something"
here may be taken as widely as may be wished. The
"making" is not causality, of course: Rather, it is
that in the world in virtue of which the truth is true.
Gustav Bergmann and his followers have spoken of
the "ontological ground" of truths, and I think that
this is my "something in the world" that makes
truths true. An important point to notice is that
different truths may all have the same truth-maker,
or ontological ground. For instance, that this thing
is colored, is red, and is scarlet are all made true by
the thing's having a particular shade of color.
The truth-maker principle seems to me to be
fairly obvious once attention is drawn to it, but I
do not know how to argue for it further. It is to be
noted, however, that some of those who take per­
fectly seriously the sort of metaphysical investiga­
tion that we are here engaged upon nevertheless
reject the principle. 9
Accepting the truth-maker principle will lead
one to reject Quine's viewlO that predicates do not \nD. M. Armstrong
have to be taken seriously in considering the onto­
logical implications of statements one takes to be
true. Consider the difference between asserting
that a certain surface is red and asserting that it is
green. An upholder of the truth-maker principle
will think that there has to be an ontological
ground, a difference in the world, to account for
the difference between the predicate 'red' applying
to the surface and the predicate 'green' so applying.
Of course, what that ontological ground is, is a
further matter. There is no high road from the
principle to universals and states of affairs.
Returning now to states of affairs, it may be
pointed out that there are some reasons for accept­
ing states of affairs even if the truth-maker prin­
ciple is rejected. First, we can apparently refer to
states of affairs, preparatory to saying something
further about them. But it is generally, if not uni­
versally, conceded by philosophers that what can be
referred to exists. Second, states of affairs are plaus­
ible candidates for the terms of causal relations.
The state of affairs of a's being F may be the
cause of b's being G. Third, as we shall see in
section 8, states of affairs can help to solve a fairly
pressing problem in the theory of universals: how to
understand the multiple location of property uni­
versals and the nonlocation of relation universals.
It is interesting to see that states of affairs seem
not to be required by a Class Nominalist or a
Resemblance Nominalist, and of course that is an
important economy for their respective theories.
The Class Nominalist analyzes a's being F as a's
being a member of a class (or natural class) contain­
ing {a, b, c, .. . }. But here we have simply a and
the class. The class-membership relation is inter­
nal, dictated by the nature of the terms. So we need
not recognize it as something additional to the
terms. The terms by themselves are sufficient
truth-makers. Hence we do not need states of
affairs.
The Resemblance Nominalist analyzes a's being
F as a matter of resemblance relations holding
between a and, say, suitable paradigm Fs. But
that relation is also internal, dictated by what I
called the particularized nature of a and the para­
digm objects. Once again, states of affairs are not
needed.
(But it seems that a Predicate Nominalist will
require states of affairs. a's being F is analyzed as
a's falling under the predicate F. But how can the
falling under be dictated simply by a and the
linguistic object F? Falling under is an external
relation. )
Now for something very important. States of
affairs have some rather surprising characteristics.
Let us call a, b, F, R, etc. the constituents of states
of affairs. It turns out that it is possible for there to
be two different states of affairs that nevertheless
have exact~y the same constituents.
Here is a simple example. Let R be a nonsym­
metrical relation (for instance, loves). Let it be the
case, contingently, that a has R to band b has R to
a. Two distinct states of affairs exist: a's having R
to b, and b's having R to a (a's loving band b's
loving a). Indeed, these states of affairs are wholly
distinct, in the sense that it is possible for either
state of affairs to fail to obtain while the other
exists. Yet the two states of affairs have exactly
the same constituents.
You can get the same phenomenon with proper­
ties as well as relations. I I Assume, as I think it is
correct to assume, that a conjunction of states of
affairs is itself a state of affairs. Then consider (l)
a's being F and b's being G; and (2) a's being G and
b's being F. Two wholly distinct states of affairs, it
may be, but the very same constituents.
At this point, it is worth realizing that states of
affairs may be required not simply by those who
recognize universals but also by any philosophy
that recognizes properties and relations, whether
as universals or as particulars. This is very import­
ant, because we saw in examining Natural Class
and Resemblance theories what difficulties there
are in denying properties and relations (in espous­
ing a blob view).
Suppose that a has RI to b, with R, a particular,
but a nonsymmetrical, relation. If b has 'the same'
relation to a, then, on a philosophy of tropes, we
have b's having R2 to a: two states of affairs with
different (though overlapping) constituents. For
the loving that holds between a and b is a different
object from the loving that holds between band a.
Nevertheless, a's having R, to b entails the exist­
ence of constituents a, R" and b, but the existence
of these constituents does not entail that a has R, to
b. So states of affairs still seem to be something
more than their constituents.
With tropes, you never get different states of
affairs constructed out of exactly the same consti­
tuents. But given just one set of constituents, more
than one state of affairs having just these constitu­
ents is possible. From a, trope R" and b, for
instance, we could get a's having R, to b or b's
having R, to a. There is a way for a philosophy of
tropes to avoid having to postulate states of affairs.
But let us leave that aside for now. \nI have spoken of the constituents of states of
affairs. Could we also think and speak of them as
parts of states of affairs? I think that it would be
very unwise to think and speak of them in this way.
Logicians have paid some attention to the notions
of whole and part. They have worked out a formal
calculus for manipulating these notions, which is
sometimes called the calculus of individuals or,
better, mereology (in Greek meros means a part).
One philosopher who helped to work this out was
Nelson Goodman, and in his book The Structure oj
Appearance an account of mereology is given. 12
There is one mereological principle that is very
important for us here: If there are a number of
things, and if they have a sum, that is, a whole of
which they are parts, then they have just one sum.
I say if they have a sum, because it is controver­
sial whether a number ofthings always have a sum.
Do the square root of 2 and the Sydney Opera
House have a sum? Philosophers differ on how
permissive a mereology should be, that is, on
whether there are limits to what you can sum, and
if there are limits, where the limits fall. I myself
would accept total permissiveness in summing. But
all that is needed here is something that is agreed
by all: where things can be summed, for each
collection of things there is just one sum. We
have just seen, however, that the complete consti­
tuents of a state of affairs are capable of being, and
may actually even be, the complete constituents of
a different state of affairs. Hence constituents do
not stand to states of affairs as parts to whole.
It is worth noticing that complex universals have
constituents rather than parts. At any rate this is so
if we accept the Principle of Instantiation. Con­
sider, for instance, conjunctive universals. If being
P and Qis a conjunctive universal, then there must
exist some particular, x, such that x is both P and
Q But to say that is to say that there exists at least
one state of affairs of the form x is P and x is Q For
the conjunctive universal to exist is for there to be a
state of affairs of a certain sort. As a result, it is
misleading to say that P and Q are parts of the
conjunctive universal, a thing that I myself did
say in the past. lJ
A very important type of complex universal is a
structural property. A structural property involves
a thing instantiating a certain pattern, such as a
flag. Different parts (mereological parts) of the
thing that instantiates the structural property will
have certain properties. If the structural property
involves relations, as a flag does, some or all of
these parts will be related in various ways. It is
Universals as Attributes
easy to see that states of affairs must be appealed
to. If a has P, and b has Q, and a has R to b, then
and only then the object [a + b] has the structural
property that may be presented in a shorthand way
as P-R-Q
A final point before leaving this particularly
important section. The fact that states of affairs,
if they exist, have a nonmereological mode of com­
position may have consequences for the view that
particulars are no more than bundles of universals.
(I understand that this point comes from Mark
Johnston. ) We have seen that different states of
affairs can have exactly the same constituents (a's
loving b, and b's loving a). We have previously
argued against the Bundle theory that two bundles
containing exactly the same universals are imposs­
ible. They would be the very same bundle. Yet,
considering the matter independently of the Bun­
dle theory, why should not two different particu­
lars be exactly alike? But now suppose that, as is
plausible, we treat a bundling of universals as a
state of affairs. Why should not exactly the same
universals be bundled up in different ways?
In reply, I think it must be admitted that this is
conceivable. But it would depend upon the Bundle
theorist's working out a scheme that allowed for
different bundling of the very same things. This is
not provided for in the actual Bundle theories that
have been developed. So if they want to take this
path, then the onus is on Bundle theorists to try to
develop their theory in a new way.
5 A World of States of Affairs?
In the previous section it was argued that a philo­
sophy that admits both particulars and universals
ought to admit states of affairs (facts), which have
particulars and universals as constituents (not as
parts). As a matter of fact, we saw that to introduce
properties and relations at all, even as particulars,
would apparently involve states of affairs. But our
present concern is with universals.
The suggestion to be put forward now is that we
should think of the world as a world of states of
affairs, with particulars and universals only having
existence within states of affairs. We have already
argued for a Principle of Instantiation for univer­
sals. If this is a true principle, then the way is open
to regard a universal as an identical element present
in certain states of affairs. A particular that existed
outside states of affairs would not be clothed in any
properties or relations. It may be called a bare \nD. M. Armstrong
particular. If the world is to be a world of states of
affairs, we must add to the Principle of Instantia­
tion a Principle of the Rejection of Bare Particulars.
This second principle looks plausible enough. In
a Universals theory, it is universals that give a thing
its nature, kind, or sort. A bare particular would
not instantiate any universals, and thus would have
no nature, be of no kind or sort. What could we
make of such an entity? Perhaps a particular need
not have any relations to any other particular -
perhaps it could be quite isolated. But it must
instantiate at least one property.
6 The Thin and the Thick Particular
Here is a problem that has been raised by John
Quilter. 14 He calls it the "Antinomy of Bare Parti­
culars. " Suppose that particular a instantiates
property F. a is F. This "is" is obviously not the
"is" of identity, as in a is a or F is F. a and Fare
different entities, one being a particular, the other a
universal. The "is" we are dealing with is the "is"
of instantiation - of a fundamental tie between
particular and property. But if the "is" is not the
"is" of identity, then it appears that a considered in
itself is really a bare particular lacking any proper­
ties. But in that case a has not got the property F.
The property F remains outside a - just as trans­
cendent forms remain outside the particular in
Plato's theory.
I believe that we can at least begin to meet this
difficulty by drawing the important distinction
between the thin and the thick particular. ls The
thin particular is a, taken apart from its properties
(substratum). It is linked to its properties by
instantiation, but it is not identical with them. It
is not bare, because to be bare it would have to be
not instantiating any properties. But though
clothed, it is thin.
However, this is not the only way that a par­
ticular can be thought of. It can also be thought of
as involving its properties. Indeed, that seems to be
the normal way that we think of particulars. This is
the thick particular. But the thick particular,
because it enfolds both thin particulars and proper­
ties, held together by instantiation, can be nothing
but a state of affairs.
Suppose that a instantiates F, G, H, .. . They
comprise the totality of a's (nonrelational) proper­
ties. Now form the conjunctive property F & G &
H. .. . Call this property N, where N is meant to be
short for a's nature. a is N is true, and a's being N
is a (rather complex) state of affairs. It is also the
thick particular. The thick particular is a state of
affairs. The properties of a thing are "contained
within it" because they are constituents of this state
of affairs. (Notice that states of affairs, such as a's
being N, are not repeatable. So, along with thin
particulars, they can be called particulars also. )
Therefore, in one sense a particular is prop­
ertyless. That is the thin particular. In another
sense it enfolds properties within itself. In the latter
case it is the thick particular and is a state of affairs.
I think that this answers the difficulty raised by the
Antinomy of Bare Particulars.
Two points before leaving this section: First, the
distinction between thin and thick particulars does
not depend upon a doctrine of properties as uni­
versals. It does presuppose a substance-attribute
account of a particular, rather than a bundle view.
But we have already seen that it is possible to take a
substance-attribute view with the attributes as par­
ticulars, that is, as tropes. The thin particular
remains the particular with its attributes abstracted
away. The thick particular is again a state of affairs:
the thin particular's having the (particular) attri­
butes that it has.
Second, the thin and the thick particular are
really the two ends of a scale. In between is the
particular clothed with some, but only some, of its
properties. They may be properties that are, for
one reason or another, particularly important. This
intermediate particular will, of course, be a state of
affairs, but a less comprehensive one than the state
of affairs that is the thick particular.
7 Universals as Ways
The discussion in the previous section is not
entirely satisfactory as it stands. It still leaves us
with a picture of the thin particular and its proper­
ties as distinct metaphysical nodules that are linked
together in states of affairs to form the thick par­
ticular. This makes the Principles of Instantiation
and of the Rejection of Bare Particulars seem a bit
arbitrary. Why must the nodules occur together?
Could they not come apart? But would they then
not be those unwanted creatures: uninstantiated
universals and bare particulars?
Here I turn to a suggestion that has often been in
the air, but had not, I think, been expounded
systematically before David Seargent's book on
Stout's theory of universals. 16 Unlike Stout, Sear­
gent accepts universals, and in chapter 4 he argues \nthat we should think of them as ways. Properties
are ways things are. The mass or charge of an
electron is a way the electron is (in this case, a
way that any electron is). Relations are ways things
stand to each other.
If a property is a way that a thing is, then this
brings the property into very intimate connection
with the thing, but without destroying the distinc­
tion between them. One can see the point of think­
ing of instantiation as a fundamental connection, a
tie or nexus closer than mere relation. Nor will one
be much tempted by the idea of an uninstantiated
property. A way that things are could hardly exist
on its own.
Again, one will not be tempted by the idea that
the way a thing stands to other things, a relation,
could exist on its own, independent of the things.
(Not that the idea was ever very tempting! It is
easier to substantialize properties than relations. )
It may be objected that the phrases "ways things
are" and "ways things stand to each other" beg the
question against uninstantiated universals. Should
I not have spoken of ways things could be and ways
things could stand to each other, thus canceling the
implication that the ways must be the ways of
actual things?
However, my argument is not attempting to take
advantage of this semantic point. My contention is
that once properties and relations are thought of
not as things, but as ways, it is profoundly un­
natural to think of these ways as floating free
from things. Ways, I am saying, are naturally con­
strued only as ways actual things are or ways actual
things stand to each other. The idea that properties
and relations can exist un instantiated is nourished
by the idea that they are not ways but things.
Before concluding this section, I should like to
note that the conception of properties and relations
as ways does not depend upon taking them as
universals. We can still think of a's property as a
way that a is, even if the property is particular, a
trope. It will just be the case that no other thing
besides a can be that way. Similarly, a relation
holding between a and b can still be a way a and b
stand to each other, even if this way is non­
repeatable.
It is very important to realize that the notions of
states of affairs and their constituents, the distinc­
tion between the thin and the thick particular, and
the conception of properties and relations as ways
things are and ways things stand to other things are
available, if desired, to a philosophy of tropes as
much as to a philosophy of universals.
-- -- ------------
Universals as Attributes
8 Multiple Location
To bring universals from a Platonic realm down to
earth, down to space-time, seems to involve saying
something rather strange. It seems to follow that
universals are, or may be, multiply located. For are
they not to be found wherever the particulars that
instantiate them are found? If two different elec­
trons each have charge e, then e, one thing, a uni­
versal, is to be found in two different places, the
places where the two electrons are, yet entirely and
completely in each place. This has seemed wildly
paradoxical to many philosophers.
Plato appears to be raising this difficulty in the
Philebus, ISb-c. There he asked about a Form:
"Can it be as a whole outside itself, and thus
come to be one and identical in one thing and in
several at once - a view which might be thought to
be the most impossible of all? "l7 A theory that kept
universals in a separate realm from particulars
would at least avoid this difficulty!
You might try just accepting the multiple loca­
tion of universals. Some philosophers have. But
then a difficulty can be raised: What about rela­
tions? Perhaps one can give properties a multiple
location. But just where will you locate the "multi­
ply located" relations? In the related things? That
does not sound right. If a precedes b, is the relation
in both a and b? Or in the thing [a + b]? Neither
answer sounds right. But if it is not in the things,
where is it?
I am inclined to meet the difficulty by saying
that talk of the location of universals, while better
than placing them in another realm, is also not
quite appropriate. What should be said first, I
think, is that the world is a world of states of affairs.
These states of affairs involve particulars having
properties and standing in relations to each other.
The properties and relations are universals, which
means both that different particulars can have the
very same property and that different pairs, triples, .. ., of particulars can stand in the very same rela­
tion to each other. I do not think that all that is too
startling a claim.
But if Naturalism is true, then the world is a
single spatiotemporal manifold. What does this
come to in terms of the states of affairs theory?
That is, how do we reconcile Naturalism with the
view sketched in the previous paragraph? It would
be an enormous undertaking, presumably invol­
ving both fundamental science and philosophy, to
give an answer involving even the sketchiest detail.
All that can be said here is that the space-time \nD. M. Armstrong
world would have to be an enormous plurality or
conjunction of states of affairs, with all the par­
ticulars that feature in the states of affairs linked up
together (in states of affairs) by spatiotemporal
relations.
To talk oflocating universals in space-time then
emerges as a crude way of speaking. Space-time is
Notes
It is suggested that ch. 11 of D. M. Armstrong's Nomin­
alism and Realism (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1978) and chs 13-17 of his A Theory of Universals
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978) be used
as companion readings to this chapter.
See his introductory book The Problems of Philosophy
(London: Williams and Norgate, 1912), chs 9 and 10.
2 F. E. Abbott, Scientific Theism (London: Macmillan,
1886).
3 Plato, Republic, trans. F. M. Cornford (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1947), p. 595.
4 Michael Tooley, Causation (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1987), sects 3. 1. 4 and 3. 2.
See D. M. Armstrong, What is a Law of Nature?
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983),
ch. 8.
6 D. M. Armstrong, A Combinatorial Theory of Possib­
ility (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989),
ch. 10.
7 L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1953), sects 66 and 67.
8 E. g. , L. Wittgenstein, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1961); B. Skyrms, "Tractarian
nominalism, " Philosophical Studies 40 (1981).
not a box into which universals are put. Universals
are constituents of states of affairs. Space-time is a
conjunction of states of affairs. In that sense uni­
versals are "in" space-time. But they are in it as
helping to constitute it. I think that this is a reason­
able understanding of universalia in rebus, and I
hope that it meets Plato's objection. IS
9 See in particular David Lewis, "New work for a
theory of universals, " this volume, ch. 17.
10 W. V. ~ine, "On what there is, " this volume, ch. 1.
11 As pointed out by David Lewis, "Comment on Forr­
est and Armstrong, " Australasian Journal ofPhiloso­
phy 64 (1986).
12 Nelson Goodman, The Structure of Appearance (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1966).
13 Armstrong, Theory of Universals, ch. 15, sect. 2.
14 John ~ilter, "What has properties? ," Proceedings of
the Russellian Society (Sydney University, Philosophy
Dept. , 1985), p. 10.
15 This distinction is discussed in greater detail in D. M.
Armstrong's Universals: An Opinionated Introduction
(Boulder, Colo. : Westview Press, 1989), from which
the present selection is taken.
16 D. A. ]. Seargent, Plurali(y and Continuity. an Essay
on C. F. Stout's Theory of Universals (Martinus Nijh­
off, 1985).
17 Plato, Philebus, trans. A. E. Taylor.
18 For more on this topic see my "Can a naturalist
believe in universals? ", in E. Ullmann-Margalit
(ed. ), Science in Reflection, (Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1988); together with critical comment in
the same volume by Gilead Bar-Elli. \nDavid Lewis
Introduction
D. M. Armstrong offers a theory of universals as
the only adequate answer to a compulsory question
for systematic philosophy: the problem of One over
Many. ! I find this line of argument unpersuasive.
But I think there is more to be said for Armstrong's
theory than he himself has said. For as I bear it in
mind considering various topics in philosophy, I
notice time and again that it offers solutions to my
problems. Whatever we may think of the problem
of One over Many, universals can earn their living
doing other much-needed work.
I do not say that they are indispensable. The
services they render could be matched using
resources that are Nominalistic in letter, if perhaps
not in spirit. 2 But neither do I hold any presump­
tion against universals, to the effect that they are to
be accepted only if we have no alternative. I there­
fore suspend judgement about universals them­
selves. I only insist that, one way or another, their
work must be done.
I shall investigate the benefits of adding univer­
sals to my own usual ontology. That ontology,
though Nominalistic, is in other respects generous.
It consists of possibilia - particular, individual
things, some of which comprise our actual world
and others of which are unactualized3 - together
with the iterative hierarchy of classes built up from
Originally published in Australasian Journal of Philo­
sophy 61 (1983), pp. 343-77. Reprinted with permis­
sion of the author and La Trobe University, Bundoora.
them. Thus I already have at my disposal a theory
of properties as classes of possibilia. Properties, so
understood, are not much like universals. Nor can
they, unaided, take over the work of universals.
Nevertheless, they will figure importantly in what
follows, since for me they are part of the environ­
ment in which universals might operate.
The friend of universals may wonder whether
they would be better employed not as an addition
to my ontology of possibilia and classes, but rather
as a replacement for parts of it. A fair question, and
an urgent one; nevertheless, not a question consid­
ered in this paper.
In the next section, I shall sketch Armstrong's
theory of universals, contrasting universals with
properties understood as classes of possibilia.
Then I shall say why I am unconvinced by the
One over Many argument. Then I shall turn to
my principal topic: how universals could help me
in connection with such topics as duplication,
supervenience, and divergent worlds; a minimal
form of materialism; laws and causation; and the
content of language and thought. Perhaps the list
could be extended.
Universals and Properties
Language offers us several more or less inter­
changeable words: 'universal'; 'property', 'quality',
'attribute', 'feature', and 'characteristic'; 'type',
'kind', and 'sort'; and perhaps others. And philo­
sophy offers us several conceptions of the entities \nDavid Lewis
that such words refer to. My purpose is not to fix
on one of these conceptions; but rather to distin­
guish two (at opposite extremes) and contemplate
helping myself to both. Therefore some regimenta­
tion of language is called for; I apologize for any
inconvenience caused. Let me reserve the word
'universal' for those entities, if such there be, that
mostly conform to Armstrong's account. And let
me reserve the word 'property' for classes - any
classes, but I have foremost in mind classes of
things. To have a property is to be a member of
the class. 4
Why call them 'properties' as well as 'classes'? -
Just to underline the fact that they need not be
classes of actual things. The property of being a
donkey, for instance, is the class of all the donkeys.
This property belongs to - this class contains - not
only the actual donkeys of this world we live in, but
also all the unactualized, otherworldly donkeys.
Likewise I reserve the word 'relation' for arbit­
rary classes of ordered pairs, triples, .. . Thus a
relation among things is a property of 'tuples of
things. Again, there is no restriction to actual
things. Corresponding roughly to the division
between properties and relations of things, we
have the division between 'monadic' and 'polyadic'
universals.
Universals and properties differ in two principal
ways. The first difference concerns their instantia­
tion. A universal is supposed to be wholly present
wherever it is instantiated. It is a constituent part
(though not a spatiotemporal part) of each particu­
lar that has it. A property, by contrast, is spread
around. The property of being a donkey is partly
present wherever there is a donkey, in this or any
other world. Far from the property being part of
the donkey, it is closer to the truth to say that the
donkey is part of the property. But the precise
truth, rather, is that the donkey is a member of
the property.
Thus universals would unify reality5 in a way
that properties do not. Things that share a univer­
sal have not just joined a single class. They literally
have something in common. They are not entirely
distinct. They overlap.
By occurring repeatedly, universals defy intuit­
ive principles. But that is no damaging objection,
since plainly the intuitions were made for particu­
lars. For instance, call two entities cop resent if both
are wholly present at one position in space and
time. We might intuit offhand that copresence is
transitive. But it is not so, obviously, for universals.
Suppose for the sake of argument that there are
universals: round, silver, golden. Silver and round
are copresent, for here is a silver coin; golden and
round are cop resent, for there is a gold coin; but
silver and golden are not copresent. Likewise, if we
add universals to an ontology of possibilia, for the
relation of being part of the same possible world. 6 I
and some otherworldly dragon are not worldmates;
but I am a worldmate of the universal golden, and
so is the dragon. Presumably I needed a mixed case
involving both universals and particulars. For why
should any two universals ever fail to be world­
mates? Lacking such failures, the world mate rela­
tion among universals alone is trivially transitive.
The second difference between universals and
properties concerns their abundance. This is the
difference that qualifies them for different work,
and thereby gives rise to my interest in having
universals and properties both.
A distinctive feature of Armstrong's theory is
that universals are sparse. There are the universals
that there must be to ground the objective resem­
blances and the causal powers of things, and there
is no reason to believe in any more. All of the
following alleged universals would be rejected:
not golden,
golden or wooden,
metallic,
self-identical,
owned by Fred,
belonging to class C,
grue,
first examined before
2000 AD;
being identical,
being alike in some respect,
being exactly alike,
being part of,
owning,
being paired with by some
pair in R
(where C and R are utterly miscellaneous classes).
The guiding idea, roughly, is that the world's uni­
versals should comprise a minimal basis for char­
acterizing the world completely. Universals that do
not contribute at all to this end are unwelcome, and
so are universals that contribute only redundantly.
A satisfactory inventory of universals is a non­
linguistic counterpart of a primitive vocabulary
for a language capable of describing the world
exhaustively.
(That is rough: Armstrong does not dismiss
redundant universals out of hand, as the spirit of
his theory might seem to demand. Conjunctive
universals - as it might be, golden-and-round -
are accepted, though redundant; so are analysable
structural universals. The reason is that if the
world were infinitely complex, there might be no
way to cut down to a minimal basis. The only
alternative to redundancy might be inadequacy, \nand if so, we had better tolerate redundancy. But
the redundancy is mitigated by the fact that com­
plex universals consist of their simpler - if perhaps
not absolutely simple - constituents. They are not
distinct entities. 7
It is quite otherwise with properties. Any class of
things, be it ever so gerrymandered and miscella­
neous and indescribable in thought and language,
and be it ever so superfluous in characterizing the
world, is nevertheless a property. So there are
properties in immense abundance. (If the number
of things, actual and otherwise, is beth-2, an estim­
ate I regard as more likely low than high, then the
number of properties of things is beth-3. And that
is a big infinity indeed, except to students of the
outer reaches of set theory. ) There are so many
properties that those specifiable in English, or in
the brain's language of synaptic interconnections
and neural spikes, could be only an infinitesimal
minority.
Because properties are so abundant, they are
undiscriminating. Any two things share infinitely
many properties, and fail to share infinitely many
others. That is so whether the two things are per­
fect duplicates or utterly dissimilar. Thus proper­
ties do nothing to capture facts of resemblance.
That is work more suited to the sparse universals.
Likewise, properties do nothing to capture the
causal powers of things. Almost all properties are
causally irrelevant, and there is nothing to make the
relevant ones stand out from the crowd. Properties
carve reality at the joints - and everywhere else as
well. If it's distinctions we want, too much struc­
ture is no better than none.
It would be otherwise if we had not only the
countless throng of all properties, but also an elite
minority of special properties. Call these the nat­
ural properties. 8 If we had properties and univer­
sals both, the universals could serve to pick out the
natural properties. Afterwards the universals could
retire if they liked, and leave their jobs to the
natural properties. Natural properties would be
the ones whose sharing makes for resemblance,
and the ones relevant to causal powers. Most sim­
ply, we could call a property perfect(y natural if its
members are all and only those things that share
some one universal. But also we would have other
less-than-perfectly natural properties, made so by
families of suitable related universals. 9 Thus we
might have an imperfectly natural property of
being metallic, even if we had no such single uni­
versal as metallic, in virtue of a close-knit family of
genuine universals one or another of which is
New Work for a Theory of Universals
instantiated by any metallic thing. These imper­
fectly natural properties would be natural to vary­
ing degrees.
Let us say that an adequate theory of properties is
one that recognizes an objective difference between
natural and unnatural properties; preferably, a dif­
ference that admits of degree. A combined theory
of properties and universals is one sort of adequate
theory of properties.
But not the only sort. A Nominalistic theory of
properties could achieve adequacy by other means.
Instead of employing universals, it could draw
primitive distinctions among particulars. Most
simply, a Nominalist could take it as a primitive
fact that some classes of things are perfectly natural
properties; others are less-than-perfectly natural to
various degrees; and most are not at all natural.
Such a Nominalist takes 'natural' as a primitive
predicate, and offers no analysis of what he means
in predicating it of classes. His intention is to select
the very same classes as natural properties that the
user of universals would select. But he regards the
universals as idle machinery, fictitiously superim­
posed on the primitive objective difference
between the natural properties and the others. 1O
Alternatively, a Nominalist in pursuit of ad­
equacy might prefer to rest with primitive objective
resemblance among things. (He might not think
that 'natural' was a very natural primitive, perhaps
because it is to be predicated of classes. ) Then he
could undertake to define natural properties in
terms of the mutual resemblance of their members
and the failure of resemblance between their mem­
bers and their non-members. Unfortunately, the
project meets with well-known technical difficul­
ties. These can be solved, but at a daunting price in
complexity and artificiality of our primitive. We
cannot get by with the familiar dyadic 'resembles'.
Instead we need a predicate of resemblance that is
both contrastive and variably polyadic. Something
like
X! , Xz, .. . resemble one another and do not
likewise resemble any of Yl, Yz, .. .
(where the strings of variables may be infinite, even
uncountable) must be taken as understood with­
out further analysis. ll If adequate Nominalism
requires us to choose between this and a primitive
predicate of classes, we might well wonder whether
the game is worth the candle. I only say we might
wonder; I know of no consideration that seems to
me decisive. \nDavid Lewis
At this point, you may see very well why it could
be a good idea to believe in universals as well as
properties; but you may see no point in having
properties as well as universals. But properties
have work of their own, and universals are ill­
suited to do the work of properties.
It is properties that we need, sometimes natural
and sometimes not, to provide an adequate supply
of semantic values for linguistic expressions. Con­
sider such sentences as these:
(1) Red resembles orange more than it resembles
blue.
(2) Red is a colour.
(3) Humility is a virtue.
(4) Redness is a sign of ripeness.
Prima facie, these sentences contain names that
cannot be taken to denote particular, individual
things. What is the semantic role of these words?
If we are to do compositional semantics in the way
that is best developed, we need entities to assign as
semantic values to these words, entities that will
encode their semantic roles. Perhaps sometimes we
might find paraphrases that will absolve us from
the need to subject the original sentence to seman­
tic analysis. That is the case with (1), for instance. 12
But even if such paraphrases sometimes exist -
even if they always exist, which seems unlikely -
they work piecemeal and frustrate any systematic
approach to semantics.
Armstrong takes it that such sentences provide a
subsidiary argument for universals, independent of
his main argument from the One over Many prob­
lem. 13 I quite agree that we have here an argument
for something. But not for universals as opposed to
properties. Properties can serve as the requisite
semantic values. Indeed, properties are much bet­
ter suited to the job than universals are. That is
plain even from the examples considered. It is
unlikely that there are any such genuine universals
as the colours (especially determinable colours, like
red, rather than determinate shades), or ripeness,
or humility. Armstrong agrees14 that he cannot
take (1)-(4) as straightforwardly making reference
to universals. He must first subject them to para­
phrase. Even if there always is a paraphrase that
does refer to, or quantify over, genuine universals,
still the need for paraphrase is a threat to systematic
semantics. The problem arises exactly because uni­
versals are sparse. There is no corresponding
objection if we take the requisite semantic values
as properties.
Other sentences make my point more dramat­
ically.
(5) Grueness does not make for resemblance
among all its instances.
(6) What is common to all who suffer pain is
being in some or another state that occupies
the pain role, presumably not the same state
in all cases.
The point is not that these sentences are true -
though they are - but that they require semantic
analysis. (It is irrelevant that they are not ordinary
language. ) A universal of grueness would be anath­
ema; as would a universal such that, necessarily,
one has it if he is in some state or other that
occupies the pain role in his case. IS But the corres­
ponding properties are no problem.
Indeed, we have a comprehension schema apply­
ing to any predicate phrase whatever, however
complicated. (Let it even be infinitely long; let it
even include imaginary names for entities we
haven't really named. ) Let x range over things, P
over properties (classes) of things. Then:
We could appropriately call this 'the property of ¢­
ing' in those cases where the predicate phrase is
short enough to form a gerund, and take this prop­
erty to be the semantic value of the gerund. Con­
trast this with the very different relationship of
universals and predicates set forth in Universals,
vol. 2, pp. 7-59.
Consider also those sentences which prima facie
involve second-order quantification. From Univer­
sals, vol. 1, p. 62, and 'Against "ostrich" nominal­
ism' we have these:
(7) He has the same virtues as his father.
(8) The dresses were of the same colour.
(9) There are undiscovered fundamental phys­
ical properties.
(10)
(11)
Acquired characteristics are never inherited.
Some zoological species are cross-fertile.
Prima facie, we are quantifying either over proper­
ties or over universals. Again, paraphrases might
defeat that presumption, but in a piecemeal way
that threatens systematic semantics. In each case,
properties could serve as the values of the variables
of quantification. Only in case (9) could universals
serve equally well. To treat the other cases, not to
mention \n(12) Some characteristics, such as the colours, are
more disjunctive than they seem
as quantifications over universals, we would again
have to resort to some preliminary paraphrase. 16
This second semantic argument, like the first,
adduces work for which properties are better quali­
fied than universals.
Which is not to deny that a partnership might do
better still. Let it be granted that we are dealing
with quantifications over properties. Still, these
quantifications - like most of our quantifications
- may be tacitly or explicitly restricted. In particu­
lar, they usually are restricted to natural properties.
Not to perfectly natural properties that correspond
to single universals, except in special cases like (9),
but to properties that are at least somewhat more
natural than the great majority of the utterly mis­
cellaneous. That is so for all our examples, even
(12). Then even though we quantify over proper­
ties, we still need either universals or the resources
of an adequate Nominalism in order to say which of
the properties we mostly quantify over.
I also think that it is properties that we need in
characterizing the content of our intentional atti­
tudes. I believe, or I desire, that I live in one of the
worlds in a certain class, rather than any world
outside that class. This class of worlds is a property
had by worlds. I believe, or I desire, that my world
has that property. (The class of worlds also may be
called a proposition, in one of the legitimate senses
of that word, and my 'propositional attitude' of
belief or desire has this proposition as its 'object'. )
More generally, subsuming the previous case, I
believe or I desire that I myself belong to a certain
class of possibilia. I ascribe a certain property to
myself, or I want to have it. Or I might ascribe a
property to something else, or even to myself,
under a relation of acquaintance I bear to that
thing. 17 Surely the properties that give the content
of attitudes in these ways cannot be relied on to be
perfectly natural, hence cannot be replaced by uni­
versals. It is interesting to ask whether there is any
lower limit to their naturalness (see the final sec­
tion), but surely no very exacting standard is poss­
ible. Here again properties are right for the job,
universals are not.
One Over Many
Armstrong's main argument for universals is the
'One over Many'. It is because I find this argument
New Work for a Theory of Universals
unconvincing that I am investigating alternative
reasons to accept a theory of universals.
Here is a concise statement of the argument,
taken by condensation from 'Against "ostrich"
nominalism', pp. 440--1. A very similar statement
could have been drawn from the opening pages of
Universals.
I would wish to start by saying that many dif­
ferent particulars can all have what appears to
be the same nature and draw the conclusion
that, as a result, there is a prima facie case for
postulating universals. We are continually talk­
ing about different things having the same
property or quality, being of the same sort of
kind, having the same nature, and so on. Philo­
sophers draw the distinction between sameness
of token and sameness of type. But they are only
making explicit a distinction which ordinary
language (and so, ordinary thought) perfectly
recognizes. I suggest that the fact of sameness of
type is a Moorean fact: one of the many facts
which even philosophers should not deny,
whatever philosophical account or analysis
they give of such facts. Any comprehensive
philosophy must try to give some account of
Moorean facts. They constitute the compulsory
questions in the philosophical examination
paper.
From this point of departure, Armstrong makes his
case by criticizing rival attempts to answer the
compulsory question, and by rejecting views that
decline to answer it at all.
Still more concisely, the One over Many prob­
lem is presented as the problem of giving some
account of Moorean facts of apparent sameness of
type. Thus understood, I agree that the question is
compulsory; I agree that Armstrong's postulation
of shared universals answers it; but I think that an
adequate Nominalism also answers it.
An effort at systematic philosophy must indeed
give an account of any purported fact. There are
three ways to give an account. (1) 'I deny it' - this
earns a failing mark if the fact is really Moorean. (2)
'I analyse it thus' - this is Armstrong's response to
the facts of apparent sameness of type. Or (3) 'I
accept it as primitive'. Not every account is an
anazysis! A system that takes certain Moorean
facts as primitive, as unanalysed, cannot be accused
of failing to make a place for them. It neither shirks
the compulsory question nor answers it by denial.
It does give an account. \nDavid Lewis
An adequate Nominalism, of course, is a theory
that takes Moorean facts of apparent sameness of
type as primitive. It predicates mutual resemblance
of the things which are apparently of the same type;
or it predicates naturalness of some property that
they all share, i. e. , that has them all as members;
and it declines to analyse these predications any
further. That is why the problem of One over
Many, rightly understood, does not provide more
than a prima facie reason to postulate universals.
Universals afford one solution, but there are others.
I fear that the problem does not remain rightly
understood. Early in Universals it undergoes an
unfortunate double transformation. In the course
of a few pageslB the legitimate demand for an
account of Moorean facts of apparent sameness of
type turns into a demand for an analysis of pre­
dication in general. The analysandum becomes the
schema 'a has the property P. The turning point
takes only two sentences:
How is [the Nominalist] to account for the
apparent (if usually partial) identity of numer­
ically different particulars? How can two differ­
ent things both be white or both be on a table? 19
And very soon, those who 'refuse to countenance
universals but who at the same time see no need for
any reductive analyses [of the schema of predica­
tion]', those according to whom 'there are no uni­
versals but the proposition that a is F is perfectly all
right as it is', stand accused of dodging the com­
pulsory question. 2o
When the demand for an account - for a place in
one's system - turned into a demand for an analy­
sis, then I say that the question ceased to be com­
pulsory. And when the analysandum switched,
from Moorean facts of apparent sameness of type
to predication generally, then I say that the ques­
tion ceased to be answerable at all. The trans­
formed problem of One over Many deserves our
neglect. The ostrich that will not look at it is a wise
bird indeed.
Despite his words, I do not think that Armstrong
really means to demand, either from Nominalists
or from himself, a ful~y general analysis of predica­
tion. For none is so ready as he to insist that not
just any shared predicate makes for even apparent
sameness of type. (That is what gives his theory its
distinctive interest and merit. ) It would be better to
put the transformed problem thus: one way or
another, all predication is to be analysed. Some
predications are to be analysed away in terms of
others. Here we have one-off analyses for specific
predicates - as it might be, for 'grue'. But all those
predications that remain, after the one-off analyses
are finished, are to be analysed wholesale by means
of a general analysis of the schema 'a has property
F'.
There is to be no unanalysed predication. Time
and again, Armstrong wields this requirement
against rival theories. One theory after another
falls victim to the 'relation regress': in the course
of analysing other predications, the theory has
resort to a new predicate that cannot, on pain of
circularity, be analysed along with the rest. So falls
Class Nominalism (including the version with
primitive naturalness that I deem adequate): it
employs predications of class membership, which
predications it cannot without circularity analyse in
terms of class membership. So falls Resemblance
Nominalism: it fails to analyse predications of
resemblance. So fall various other, less deserving
Nominalisms. And so fall rival forms of Realism,
for instance Transcendent, Platonic Realism: this
time, predications of participation evade analysis.
Specific theories meet other, specific objections;
suffice it to say that I think these inconclusive
against the two Nominalisms that I called adequate.
But the clincher, the one argument that recurs
throughout the many refutations, is the relation
regress. And this amounts to the objection that
the theory under attack does not achieve its pre­
sumed aim of doing away with all un analysed
predication and therefore fails to solve the trans­
formed problem of One over Many.
Doing away with all unanalysed predication is an
unattainable aim, and so an unreasonable aim. No
theory is to be faulted for failing to achieve it. For
how could there be a theory that names entities, or
quantifies over them, in the course of its sentences,
and yet altogether avoids primitive predication?
Artificial tricks aside, 21 the thing cannot be done.
What's true is that a theory may be faulted for its
overabundant primitive predications, or for unduly
mysterious ones, or for unduly complicated ones.
These are not fatal faults, however. They are to be
counted against a theory, along with its faults of
overly generous ontology or of disagreement with
less-than-Moorean commonsensical opinIOns.
Rival philosophical theories have their prices,
which we seek to measure. But it's all too clear
that for philosophers, at least, there ain't no such
thing as a free lunch.
How does Armstrong himself do without prim­
itive predication? - He doesn't. Consider the \npredicate 'instantiates' (or 'has'), as in 'particular a
instantiates universal F' or 'this electron has unit
charge'. No one-off analysis applies to this specific
predicate. 'Such identity in nature [as results from
the having of one universal in many particulars] is
literally inexplicable, in the sense that it cannot be
further explained. '22 Neither do predications of
'instantiates' fall under Armstrong's general ana­
lysis of (otherwise unanalysed) predication. His is a
non-relational Realism: he declines, with good rea­
son, to postulate a dyadic universal of instantiation
to bind particulars to their universals. (And if he
did, it would only postpone the need for primitive
predication. ) So let all who have felt the bite of
Armstrong's relation regress rise up and cry 'Tu
quoque! ' And let us mark well that Armstrong is
prepared to give one predicate 'what has been said
to be the privilege of the harlot: power without
responsibility. The predicate is informative, it
makes a vital contribution to telling us what is the
case, the world is different if it is different, yet
ontologically it is supposed not to commit us.
Nice work: if you can get it. '23
Let us dump the project of getting rid of prim­
itive predication, and return to the sensible -
though not compulsory - project of analysing
Moorean facts of apparent sameness of type. Now
does the relation regress serve Armstrong better? I
think not. It does make better sense within the
more sensible project, but it still bites Armstrong
and his rivals with equal force. Let the Nominalist
say 'These donkeys resemble each other, so like­
wise do those stars, and there analysis ends. ' Let
the Platonist say 'This statue participates in the
Form of beauty, likewise that lecture participates
in the Form of truth, and there analysis ends. ' Let
Armstrong say 'This electron instantiates unit
charge, likewise that proton instantiates tripartite­
ness, and there analysis ends. ' It is possible to
complain in each case that a fact of sameness of
type has gone unanalysed, the types being respect­
ively resemblance, participation, and instantiation.
But it is far from evident that the alleged facts are
Moorean, and still less evident that the first two are
more Moorean than the third. None of them are
remotely the equals of the genuine Moorean fact
that, in some sense, different lumps of gold are the
same in kind.
Michael Devitt has denounced the One over
Many problem as a mirage better left unseen. 24 I
have found Devitt's discussion instructive, and I
agree with much of what he says. But Devitt has
joined Armstrong in transforming the One over
New Work for a Theory of Universals
Many problem. He takes it to be the problem of
analysing the schema
a and b have the same property (are of the same
type), F-ness
otherwise than by means of a one-off analysis for
some specific F. To that problem it is fair to answer
as he does that
a is F; b is F
is analysis enough, once we give over the aim of
doing without primitive predication. But Devitt
has set himself too easy a problem. If we attend to
the modest, untransformed One over Many prob­
lem, which is no mirage, we will ask about a differ­
ent analysandum:
a and b have some common property (are some­
how of the same type)
in which it is not said what a and b have in com­
mon. This less definite analysandum is not covered
by what Devitt has said. Ifwe take a clearly Moor­
ean case, he owes us an account: either an analysis
or an overt resort to primitive predication of
resemblance.
Duplication, Supervenience, and
Divergent Worlds
Henceforth I shall speak only of my need for the
distinction between natural and unnatural, or more
and less natural, properties. It is to be understood
that the work I have in store for an adequately
discriminatory theory of properties might be new
work for a theory of universals, or it might instead
be work for the resources of an adequate Nomin­
alism.
I begin with the problem of analysing duplica­
tion. We are familiar with cases of approximate
duplication, e. g. , when we use copying machines.
And we understand that if these machines were
more perfect than they are, the copies they made
would be perfect duplicates of the original. Copy
and original would be alike in size and shape and
chemical composition of the ink marks and the
paper, alike in temperature and magnetic align­
ment and electrostatic charge, alike even in the
exact arrangement of their electrons and quarks.
Such duplicates would be exactly alike, we say. \nDavid Lewis
They would match perfectly, they would be qualit­
atively identical, they would be indiscernible.
But they would not have exactly the same prop­
erties, in my sense of the word. As in the case of any
two things, countless class boundaries would divide
them. Intrinsically, leaving out their relations to the
rest of the world, they would be just alike. But they
would occupy different spatio-temporal positions;
and they might have different owners, be first
examined in different centuries, and so on.
So if we wish to analyse duplication in terms of
shared properties, it seems that we must first dis­
tinguish the intrinsic (or 'internal') properties from
the extrinsic (or 'external' or 'relational') properties.
Then we may say that two things are duplicates iff
they have precisely the same intrinsic properties,
however much their extrinsic properties might dif­
fer. But our new problem of dividing the properties
into intrinsic and extrinsic is no easier than our
original problem of analysing duplication. In fact,
the two problems are joined in a tight little circle
of interdefinability. Duplication is a matter of shar­
ing intrinsic properties; intrinsic properties are
just those properties that never differ between
duplicates. Property P is intrinsic iff, for any two
duplicate things, not necessarily from the same
world, either both have P or neither does. P is
extrinsic iff there is some such pair of duplicates
of which one has P and the other lacks p. 25
If we relied on our physical theory to be accurate
and exhaustive, we might think to define duplica­
tion in physical terms. We believe that duplicates
must be alike in the arrangement of their electrons
and quarks - why not put this forward as a defini­
tion? But such a 'definition' is no analysis. It pre­
supposes the physics of our actual world; however
physics is contingent and known a posteriori. The
definition does not apply to duplication at possible
worlds where physics is different, or to duplication
between worlds that differ in their physics. Nor
does it capture what those ignorant of physics mean
when they speak - as they do - of duplication.
The proper course, I suggest, is to analyse du­
plication in terms of shared properties; but to begin
not with the intrinsic properties but rather with
natural properties. Two things are qualitative
duplicates if they have exactly the same perfectly
natural properties. 26
Physics is relevant because it aspires to give an
inventory of natural properties - not a complete
inventory, perhaps, but a complete enough invent­
ory to account for duplication among actual things.
If physics succeeds in this, then duplication within
our world amounts to sameness of physical descrip­
tion. But the natural properties themselves are
what matter, not the theory that tells us what they
are. If Materialism were false and physics an utter
failure, as is the case at some deplorable worlds,
there would still be duplication in virtue of shared
natural properties.
On my analysis, all perfectly natural properties
come out intrinsic. That seems right. The converse
is not true. Intrinsic properties may be disjunctive
and miscellaneous and unnatural, so long as they
never differ between duplicates. The perfectly nat­
ural properties comprise a basis for the intrinsic
properties; but arbitrary Boolean compounds of
them, however unnatural, are still intrinsic.
Hence if we adopt the sort of adequate Nominalism
that draws a primitive distinction between natural
and unnatural properties, that is not the same thing
as drawing a primitive distinction between intrinsic
and extrinsic properties. The former distinction
yields the latter, but not vice versa.
Likewise if we adopt the sort of adequate
Nominalism that begins with a suitable relation of
partial resemblance, that is not the same thing as
taking duplication itself as primitive. Again, the
former yields the latter, but not vice versa.
If instead we reject Nominalism, and we take the
perfectly natural properties to be those that corres­
pond to universals (in the sense that the members
of the property are exactly those things that
instantiate the universal), then all the properties
that correspond to universals are intrinsic. So are
all the Boolean compounds - disjunctions, nega­
tions, etc. - of properties that correspond to uni­
versals. The universals themselves are intrinsic ex
officio, so to speak.
But here I must confess that the theory of uni­
versals for which I offer new work cannot be
exactly Armstrong's theory. For it must reject
extrinsic universals; whereas Armstrong admits
them, although not as irreducible. 27 I think he
would be better off without them, given his own
aims. (1) They subvert the desired connection
between sharing of universals and Moorean facts
of partial or total sameness of nature. Admittedly,
there is such a thing as resemblance in extrinsic
respects: things can be alike in the roles they play
vis-a-vis other things, or in the origins they spring
from. But such resemblances are not what we mean
when we say of two things that they are of the same
kind, or have the same nature. (2) They subvert the
desired immanence of universals: if something
instantiates an extrinsic universal, that is not a \nfact just about that thing. (3) They are not needed
for Armstrong's theory of laws of nature; any sup­
posed law connecting extrinsic universals of things
can be equivalently replaced by a law connecting
intrinsic structures of larger systems that have
those things as parts.
Thus I am content to say that if there are uni­
versals, intrinsic duplicates are things having
exactly the same universals. We need not say
'. .. exactly the same intrinsic universals, ' because
we should not believe in any other kind.
Not only is duplication of interest in its own
right; it also is needed in dealing with other topics
in metaphysics. Hence such topics create a derived
need for natural properties. I shall consider two
topics where I find need to speak of duplication:
supervenience and divergent worlds.
First, supervenience. A supervenience thesis is a
denial of independent variation. Given an ontology
of possibilia, we can formulate such theses in terms
of differences between possible individuals or
worlds. To say that so-and-so supervenes on
such-and-such is to say that there can be no differ­
ence in respect of so-and-so without difference in
respect of such-and-such. Beauty of statues super­
venes on their shape, size, and colour, for instance,
if no two statues, in the same or different worlds,
ever differ in beauty without also differing in shape
or size or colour. 28
A supervenience thesis is, in a broad sense,
reductionist. But it is a stripped-down form or
reductionism, unencumbered by dubious denials
of existence, claims of ontological priority, or
claims of translatibility. One might wish to say
that in some sense the beauty of statues is nothing
over and above the shape and size and colour that
beholders appreciate, but without denying that
there is such a thing as beauty, without claiming
that beauty exists only in some less-than-funda­
mental way, and without undertaking to para­
phrase ascriptions of beauty in terms of shape,
etc. A supervenience thesis seems to capture what
the cautious reductionist wishes to say.
Even if reductionists ought to be less cautious
and aim for translation, still it is a good idea to
attend to the question of supervenience. For if
supervenience fails, then no scheme of translation
can be correct, and we needn't go on Chisholming
away in search of one. If supervenience succeeds,
on the other hand, then some correct scheme must
exist; the remaining question is whether there
exists a correct scheme that is less than infini tel y
New Work for a Theory of Universals
complex. If beauty is supervenient on shape, etc. ,
the worst that can happen is that an ascription of
beauty is equivalent to an uncountably infinite
disjunction of maximally specific descriptions of
shape, etc. , which descriptions might themselves
involve infinite conjunctions.
Interesting supervenience theses usually involve
the notion of qualitative duplication that we have
just considered. Thus we may ask what does or
doesn't supervene on the qualitative character of
the entire world, throughout all of history. Sup­
pose that two possible worlds are perfect qualitat­
ive duplicates - must they then also have exactly
the same distributions of objective probability, the
same laws of nature, the same counterfactuals and
causal relations? Must their inhabitants have the
same de re modal properties? If so, it makes sense to
pursue such projects as a frequency analysis of
probability, a regularity analysis of laws of nature,
or a comparative similarity analysis of causal coun­
terfactuals and de re modality. If not, such projects
are doomed from the start, and we needn't look at
the details of the attempts. But we cannot even
raise these questions of supervenience unless we
can speak of duplicate worlds. And to do that, I
have suggested, we need natural properties.
(Note that if possible worlds obey a principle of
identity of qualitative indiscernibles, then all these
supervenience theses hold automatically. If no
two worlds are duplicates, then a fortiori no two
are duplicates that differ in their probabilities,
laws, .. . or anything else. )
We might also ask whether qualitative character
supervenes on anything less. For instance, we
might ask whether global qualitative character
supervenes on local qualitative character. Say that
two worlds are local duplicates iff they are divisible
into corresponding small parts in such a way that
(l) corresponding parts of the two worlds are
duplicates, and (2) the correspondence preserves
spatio temporal relations. (The exact meaning
depends, of course, on what we mean by 'small'. )
If two worlds are local duplicates, then must they
be duplicates simpliciter? Or could they differ in
ways that do not prevent local duplication - e. g. ,
in external relations, other than the spatio temporal
relations themselves, between separated things?
Again, we must make sense of duplication - this
time, both in the large and in the small-even to ask
the question. 29
Next, divergent worlds. I shall say that two possible
worlds diverge iff they are not duplicates but they \nDavid Lewis
do have duplicate initial temporal segments. Thus
our world and another might match perfectly up
through the year 1945, and go their separate ways
thereafter.
Note that we need no identity of times across
worlds. Our world through our 1945 duplicates an
initial segment of the other world; that other­
worldly segment ends with a year that indeed
resembles our 1945, but it is part of otherworldly
time, not part of our time. Also, we need no separa­
tion of time and space that contravenes Relativity ~
we have initial temporal segments, of this or another
world, if we have spatio temporal regions bounded
by space like surfaces that cut the world in two.
I distinguish divergence of worlds from branching
of worlds. In branching, instead of duplicate seg­
ments, one and the same initial segment is allegedly
shared as a common part by two overlapping
worlds. Branching is problematic in ways that
divergence is not. First, because an inhabitant of
the shared segment cannot speak unequivocally of
the world he lives in. What ifhe says there will be a
sea fight tomorrow, meaning of course to speak of
the future of his own world, and one of the two
worlds he lives in has a sea fight the next day and
the other doesn't? Second, because overlap of
worlds interferes with the most salient principle
of demarcation for worlds, viz. , that two possible
individuals are part of the same world iff they are
linked by some chain of external relations, e. g. , of
spatio temporal relations. (I know of no other
example. ) Neither of these difficulties seems insu­
perable, but both are better avoided. That makes it
reasonable to prefer a theory of non-overlapping
divergent worlds to a theory of branching worlds.
Then we need to be able to speak of qualitative
duplication of world-segments, which we can do in
terms of shared natural properties.
Divergent (or branching) worlds are of use in
defining Determinism. The usual definitions are
not very satisfactory. If we say that every event has
a cause, we overlook probabilistic causation under
Indeterminism. If we speak of what could be pre­
dicted by a superhuman calculator with unlimited
knowledge of history and the laws of nature, we
overlook obstacles that might prevent prediction
even under Determinism, or else we try to make
non-vacuous sense of counterfactuals about what
our predictor could do if he had some quite im­
possible combination of powers and limitations.
A better approach is as follows. First, a system of
laws of nature is Deterministic iff no two divergent
worlds both conform perfectly to the laws of
that system. Second, a world is Deterministic iff
its laws comprise a Deterministic system. Third,
Determinism is the thesis that our world is Deter­
ministic. 3o
(Alternative versions of Determinism can be
defined in similar fashion. For instance, we could
strengthen the first step by prohibiting conver­
gence as well as divergence of law-abiding worlds.
Or we could even require that no two law-abiding
worlds have duplicate momentary slices without
being duplicates throughout their histories. Or we
could define a weaker sort of Determinism: we
could call a world Jortuitous(y Deterministic, even
if its laws do not comprise a Deterministic system,
iff no world both diverges from it and conforms to
its laws. The laws and early history of such a world
suffice to determine later history, but only because
the situations in which the laws fall short of Deter­
minism never arise. We might equivalently define
fortuitous Determinism as follows: for any histor­
ical fact F and any initial segment S of the world,
there are a true proposition H about the history of
S and a true proposition L about the laws of nature,
such that Hand L together strictly imply F. 3l Does
this definition bypass our need to speak of duplica­
tion of initial segments? Not so, for we must ask
what it means to say that H is about the history of
S. I take that to mean that H holds at both or
neither of any two worlds that both begin with
segments that are duplicates of S. )
Divergent worlds are important also in connec­
tion with the sort of counterfactual conditional that
figures in patterns of causal dependence. Such
counterfactuals tend to be temporally asymmetric,
and this is what gives rise to the asymmetry of
causation itself. Counterfactuals of this sort do
not 'backtrack': it is not to be said that if the present
were different, a different past would have led up
to it, but rather that if the present were different,
the same past would have had a different outcome.
Given a hypothesized difference at a certain time,
the events of future times normally would be very
different indeed, but the events of past times
(except perhaps for the very near past) would be
no different. Thus actuality and its counterfactual
alternatives are divergent worlds, with duplicate
initial segments. 32
Minimal Materialism
There is a difficulty that arises if we attempt to
formulate certain reductionist views, for instance \nMaterialism, as supervenience theses. A solution to
this difficulty employs natural properties not only
by way of duplication but in a more direct way also.
Roughly speaking, Materialism is the thesis that
physics - something not too different from pres­
ent-day physics, though presumably somewhat
improved - is a comprehensive theory of the
world, complete as well as correct. The world is
as physics says it is, and there's no more to say.
World history written in physical language is all of
world history. That is rough speaking indeed; our
goal will be to give a better formulation. But before
I try to say more precisely what Materialism is, let
me say what it is not. (l) Materialism is not a thesis
of finite translatability of all our language into the
language of physics. (2) Materialism is not to be
identified with anyone Materialist theory of mind.
It is a thesis that motivates a variety of theories of
mind: versions of Behaviourism, Functionalism,
the mind-body identity theory, even the theory
that mind is all a mistake. (3) Materialism is not
just the theory that there are no things except those
recognized by physics. To be sure, Materialists
don't believe in spirits, or other such non-physical
things. But anti-materialists may not believe in
spirits either - their complaint needn't be that
physics omits some of the things that there are.
They may complain instead that physics overlooks
some of the ways there are for physical things to
differ; for instance, they may think that physical
people could differ in what their experience is like.
(4) That suggests that Materialism is, at least in
part, the thesis that there are no natural properties
instantiated at our world except those recognized
by physics. That is better, but I think still not right.
Couldn't there be a natural property X (in the
nature of the case, it is hard to name an example! )
which is shared by the physical brains in worlds
like ours and the immaterial spirits that inhabit
other worlds? Or by this-worldly quarks and cer­
tain otherworldly particles that cannot exist under
our physics? Physics could quite properly make no
mention of a natural property of this sort. It is
enough to recognize the special case applicable to
our world, X-cum-physicality, brain hood or quark­
hood as it might be. Then ifby physical properties
we mean those properties that are mentioned in the
language of physics, a Materialist ought not to hold
that all natural properties instantiated in our world
are physical properties.
At this point, it ought to seem advisable to for­
mulate Materialism as a supervenience thesis: no
difference without physical difference. Or, contra-
New Work for a Theory of Universals
posing: physical duplicates are duplicates simpli­
citer. A fortiori, no mental difference without
physical difference; physical duplicates are mental
duplicates. The thesis might best be taken as apply­
ing to whole possible worlds, in order to bypass
such questions as whether mental life is to some
extent extrinsic to the subject. So we have this first
of several attempted formulations of Materialism:
MI: Any two possible worlds that are exactly
alike in all respects recognized by physics
are qualitative duplicates.
But this will not do. In making Materialism into a
thesis about how just any two worlds can and
cannot differ, MI puts Materialism forward as a
necessary truth. That is not what Materialists
intend. Materialism is meant to be a contingent
thesis, a merit of our world that not all other worlds
share. Two worlds could indeed differ without
differing physically, if at least one of them is a
world where Materialism is false. For instance,
our Materialistic world differs from a non-mater­
ialistic world that is physically just like ours but
that also contains physically epiphenomenal spirits.
There is a non-contingent supervenience thesis
nearby that might appeal to Materialists:
M2: There is no difference, a fortiori no men­
tal difference, without some non-mental
difference. Any two worlds alike in all
non-mental respects are duplicates, and
in particular do not differ in respect of
the mental lives of their inhabitants.
This seems to capture our thought that the mental
is a pattern in a medium, obtaining in virtue oflocal
features of the medium (neuron firings) and per­
haps also very global features (laws of nature) that
are too small or too big to be mental themselves.
But M2 is not Materialism. It is both less and more.
Less, obviously, because it never says that the
medium is physical. More, because it denies the
very possibility of what I shall call Panpsychistic
Materialism.
It is often noted that psychophysical identity is a
two-way street: if all mental properties are phys­
ical, then some physical properties are mental. But
perhaps not just some but all physical properties
might be mental as well; and indeed every property
of anything might be at once physical and mental.
Suppose there are indeed worlds where this is so. If
so, presumably there are many such worlds, not all \nDavid Lewis
duplicates, differing inter alia in the mental lives of
their inhabitants. But all differences between such
worlds are mental (as well as physical), so none are
non-mental. These worlds will be vacuously alike
in all non-mental respects, for lack of any non­
mental respects to differ in. Then M2 fails. And
not just at the trouble-making worlds; M2 is non­
contingent, so if it fails at any worlds, it fails at all­
even decent Materialistic worlds like ours. Maybe
Panpsychistic Materialism is indeed impossible -
how do you square it with a broadly functional
analysis of mind? - but a thesis that says so IS
more than just Materialism.
A third try. This much is at least true:
M3: No two Materialistic worlds differ with­
out differing physically; any two Materi­
alistic worlds that are exactly alike
physically are duplicates.
But M3 is not a formulation of Materialism, for the
distinction between Materialistic and other worlds
appears within M3. All we learn is that the Mater­
ialistic worlds comprise a class within which there
is no difference without physical difference. But
there are many such classes. In fact, any world,
however spirit-ridden, belongs to such a class.
A fourth try. Perhaps we should confine our
attention to nomologically possible worlds, thus:
M4: Among worlds that conform to the actual
laws of nature, no two differ without
differing physically; any two such worlds
that are exactly alike physically are
duplicates.
But again we have something that is both less and
more than Materialism: less, because M4 could
hold at a world where Materialism is false but
where spiritual phenomena are correlated with
physical phenomena according to strict laws;
more, because M4 fails to hold at a Materialistic,
spirit-free world if the laws of that world do not
preclude the existence of epiphenomenal spirits.
Our world might be such a world, a world where
spirits are absent but not outlawed. 33
So far, a supervenience formulation of Mater­
ialism seems elusive. But I think we can succeed if
we join the idea of supervenience with the idea that
a non-materialistic world would have something
extra, something that a Materialistic world lacks.
It might have spirits; or it might have physical
things that differ in non-physical ways, for inst2nce
in what their experience is like. In either case there
are extra natural properties, properties instantiated
in the non-materialistic world but nowhere to be
found in the Materialistic world. Let us say that a
property is alien to a world iff (I) it is not instan­
tiated by any inhabitant of that world, and (2) it is
not analysable as a conjunction of, or as a structural
property constructed out of, natural properties all
of which are instantiated by inhabitants of that
world. (I need the second clause because I am
following Armstrong, mutatis mutandis, in declin­
ing to rule out perfectly natural properties that are
conjunctive or structurally complex. 34 It would be
wrong to count as alien a complex property ana­
lysable in terms of non-alien constituents. ) If our
world is Materialistic, then it is safe to say that
some of the natural properties instantiated in any
non-materialistic world are properties alien to our
world. Now we can proceed at last to formulate
Materialism as a restricted and contingent super­
venience thesis:
M5: Among worlds where no natural proper­
ties alien to our world are instantiated,
no two differ without differing physi­
cally; any two such worlds that are
exactly alike physically are duplicates35
We took Materialism to uphold the comprehens­
iveness of 'something not too different from pres­
ent-day physics, though presumably somewhat
improved'. That was deliberately vague. Material­
ist metaphysicians want to side with physics, but
not to take sides within physics. Within physics,
more precise claims of completeness and correct­
ness may be at issue. Physics (ignoring latter-day
failures of nerve) is the science that aspires to
comprehensiveness, and particular physical the­
ories may be put forward as fulfilling that aspira­
tion. If so, we must again ask what it means to claim
comprehensiveness. And again, the answer may be
given by a supervenience formulation: no differ­
ence without physical difference as conceived by
such-and-such grand theory. But again it must be
understood as a restricted and contingent super­
venience thesis, applying only among worlds
devoid of alien natural properties.
Thus the business of physics is not just to dis­
cover laws and causal explanations. In putting for­
ward as comprehensive theories that recognize only
a limited range of natural properties, physics pro­
poses inventories of the natural properties instan­
tiated in our world. Not complete inventories, \nperhaps, but complete enough to account for all the
duplications and differences that could arise in the
absence of alien natural properties. Of course, the
discovery of natural properties is inseparable from
the discovery of laws. For an excellent reason to
think that some hitherto unsuspected natural prop­
erties are instantiated - properties deserving of
recognition by physics, the quark colours as they
might be - is that without them, no satisfactory
system of laws can be found.
This is reminiscent of the distinctive a poster­
iori, scientific character of Armstrong's Realism. 36
But in the setting of an ontology of possibilia, the
distinction between discovering what universals or
natural properties there actually are and discover­
ing which ones are actually instantiated fades away.
And the latter question is a posteriori on any the­
ory. What remains, and remains important, is that
physics discovers properties. And not just any
properties - natural properties. The discovery is,
for instance, that neutrinos are not all alike. That is
not the discovery that different ones have different
properties in my sense, belong to different classes.
We knew that much a priori. Rather, it is the
surprising discovery that some natural property
differentiates some neutrinos from others. That
discovery has in fact been made; I should like to
read an account of it by some philosopher who is
not prepared to adopt a discriminatory attitude
toward properties and who thinks that all things
are equally similar and dissimilar to one another.
Laws and Causation
The observation that physics discovers natural
properties in the course of discovering laws may
serve to introduce our next topic: the analysis of
what it is to be a law of nature. I agree with
Armstrong that we need universals, or at least
natural properties, in explaining what lawhood
is, though I disagree with his account of how this
IS so.
Armstrong's theory, in its simplest form, 37 holds
that what makes certain regularities lawful are
second-order states of affairs N (F, G) in which
the two ordinary, first -order uni versals F and G are
related by a certain dyadic second-order universal
N. It is a contingent matter which universals are
thus related by the lawmaker N. But it is necessary
- and necessary simpliciter, not just nomologically
necessary - that if N ( F, G) obtains, then F and G
are constantly conjoined. There is a necessary con-
New Work for a Theory of Universals
nection between the second-order state of affairs
N(F, G) and the first-order lawful regularity
'Vx(Fx: J Gx); and likewise between the conjunc­
tive state of affairs N (F, G) fS Fa and its necessary
consequence Ga.
A parallel theory could be set up with natural
properties in place of Armstrong's first-and
second-order universals. It would have many of
the attractive features that Armstrong claims on
behalf of his theory, but at least one merit would
be lost. For Armstrong, the lawful necessitation of
Ga by Fa is a purely local matter: it involves only a,
the universals F and G that are present in a, and the
second-order law-making universal that is present
in turn in (or between) these two universals. If we
replace the universals by properties, however nat­
ural, that locality is lost. For properties are classes
with their membership spread around the worlds,
and are not wholly present in a. But I do not think
this a conclusive objection, for our intuitions of
locality often seem to lead us astray. The selective
regularity theory I shall shortly advocate also sacri­
fices locality, as does any regularity theory of law.
What leads me (with some regret) to reject Arm­
strong's theory, whether with universals or with
natural properties, is that I find its necessary con­
nections unintelligible. Whatever N may be, I can­
not see how it could be absolutely impossible to
have N(F, G) and Fa without Ga. (Unless N just
is constant conjunction, or constant conjunction
plus something else, in which case Armstrong's
theory turns into a form of the regularity theory
he rejects. ) The mystery is somewhat hidden by
Armstrong's terminology. He uses 'necessitates' as
a name for the law-making universal N; and who
would be surprised to hear that if F 'necessitates' G
and a has F, then a must have G? But I say that N
deserves the name of 'necessitation' only if, some­
how, it really can enter into the requisite necessary
connections. It can't enter into them just by bear­
ing a name, any more than one can have mighty
biceps just by being called 'Armstrong'.
I am tempted to complain in Humean fashion of
alleged necessary connections between distinct
existences, especially when first-order states of
affairs in the past supposedly join with second­
order states of affairs to necessitate first-order
states of affairs in the future. That complaint is
not clearly right: the sharing of universals detracts
from the distinctness of the necessitating and the
necessitated states of affairs. But I am not
appeased. I conclude that necessary connections
can be unintelligible even when they are supposed \nDavid Lewis
to obtain between existences that are not clearly
and wholly distinct. 38
Thus I do not endorse Armstrong's way of
building universals, or alternatively natural proper­
ties, into the analysis oflawhood. Instead I favour a
regularity analysis. But I need natural properties
even so.
Certainly not just any regularity is a law of nat­
ure. Some are accidental. So an adequate regularity
analysis must be selective. Also, an adequate ana­
lysis must be collective. It must treat regularities
not one at a time, but rather as candidates to enter
into integrated systems. For a given regularity
might hold either as a law or accidentally, depend­
ing on whether other regularities obtain that can fit
together with it in a suitable system. (Thus I reject
the idea that lawhood consists of, lawlike ness' plus
truth. ) Following Mill and Ramsey, 39 I take a suit­
able system to be one that has the virtues we aspire
to in our own theory building, and that has them to
the greatest extent possible given the way the world
is. It must be entirely true; it must be closed under
strict implication; it must be as simple in axiom­
atization as it can be without sacrificing too much
information content; and it must have as much
information content as it can have without sacrifi­
cing too much simplicity. A law is any regularity
that earns inclusion in the ideal system. (Or, in case
of ties, in every ideal system. ) The ideal system
need not consist entirely of regularities; particular
facts may gain entry if they contribute enough to
collective simplicity and strength. (For instance,
certain particular facts about the Big Bang might
be strong candidates. ) But only the regularities of
the system are to count as laws.
We face an obvious problem. Different ways to
express the same content, using different vocabu­
lary, will differ in simplicity. The problem can be
put in two ways, depending on whether we take our
systems as consisting of propositions (classes of
worlds) or as consisting of interpreted sentences.
In the first case, the problem is that a single system
has different degrees of simplicity relative to dif­
ferent linguistic formulations. In the second case,
the problem is that equivalent systems, strictly
implying the very same regularities, may differ in
their simplicity. In fact, the content of any system
what ever may be formulated very simply indeed.
Given system S, let F be a predicate that applies to
all and only things at worlds where S holds. Take F
as primitive, and axiomatize S (or an equivalent
thereof) by the single axiom V xFx. If utter simpli­
city is so easily attained, the ideal theory may as
well be as strong as possible. Simplicity and
strength needn't be traded off. Then the ideal
theory will include (its simple axiom will strictly
imply) all truths, and a fortiori all regularities.
Then, after all, every regularity will be a law.
That must be wrong.
The remedy, of course, is not to tolerate such a
perverse choice of primitive vocabulary. We should
ask how candidate systems compare in simplicity
when each is formulated in the simplest eligible
way; or, if we count different formulations as dif­
ferent systems, we should dismiss the ineligible
ones from candidacy. An appropriate standard of
eligibility is not far to seek: let the primitive voca­
bulary that appears in the axioms refer only to
perfectly natural properties.
Of course, it remains an unsolved and difficult
problem to say what simplicity of a formulation is.
But it is no longer the downright insoluble problem
that it would be if there were nothing to choose
between alternative primitive vocabularies.
(One might think also to replace strict implica­
tion by deducibility in some specified calculus. But
this second remedy seems unnecessary given the
first, and seems incapable of solving our problem
by itself. )
If we adopt the remedy proposed, it will have the
consequence that laws will tend to be regularities
involving natural properties. Fundamental laws,
those that the ideal system takes as axiomatic,
must concern perfectly natural properties. Derived
laws that follow fairly straightforwardly also will
tend to concern fairly natural properties. Regula­
rities concerning unnatural properties may indeed
be strictly implied, and should count as derived
laws if so. But they are apt to escape notice even
if we someday possess a good approximation to the
ideal system. For they will be hard to express in
a language that has words mostly for not-too­
unnatural properties, as any language must. (See
the next section. ) And they will be hard to derive,
indeed they may not be finitely derivable at all, in
our deductive calculi. Thus my account explains,
as Armstrong's does in its very different way, why
the scientific investigation of laws and of natural
properties is a package deal; why physicists posit
natural properties such as the quark colours in
order to posit the laws in which those properties
figure, so that laws and natural properties get dis­
covered together.
If the analysis of lawhood requires natural proper­
ties, then so does the analysis of causation. It is \nfairly uncontroversial that causation involves laws.
That is so according to both of the leading theories
of causation: the deductive-nomological analysis,
on which the laws are applied to the actual course
of events with the cause and effect present; and the
counterfactual analysis that I favour, on which the
laws are applied to counterfactual situations with
the cause hypothesized away. These counterfactual
alternatives may need to break actual laws at the
point where they diverge from actuality, but the
analysis requires that they evolve thereafter in
accordance with the actuallaws. 40
According to my counterfactual analysis, causa­
tion involves natural properties in a second way
too. We need the kind of counterfactuals that
avoid backtracking; or else the analysis faces fatal
counterexamples involving epiphenomenal side­
effects or cases of causal pre-emption. As I have
already noted, these counterfactuals are to be char­
acterized in terms of divergent worlds, hence in
terms of duplicate initial world-segments, hence in
terms of shared natural properties.
Causation involves natural properties in yet
another way. (Small wonder that I came to appreci­
ate natural properties after working on the analysis
of causation! ) Causation holds between events.
Unless we distinguish genuine from spurious
events, we will be left with too many putative
causes. You put a lump of butter in a skillet, and
the butter melts. What event causes this? There is
one event that we can call a moving of molecules. It
occurs in the region where the skillet is, just before
the butter melts. This is an event such that, neces­
sarily, it occurs in a spatiotemporal region only if
that region contains rapidly moving molecules.
Surely this event is a cause of the melting of the
butter.
Heat is that phenomenon, whatever it may be,
that manifests itself in certain familiar characteris­
tic ways. Let us say: heat is that which occupies the
heat-role. (It won't matter whether we take the
definite description plain, as I prefer, or rigidified. )
In fact, but contingently, it is molecular motion
that occupies the heat-role. It might have been
molecular non-motion, or 'caloric fluid, or what
you will. Now consider an alleged second event,
one that we may call a having-the-occupant-of-the­
heat-role. This second event occurs just when and
where the first does, in the region where the hot
skillet is. It occurs there in virtue of the two facts
(1) that the skillet's molecules are moving rapidly,
and (2) that the region in question is part of a world
where molecular motion is what occupies the heat-
New Work for a Theory of Universals
role. But this second event differs from the first.
The necessary conditions for its occurrence are
different. Necessarily, it occurs in a region only if
that region contains whatever phenomenon occu­
pies the heat-role in the world of which that region
is part. So in those worlds where caloric fluid
occupies the heat-role and molecular motion does
not, the first event occurs only in regions with
molecular motion whereas the second occurs only
in regions with caloric fluid.
Certainly the first event causes the melting of the
butter, but shall we say that the second event does
so as well? No; that seems to multiply causes
beyond belief by playing a verbal trick. But if
there really are two events here, I cannot see why
the second has less of a claim than the first to be a
cause of the melting of the butter. It is out of the
question to say that the first and the second events
are one and the same - then this one event would
have different conditions of occurrence from itself.
The best solution is to deny that the alleged second
event is a genuine event at all. If it isn't, of course it
can't do any causing.
Why is the first event genuine and the second
spurious? Compare the properties involved: con­
taining rapidly moving molecules versus contain­
ing whatever phenomenon occupies the heat-role.
(I mean these as properties of the spatiotemporal
region; other treatments of events would take
instead the corresponding properties of the skillet,
but my point would still apply. ) The first is a fairly
natural, intrinsic property. The second is highly
disjunctive and extrinsic. For all sorts of different
phenomena could occupy the heat-role; and
whether the phenomenon going on in a region
occupies the role depends not only on what goes
on in the region but also on what goes on elsewhere
in the same world. Thus the distinction between
more and less natural properties gives me the dis­
tinction between genuine and spurious events that
I need in order to disown an overabundance of
causes. If a property is too unnatural, it is ineffica­
cious in the sense that it cannot figure in the con­
ditions of occurrence of the events that cause
things. 41
The Content of Language and Thought
Hilary Putnam has given an argument which he
regards as a refutation of a 'radically non-epist­
emic' view of truth, but which I regard rather
as a reductio against Putnam's premisses. 42 In \nDavid Lewis
particular, it refutes his assumption that 'we inter­
pret our languages or nothing does', 43 so that any
constraint on reference must be established by our
own stipulation in language or thought. Gary Mer­
rill has suggested that Putnam may be answered by
appeal to a constraint that depends on an objective
structure of properties and relations in the world. 44
I agree, and find here another point at which we
need natural properties.
Putnam's argument, as I understand it, is as
follows. First, suppose that the only constraint on
interpretation of our language (or perhaps our lan­
guage of thought) is given by a description theory of
reference of a global and futuristic sort. An
'intended interpretation' is any interpretation that
satisfies a certain body of theory: viz. , the idealized
descendant of our current total theory that would
emerge at the end of enquiry, an ideal theory refined
to perfection under the guidance of all needed
observation and our best theoretical reasoning. If
so, intended interpretations are surprisingly abund­
ant. For any world can satisfy any theory (ideal or
not), and can do so in countless very different ways,
provided only that the world is not too small and the
theory is consistent. Beyond that, it doesn't matter
what the world is like or what the theory says.
Hence we have radical indeterminacy of reference.
And we have the coincidence that Putnam wel­
comes between satisfaction under all intended
intrepretations and 'epistemic truth'. For the ideal
theory is the whole of 'epistemic truth', the
intended interpretations are just those interpreta­
tions of our language that satisfy the ideal theory,
and (unless the world is too small or ideal theory is
inconsistent) there are some such interpretations.
I take this to refute the supposition that there are
no further constraints on reference. But Putnam
asks: how could there be a further constraint? How
could we ever establish it? By stipulation, by saying
or thinking something. But whatever we say or
think will be in language (or language of thought)
that suffers from radical indeterminacy of interpre­
tation. For the saving constraint will not be there
until we succeed in establishing it. So the
attempted stipulation must fail. The most we can
do is to contribute a new chapter to current and
ideal theory, a chapter consisting of whatever we
said or thought in our stipulation. And this new
theory goes the way of all theory. So we cannot
establish a further constraint; and 'we interpret our
language or nothing does'; so there cannot be any
further constraint. We cannot lift ourselves by our
bootstraps, so we must still be on the ground.
Indeed we cannot lift ourselves by our boot­
straps, but we are off the ground, so there must
be another way to fly. Our language does have a
fairly determinate interpretation (a Moorean fact! )
so there must be some constraint not created ex
nihilo by our stipulation.
What can it be? Many philosophers would sug­
gest that it is some sort of causal constraint. If so,
my case is made, given my arguments in the pre­
vious section: we need natural properties to explain
determinacy of interpretation. But I doubt that it
really is a causal constraint, for I am inclined to
think that the causal aspect of reference is estab­
lished by what we say and think. Thus: I think of a
thing as that which I am causally acquainted with in
such-and-such way, perhaps perceptually or per­
haps through a channel of acquaintance that
involves the naming of the thing and my picking
up of the name. I refer to that thing in my thought,
and derivatively in language, because it is the thing
that fits this causal and egocentric description
extracted from my theory of the world and of my
place in the world. 45
I would instead propose that the saving con­
straint concerns the referent - not the referrer,
and not the causal channels between the two. It
takes two to make a reference, and we will not find
the constraint if we look for it always on the wrong
side of the relationship. Reference consists in part
of what we do in language or thought when we
refer, but in part it consists in eligibility of the
referent. And this eligibility to be referred to is a
matter of natural properties.
That is the suggestion Merrill offers. (He offers
it not as his own view, but as what opponents of
Putnam ought to say; and I gratefully accept the
offer. ) In the simplest case, suppose that the inter­
pretation of the logical vocabulary somehow takes
care of itself, to reveal a standard first-order lan­
guage whose non-logical vocabulary consists
entirely of predicates. The parts of the world com­
prise a domain; and sets, sets of pairs, .. ., from this
domain are potential extensions for the predicates.
Now suppose we have an all-or-nothing division of
properties into natural and unnatural. Say that a set
from the domain is eligible to be the extension of a
one-place predicate iff its members are just those
things in the domain that share some natural prop­
erty; and likewise for many-place predicates and
natural relations. An eligible interpretation is one
that assigns none but eligible extensions to the
predicates. A so-called 'intended' interpretation is
an eligible interpretation that satisfies the ideal \ntheory. (But the name is misleading: it is not to be
said that our intentions establish the constraint
requiring eligibility. That way lies the futile boot­
strap tugging that we must avoid. ) Then if the
natural properties are sparse, there is no reason to
expect any overabundance of intended interpreta­
tions. There may even be none. Even ideal theory
runs the risk of being unsatisfiable, save in 'unin­
tended' ways. Because satisfaction is not guaran­
teed, we accomplish something if we manage to
achieve it by making a good fit between theory
and the world. All this is as it should be.
The proposal calls for refinement. First, we need
to provide for richer forms of language. In this we
can be guided by familiar translations, for instance
between modal language with higher-order quanti­
fication and first-order language that explicitly
mentions possibilia and classes built up from
them. Second, it will not do to take naturalness of
properties as all-or-nothing. Here, above all, we
need to make naturalness ~ and hence eligibility ~
a comparative matter, or a matter of degree. There
are salient sharp lines, but not in the right places.
There is the line between the perfectly natural
properties and all the rest, but surely we have
predicates for much-less-than-perfectly natural
properties. There is the line between properties
that are and that are not finitely analysable in
terms of perfectly natural properties, but that lets
in enough highly unnatural properties that it threa­
tens not to solve our problem. We need gradations;
and we need some give and take between the elig­
ibility of referents and the other factors that make
for 'intendedness', notably satisfaction of appropri­
ate bits of theory. (Ideal theory, if we keep as much
of Putnam's story as we can. ) Grueness is not an
absolutely ineligible referent (as witness my refer­
ence to it just now), but an interpretation that
assigns it is to that extent inferior to one that
assigns blueness instead. Ceteris paribus, the latter
is the 'intended' one, just because it does better on
eligibility.
Naturalness of properties makes for differences
of eligibility not only among the properties them­
selves, but also among things. Compare Bruce with
the cat-shaped chunk of miscellaneous and ever­
changing matter that follows him around, always a
few steps behind. The former is a highly eligible
referent, the latter is not. (I haven't succeeded in
referring to it, for I didn't say just which such
chunk 'it' was to be. ) That is because Bruce, unlike
the cat-shaped chunk, has a boundary well demarc­
ated by differences in highly natural properties.
New Work for a Theory of Universals
Where Bruce ends, there the density of matter,
the relative abundance of the chemical elements, .. . abruptly change. Not so for the chunk. Bruce is
also much more of a locus of causal chains than is
the chunk; this too traces back to natural proper­
ties, by the considerations of the previous section.
Thus naturalness of properties sets up distinctions
among things. The reverse happens also. Once we
are away from the perfectly natural properties, one
thing that makes for naturalness of a property is
that it is a property belonging exclusively to well­
demarcated things.
You might well protest that Putnam's problem is
misconceived, wherefore no need has been demon­
strated for resources to solve it. Putnam seems to
conceive of language entirely as a repository of
theory, and not at all as a practice of social interac­
tion. We have the language of the encyclopedia, but
where is the language of the pub? Where are the
communicative intentions and the mutual expecta­
tions that seem to have so much to do with what we
mean? In fact, where is thought? It seems to enter
the picture, if at all, only as the special case where
the language to be interpreted is hard-wired,
unspoken, hidden, and all too conjectural.
I think the point is well taken, but I think it
doesn't matter. If the problem of intentionality is
rightly posed, there will still be a threat of radical
indeterminacy, there will still be a need for saving
constraints, there will still be a remedy analogous to
Merrill's suggested answer to Putnam, and there
will still be a need for natural properties.
Set language aside and consider instead the
interpretation of thought. (Afterward we can hope
to interpret the subject's language in terms of his
beliefs and desires regarding verbal communication
with others. ) The subject is in various states, and
could be in various others, that are causally related
to each other, to the subject's behaviour, and to the
nearby environment that stimulates his senses.
These states fit into a functional organization,
they occupy certain causal roles. (Most likely they
are states of the brain. Maybe they involve some­
thing that is language-like but hard-wired, maybe
not. But the nature of the states is beside the point. )
The states have their functional roles in the subject
as he now is, and in the subject as he is at other
times and as he might have been under other cir­
cumstances, and even in other creatures of the
same kind as the subject. Given the functional
roles of the states, the problem is to assign them
content. Propositional content, some would say; \nDavid Lewis
but I would agree only if the propositions can be
taken as egocentric ones, and I think an 'egocentric
proposition' is simply a property. States indexed by
content can be identified as a belief that this, a
desire for that, a perceptual experience of seeming
to confront so-and-so, an intention to do such-and­
such. (But not all ordinary ascriptions of attitudes
merely specify the content of the subject's states.
Fred and Ted might be alike in the functional roles
of their states, and hence have states with the same
content in the narrowly psychological sense that is
my present concern, and hence believe alike, e. g. ,
by each believing himself to have heard of a pretty
town named 'Castlemaine'. Yet they might be
acquainted via that name with different towns, at
opposite ends of the earth, so that Fred and not
Ted believes that Castlemaine, Victoria, is pretty. )
The problem of assigning content to functionally
characterized states is to be solved by means of
constraining principles. Foremost among these
are principles of fit. If a state is to be interpreted
as an intention to raise one's hand, it had better
typically cause the hand to go up. If a state (or
complex of states) is to be interpreted as a system
of beliefs and desires - or better, degrees of belief
and desire - according to which raising one's hand
would be a good means to one's ends, and if
another state is to be interpreted as an intention
to raise one's hand, then the former had better
typically cause the latter. Likewise on the input
side. A state typically caused by round things
before the eyes is a good candidate for interpreta­
tion as the visual experience of confronting some­
thing round; and its typical impact on the states
interpreted as systems of belief ought to be inter­
preted as the exogenous addition of a belief that one
is confronting something round, with whatever
adjustment that addition calls for.
So far, so good. But it seems clear that prepos­
terous and perverse misinterpretations could
nevertheless cohere, could manage to fit the func­
tional roles of the states because misassignment of
content at one point compensates for misassign­
ment at another. Let us see just how this could
happen, at least under an oversimplified picture of
interpretation as follows. An interpretation is given
by a pair of functions C and V. C is a probability
distribution over the worlds, regarded as encapsu­
lating the subject's dispositions to form beliefs
under the impact of sensory evidence: if a stream
of evidence specified by proposition E would put
the subject into a total state S - for short, if E yields
S - we interpret S to consist in part of the belief
system given by the probability distribution C(-I E)
that comes from C by conditionalizing on E. V is a
function from worlds to numerical desirability
scores, regarded as encapsulating the subject's
basic values: if E yields S, we interpret S to consist
in part of the system of de sires given by the C(-I E)­
expectations of V. Say that C and V rationalize
behaviour B after evidence E iff the system of
desires given by the C(-I E)-expectations of V
ranks B at least as high as any alternative beha­
viour. Say that C and V fit iff, for any evidence­
specifying E, E yields a state that would cause
behaviour rationalized by C and V after E. That
is our only constraining principle of fit. (Where
did the others go? - We built them into the defini­
tions whereby C and V encapsulate an assignment
of content to various states. ) Then any two inter­
pretations that always rationalize the same beha­
viour after the same evidence must fit equally well.
Call two worlds equivalent iff they are alike in
respect of the subject's evidence and behaviour,
and note that any decent world is equivalent inter
alia to horrendously counterinductive worlds and
to worlds where everything unobserved by the
subject is horrendously nasty. Fit depends on
the total of C for each equivalence class, and on
the C-expectation of V within each class, but that is
all. Within a class, it makes no difference which
world gets which pair of values of C and V. We
can interchange equivalent worlds ad lib and
preserve fit. So, given any fitting and reasonable
interpretation, we can transform it into an
equally fitting perverse interpretation by swapping
equivalent worlds around so as to enhance the
probabilities of counterinductive worlds, or the
desirabilities of nasty worlds, or both. Quod erar
demonstrandum.
(My simplifications were dire: I left out the
egocentricity of belief and desire and evidence,
the causal aspect of rationalized behaviour, the
role of intentions, change of basic values, limita­
tions of logical competence, .. .. But I doubt that
these omissions matter to my conclusion. I conjec­
ture that if they were remedied, we could still
transform reasonable interpretations into perverse
ones in a way that preserves fit. )
If we rely on principles of fit to do the whole job,
we can expect radical indeterminacy of interpreta­
tion. We need further constraints, of the sort called
principles of (sophisticated) charity, or of 'human­
ity, .46 Such principles call for interpretations
according to which the subject has attitudes that
we would deem reasonable for one who has lived \nthe life that he has lived. (Unlike principles of
crude charity, they call for imputations of error if
he has lived under deceptive conditions. ) These
principles select among conflicting interpretations
that equally well conform to the principles of fit.
They impose a priori - albeit defeasible - presump­
tions about what sorts of things are apt to be
believed and desired; or rather, about what dis­
positions to develop beliefs and desires, what
inductive biases and basic values, someone may
rightly be interpreted to have.
It is here that we need natural properties. The
principles of charity will impute a bias toward
believing that things are green rather than grue,
toward having a basic desire for long life rather
than for long-life-unless-one-was-born-on-Mon­
day-and-in-that-case-life-for-an-even-number-of­
weeks. In short, they will impute eligible content,
where ineligibility consists in severe unnaturalness
of the properties the subject supposedly believes or
desires or intends himself to have. They will
impute other things as well, but it is the imputed
eligibility that matters to us at present.
Thus the threat of radical indeterminacy in the
assignment of content to thought is fended off. The
saving constraint concerns the content - not the
thinker, and not any channels between the two. It
takes two to index states with content, and we will
not find the constraint if we look for it always on
the wrong side of the relationship. Believing this or
desiring that consists in part in the functional roles
of the states whereby we believe or desire, but in
part it consists in the eligibility of the content. And
this eligibility to be thought is a matter, in part, of
natural properties.
Consider the puzzle whereby Kripke illustrates
Wittgenstein's paradox that 'no course of action
could be determined by a rule, because every
course of action can be made out to accord with
the rule, .47 A well-educated person working arith­
metic problems intends to perform addition when
he sees the '+' sign. He does not intend to perform
quaddition, which is just like addition for small
numbers but which yields the answer 5 if any of
the numbers to be quadded exceeds a certain
bound. Wherefore does he intend to add and not
to quadd? Whatever he says and whatever is writ­
ten in his brain can be perversely (mis)interpreted
as instructing him to quadd. And it is not enough to
say that his brain state is the causal basis of a
disposition to add. Perhaps it isn't. Perhaps if a
test case arose, he would abandon his intention, he
would neither add nor quadd but instead would put
New Work for a Theory of Universals
his homework aside and complain that the prob­
lems are too hard.
The naive solution is that adding means going on
in the same way as before when the numbers get
big, whereas quadding means doing something
different; there is nothing present in the subject
that constitutes an intention to do different things
in different cases; therefore he intends addition,
not quaddition. We should not scoff at this naive
response. It is the correct solution to the puzzle.
But we must pay to regain our naivete. Our theory
of properties must have adequate resources to
somehow ratify the judgement that instances of
adding are all alike in a way that instances of quad­
ding are not. The property of adding is not per­
fectly natural, of course, not on a par with unit
charge or sphericality. And the property of quad­
ding is not perfectly unnatural. But quadding is
worse by a disjunction. So quaddition is to that
extent less of a way to go on doing the same, and
therefore it is to that extent less of a way to go on
doing the same, and therefore it is to that extent
less of an eligible thing to intend to do.
It's not that you couldn't possibly intend to
quadd. You could. Suppose that today there is as
much basis as there ever is to interpret you as
intending to add and as meaning addition by your
word 'addition' and quaddition by 'quaddition';
and tomorrow you say to yourself in so many
words that it would be fun to tease the philosophers
by taking up quaddition henceforth, and you make
up your mind to do it. But you have to go out of
your way. Adding and quadding aren't on a par. To
intend to add, you need only have states that would
fit either interpretation and leave it to charity to
decree that you have the more eligible intention.
To intend to quadd, you must say or think some­
thing that creates difficulties of fit for the more
eligible intention and thereby defeats the presump­
tion in its favour. You must do something that,
taking principles of fit and presumptions of elig­
ibility and other principles of charity together, tilts
the balance in favour of an interpretation on which
you intend to quadd. How ironic that we were
worried to find nothing positive to settle the matter
in favour of addition! For the lack of anything
positive that points either way just is what it takes
to favour addition. Quaddition, being less natural
and eligible, needs something positive in its favour.
Addition can win by default.
What is the status of the principles that constrain
interpretation, in particular the charitable pre­
sumption in favour of eligible content? We must \nDavid Lewis
shun several misunderstandings. It is not to be said
(I) that as a contingent psychological fact, the con­
tents of our states turn out to be fairly eligible, we
mostly believe and desire ourselves to have not­
too-unnatural properties. Still less should it be said
(2) that we should daringly presuppose this in our
interpreting of one another, even if we haven't a
shred of evidence for it. Nor should it be said (3)
that as a contingent psychological fact we turn out
to have states whose content involves some proper­
ties rather than others, and that is what makes it so
that the former properties are more natural. (This
would be a psychologistic theory of naturalness. )
The error is the same in all three cases. It is sup­
posed, wrongly as I think, that the problem of
interpretation can be solved without bringing to it
the distinction between natural and unnatural
properties; so that the natural properties might or
might not turn out to be the ones featured in the
content of thought according to the correct solu­
tion, or so that they can afterward be defined as
the ones that are so featured. I think this is over­
optimistic. We have no notion how to solve the
problem of interpretation while regarding all prop­
erties as equally eligible to feature in content. For
that would be to solve it without enough con-
Notes
I am indebted to comments by Gilbert Harman, Lloyd
Humberstone, Frank Jackson, Mark Johnston, Donald
Morrison, Kim Sterelny, and others; and especially to
discussion and correspondence with D. M. Armstrong
over several years, without which I might well have
believed to this day that set theory applied to possibilia is
all the theory of properties that anyone could ever need.
D. M. Armstrong, Universals and Scientific Realism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978),
henceforth cited as Universals; see also his 'Against
"ostrich" nominalism: a reply to Michael Devitt. '
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 61 (1980), pp. 440-9.
2 Here I follow Armstrong's traditional terminology:
'universals' are repeatable entities, wholly present
wherever a particular instantiates them; 'Nominalism'
is the rejection of such entities. In the conflicting
modern terminology of Harvard, classes count as
'universals' and 'Nominalism' is predominantly the
rejection of classes. Confusion of the terminologies
can result in grave misunderstanding; see W. V.
Quine, 'Soft impeachment disowned', Pacific Philo­
sophical Quarterly 61 (1980), pp. 450-1.
3 Among 'things' I mean to include all the gerryman­
dered wholes and undemarcated parts admitted by the
straints. Only if we have an independent, objective
distinction among properties, and we impose the
presumption in favour of eligible content a priori as
a constitutive constraint, does the problem of inter­
pretation have any solution at all. If so, then any
correct solution must automatically respect the
presumption. There's no contingent fact of psy­
chology here to be believed, either on evidence or
daringly.
Compare our selective and collective theory of
lawhood: lawhood of a regularity just consists in its
fitting into an ideally high-scoring system, so it's
inevitable that laws turn out to have what it takes to
make for high scores. Likewise, I have suggested,
contenthood just consists in getting assigned by a
high-scoring interpretation, so it's inevitable that
contents tend to have what it takes to make for high
scores. And in both cases, I've suggested that part
of what it takes is naturalness of the properties
involved. The reason natural properties feature in
the contents of our attitudes is that naturalness is
part of what it is to feature therein. It's not that
we're built to take a special interest in natural
properties, or that we confer naturalness on
properties when we happen to take an interest in
them.
most permissive sort of mereology. Further, I include
such physical objects as spatiotemporal regions and
force fields, unless an eliminative reduction of them
should prove desirable. Further, I include such non­
physical objects as gods and spooks, though not - I
hope - as parts of the same world as us. Worlds
themselves need no special treatment. They are things
- big ones, for the most part.
4 My conception of properties resembles the doctrine of
Class Nominalism considered in Universals, vol. I, pp.
28-43. But, strictly speaking, a Class Nominalist
would be someone who claims to solve the One over
Many problem simply by means of properties taken as
classes, and that is far from my intention.
Universals, vol. 1, p. 109.
6 If universals are to do the new work I have in store filr
them, they must be capable of repeated occurrence
not only within a world but also across worlds. They
would then be an exception to my usual principle -
meant for particulars, of course - that nothing is
wholly present as part of two different worlds. But I
see no harm in that. If two worlds are said to overlap
by having a coin in common, and if this coin is
supposed to be wholly round in one world and wholly
octagonal in the other, I stubbornly ask what shape it \nis, and insist that shape is not a rclation to worlds. (See
my 'individuation by acquaintance and by stipula­
tion', Philosophical Reriew 92 (1983), pp. 3~32. ) I do
not see any parallel objection if worlds are said to
overlap by sharing a universal. What contingent, non­
relational property of the universal could we put in
place of shape of the coin in raising the problem? I
mnnot think of any.
7 See Universals, vol. 2, pp. 30-42 and 67~71.
8 See ibid. , vol. I, pp. 38-41; Anthony Quinton,
'Properties and classes', Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Sociezy 48 (1957), pp. 33~58; and W. V. Quine,
'Natural kinds', this volume, ch. 18. See also George
Bealer, Quality and Concept (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1982), esp. pp. 9~1O and 177~87.
Like me, Bealer favours an inegalitarian twofold con­
ception of properties: there are abundant 'concepts'
and sparse 'qualities', and the latter are the ones that
'determine the logical, causal, and phenomenal order
of reality' (p. 10). Despite this point of agreement,
however, Bealer's views and mine differ in many
ways.
9 Here I assume that some solution to the problem of
resemblance of universals is possible, perhaps along
the lines suggested by Armstrong in Universals, vol. 2,
pp. 48~52 and 101~31; and that such a solution could
be carried over into a theory of resemblance of per­
fectly natural properties, even if we take naturalness
of properties as primitive.
10 This is the Moderate Class Nominalism considered in
ibid. , vol. I, pp. 38-41. It is akin to the view of
Quinton, 'Properties and classes'; but plus the unac­
tualized members of the natural classes, and minus
any hint that 'natural' could receive a psychologistic
analvsis.
II Such a theory is a form of Resemblance Nominalism,
in Armstrong's classification, but it is unlike the form
that he principally considers. See Universals, vol. I,
pp. 44-63. For discussions of the problem of defining
natural classes in terms of resemblance, and of the
trickery that proves useful in solving this problem, see
Nelson Goodman, The Structure of Appearance (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1951), chs
4-6; Quine, this vol. , ch. 18; and Adam Morton,
'Complex individuals and multigrade relations',
Nous 9 (1975), pp. 309~18.
To get from primitive resemblance to perfectly
natural properties, I have in mind a definition as
follows. We begin with R as our contrastive and
variably polyadic primitive. We want it to turn out
that Xl, X2, .. . R. YI, Yz, .. . iff some perfectly natural
property is shared by all of Xl, xz, .. . but by none of
Yl, Yz, ··· We want to define N, another variably
polyadic predicate, so that it will turn out that
NXI, Xz, .. . iff XI, xz, .. . are all and only the members
of some perfectly natural property. Again we must
allow for, and expect, the case where there are in­
finitely many x's. We define NXI, xz, .. . as:
New Work for a Theory of Universals: JYI, Yz, ···, \lz(z, XI, Xz, ··· RYI, Yz, ··
Z = Xl v Z = xzv. .. ).
Then we finish the job by defining a perfectly natural
property as a class such that, if Xl, xz, .. . are all and
only its members, then NXI, Xz, .. .
We might have taken N as primitive instead of R.
But would that have been significantly different,
given the interdefinability of the two? On the other
hand, taking N as primitive also seems not signifi­
cantly different from taking perfect naturalness of
classes as primitive. It is only a difference between
speaking in the plural of individuals and speaking in
the singular of their classes, and that seems no real
difference. Is plural talk a disguised form of class talk?
Or vice versa? (See the discussion in Universals, vol. I,
pp. 32-4; also Max Black, 'The elusiveness of sets',
Review of Metaphysics 24 (1971), pp. 614-36;
Eric Stenius, 'Sets', Synthese 27 (1974), pp. 161~88;
and Kurt Godel, 'Russell's mathematical Logic', in
P. A. Schilpp (ed. ), The Philosophy of Bertrand
Russel! (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1944). ) At any rate, it is not at all clear to me that
Moderate Class Nominalism and Resemblance
Nominalism in its present form are two different
theories, as opposed to a single theory presented in
different styles.
12 In virtue of the close resemblance of red and orange, it
is possible for a red thing to resemble an orange one
very closely; it is not possible for a red thing to
resemble a blue one quite so closely. Given Our onto­
logy of possibilia, all possibilities are realized. So we
could paraphase (I) by
(I') Some red thing resembles some orange thing
more than any red thing resembles any blue
thing.
so long as it is understood that the things in question
needn't be part of our world, or of anyone world. Or
if we did not wish to speak of unactualized things, but
we were willing to take ordinary-language modal
idioms as primitive, we could instead give the para­
phrase:
(I") A red thing can resemble an orange thing more
closely than a red thing can resemble a blue
thing.
It is necessary to use the ordinary-language idioms, or
some adequate formalization of them, rather than
standard modal logic. You cannot express (1") in
modal logic (excluding an enriched modal logic that
would defeat the point of the paraphrase by quantify­
ing over degrees of resemblance or whatnot) because
you cannot express cross-world relations, and in par­
ticular cannot express the needed cross-world com­
parison of similarity. \nDavid Lewis
13 Universals, vol. I, pp. 58-63; also his 'Against
"ostrich" nominalism'. He derives the argument,
and a second semantic argument to be considered
shortly, from Arthur Pap, 'Nominalism, empiricism,
and universals: I, Philosophical Quarterly 9 (1959), pp.
330--40, and F. C. Jackson, 'Statements about univer­
sals', Mind 86 (1977), pp. 427-9.
14 Universals, vol. I, p. 61.
15 Or better, in the case of creatures of his kind. See my
'Mad pain and Martian pain', in Ned Block (ed. )
Readings in Philosophy of Psychology, vol. I (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1980).
16 Armstrong again agrees: Universals, vol. I, p. 63.
17 See my 'Attitudes de dicto and de se', Philosophical
Review 88 (1979), pp. 513-43; and 'Individuation by
acquaintance and by stipulation'.
18 Universals, vol. I, pp. 11-16.
19 Ibid. , p. 12.
20 Ibid. , pp. 16-17.
21 Let S be the syntactic category of sentences, let N be
the category of names, and for any categories x and y,
let xl y be the category of expressions that attach to y­
expressions to make x-expressions. Predicates, then,
are category SI N. (Or (SI N)I N for two-place pre­
dicates, and so on. ) To embed names (or variables in
the category of names) into sentences without prim­
itive predication, take any category Q which is neither
S nor N, nor SIN, and let there be primitives of
categories Q/ Nand SI Q. Or take. Qj and! b, different
from Sand Nand SIN and each other, and let the
primitives be of categories. Qjl N, !bI. Qj, and S l! b.
Or. .. I cannot see how this trickery could be a genu­
ine alternative to, rather than a disguise for, primitive
predication.
22 Universals, vol. I, p. 109.
23 Compare Armstrong on Quine's treatment of pre­
dication, 'Against "ostrich" nominalism', p. 443.
24 Michael Devitt, '''Ostrich nominalism" or "mirage
realism"? ', Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 61 (1980),
pp. 433-9. Devitt speaks on behalf of Quine as well as
himself; Quine indicates agreement with Devitt in
'Soft impeachment disowned'.
25 Given duplication, we can also subdivide the extrinsic
properties, distinguishing pure cases from various
mixtures of extrinsic and intrinsic. Partition the
things, of this and other worlds, into equivalence
classes under the relation of duplication. A property
may divide an equivalence class, may include it, or
may exclude it. A property P is extrinsic, as we said, if
it divides at least some of the classes. We have four
subcases. (I) P divides every class; then we may call P
purely extrinsic. (2) P divides some classes, includes
some, and excludes none; then P is the disjunction of
an intrinsic property and a purely extrinsic property.
(3) P divides some, excludes some, and includes none;
then P is the conjunction of an intrinsic property and
a purely extrinsic property. (4) P divides some,
includes some, and excludes some; then P is the con-
junction of an intrinsic property and an impurely
extrinsic property of the sort considered in the second
case, or equivalently is the disjunction of an intrinsic
property and an impurely extrinsic property of the
sort considered in the third case.
We can also classify relations as intrinsic or extrin­
sic, but in two different ways. Take a dyadic relation,
i. e. a class or ordered pairs. Call the relation intrinsic to
its relata iff, whenever a and a' are duplicates (or
identical) and band b' are duplicates (or identical),
then both or neither of the pairs (a, b) and (ai, b')
stand in the relation. Call the relation intrinsic to its
pairs iff, whenever the pairs (a, b) and (ai, b') them­
selves are duplicates, then both or neither of them
stand in the relation. In the second case, a stronger
requirement is imposed on the pairs. For instance
they might fail to be duplicate pairs because the dis­
tance between a and b differs from the distance
between a' and b', even though a and a' are duplicates
and band b' are duplicates. In traditional terminology,
'internal relations' are intrinsic to their relata; 'exter­
nal relations' are intrinsic to their pairs but not to their
relata; and relations extrinsic even to their pairs, such
as the relation of belonging to the same owner, get left
out of the classification altogether.
Our definition of intrinsic properties in terms of
duplication closely resembles the definition of'differ­
ential properties' given by Michael Siote in 'some
thoughts on Goodman's riddle', Analysis 27 (1967),
pp. 128-32, and in Reason and Scepticism (London:
George Allen & Unwin, 1970). But where I quantify
over possibilia, Siote applies modality to ordinary,
presumably actualist, quantifiers. That makes a dif­
ference. An extrinsic property might differ between
duplicates, but only when the duplicates inhabit dif­
ferent worlds; then Siote would count the property as
differential. An example is the property of being a
sphere that inhabits a world where there are pigs or a
cube that inhabits a world without pigs.
See my 'Extrinsic properties', Philosophical Studies
44 (1983), pp. 197-200; repro in On the Plurality of
Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell, 1994), ch. 5, for further
discussion of the circle from duplication to intrinsic­
ness and back.
26 Likewise (a, b) and (ai, b') are duplicate pairs iff a and
a' have exactly the same perfectly natural properties,
and so do band b', and also the perfectly natural
relations between a and b are exactly the same as
those between a' and b'.
27 See Universals, vol. 2, pp. 78-9.
28 For a general discussion of supervenience, see Jaeg­
won Kim, 'Supervenience and nomological incom­
mensurables', American Philosophical Quarterly 15
(1978), pp. 149-56.
29 Such a thesis of supervenience of the global on the
local resembles the 'holographic hypothesis' consid­
ered and rejected by Saul Kripke in 'Identity through
Time', presented at the 1979 conference of the Amer-\nican Philosophical Association, Eastern Division, and
elsewhere.
30 This approach is due, in essence, to Richard Monta­
gue, 'Deterministic theories', in Decisions, Values and
Groups, vol. 2 (Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1962), and in
his Formal Philosophy (New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1974). But Montague did not speak as I have
done of duplication of initial segments of worlds in
virtue of the sharing of certain elite properties.
Instead, he used sameness of description in a certain
vocabulary, which vocabulary was left as an unspeci­
fied parameter of his analysis. For he wrote as a
logician obliged to remain neutral on questions of
metaphysics.
31 A closely related definition appears in Peter van Inwa­
gen, 'The incompatibility of free will and determin­
ism', Philosophical Studies 27 (1975), pp. 185-99.
32 See my 'Counterfactual dependence and time's
arrow', Nous 13 (1979), pp. 455-76; Jonathan Ben­
nett's review of my Counterfactuals, Canadian Journal
of Philosophy 4 (1974), pp. 381-402; P. B. Downing,
'Subjunctive conditionals, time order, and causation',
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 59 (1959), pp.
125-40; Allan Gibbard and William Harper, 'Coun­
terfactuals and two kinds of expected utility', in C. A.
Hooker, ]. 1'. Leach, and E. F. McClennen (eds),
Foundations and Applications of Decision Theo~y (Dor­
drecht: Reidel, 1978), and in W. L. Harper, R. Stal­
naker, and G. Pearce (eds), 1ft (Dordrecht: Reidel,
1981); and Frank Jackson, 'A causal theory of coun­
terfactuals', Australasian Journal of Philosophy 55
(1977), pp. 3-21.
33 This objection against M4 as a formulation of 'the
ontological primacy of the microphysical' appears in
Terence Horgan, 'Supervenience and microphysics',
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 63 (1982), pp. 29-43.
34 See Universals, vol. 2, pp. 30-42 and 67-71.
35 This formulation resembles one proposed by Horgan,
'Supervenience and microphysics'. The principal dif­
ference is as follows. Horgan would count as alien (my
term, not his) any property cited in the fundamental
laws of otherworldly microphysics that is not also
explicitly cited in the fundamental laws of this­
worldly microphysics. Whether the property is
instantiated in either world doesn't enter into it. But
must an alien property figure in laws of otherworldly
physics? Must it figure in any otherworldly laws at all?
It seems that a Materialistic world might differ with­
out differing physically from a world where there are
properties alien in my sense but not in Horgan's -
perhaps a world where laws are in short supply.
36 Universals, vol. I, pp. 8-9 and passim.
37 Ibid. , vol. 2, pp. 148-57. A more developed form of
the theory appears in D. M. Armstrong, What Is a
Law of Nature? (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1983). Similar theories have been proposed in
Fred I. Dretske, 'Laws of nature', Philosophy of
Science 44 (1977), pp. 248-68, and in Michael Tooley,
New Work for a Theory of Universals
'The nature of laws', Canadian Journal of Philosophy 4
(1977), pp. 667-98.
38 Armstrong's more developed theory in What Is a Law
of Nature? complicates the picture in two ways. First,
the second-order state of affairs N ( F, G) is itself
taken to be a universal, and its presence in its
instances detracts yet further from the distinctness
of the necessitating and the necessitated states of
affairs. Second, all laws are defeasible. It is possible
after all to have N(F, G) and Fa without Ga, namely
if we also have N (E C5 F, H) and Ea, where Hand G
are incompatible. (The law that F's are G's might be
contingently indefeasible, if no such defeating state of
affairs N(E C5 F, H) obtains; but no law has its
indefeasibility built in essentially. ) It remains true
that there are alleged necessary connections that I
find unintelligible, but they are more complicated
than before. To necessitate a state of affairs, we need
not only the first-and second-order states of affairs
originally considered, but also a negative existential to
the effect that there are no further states of affairs of
the sort that could act as defeaters.
39 John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic (London: Parker,
1843), bk III, ch. 4, sect. 1; F. P. Ramsey, 'Universals
of law and of fact', in his Foundations (London: Rou­
tledge & Kegan Paul, 1978). Ramsey regarded this
theory of law as superseded by the different theory
in his 'General propositions and causality', also in
Foundations, but I prefer his first thoughts to his
second. I present a theory of lawhood along the lines
of Ramsey's earlier theory in my Counteijactuals
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1973), pp. 73-5. A revision to
that discussion is needed in the probabilistic case,
which I here ignore.
40 See my 'Causation', this volume, ch. 34.
41 See the discussion of impotence of dispositions in
Elizabeth W. Prior, Robert Pargetter, and Frank Jack­
son, 'Three theses about dispositions', American
Philosophical Quarterly 19 (1982), pp. 251-7. Ifa dis­
position is not identified with its actual basis, there is a
threat of multiplication of putative causes similar to
that in my example. We would not wish to say that the
breaking of a struck glass is caused both by its fragility
and by the frozen-in stresses that are the fragility is
inefficacious because it is too unnatural a property,
too disjunctive and extrinsic, to figure in the condi­
tions of occurence of any event.
42 Hilary Putnam, 'Realism and reason', in his Meaning
and the Moral Sciences (London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul, 1978), and' Models and reality', Journal of Sym­
bolic Logic 45 (1980), pp. 464-82. The reader is
warned that the argument as I present it may not be
quite as Putnam intended it to be. For I have made
free in reading between the lines and in restating the
argument in my own way.
43 Putnam, 'Models and reality', p. 482.
44 G. H. Merrill, 'The model-theoretic argument against
realism', Philosophy of Science 47 (1980), pp. 69-81. \nDavid Lewis
45 See Stephen Schiffer, 'The basis of reference',
Erkenntnis 13 (1978), pp. 171-206.
46 See my 'Radical interpretation', Synthese 23 (1974),
pp. 331-44; and Richard E. Grandy, 'Reference,
meaning and belief', Journal o[Philosophy 70 (1973),
pp. 439-52.
47 See Saul A. Kripke, 'Wittgenstein on rules and pri­
vate language: an elementary exposition', in Irving
Block (ed. ), Perspectives on Wittgenstein (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1981). \nW. V. Quine
What tends to confirm an induction? This question
has been aggravated on the one hand by Hempel's
puzzle of the non-black non-ravens, 1 and exacer­
bated on the other by Goodman's puzzle of the
grue emeralds. 2 I shall begin my remarks by relat­
ing the one puzzle to the other, and the other to an
innate flair that we have for natural kinds. Then I
shall devote the rest of the paper to reflections on
the nature of this notion of natural kinds and its
relation to science.
Hempel's puzzle is that just as each black raven
tends to confirm the law that all ravens are black, so
each green leaf, being a non-black non-raven,
should tend to confirm the law that all non-black
things are non-ravens, that is, again, that all ravens
are black. What is paradoxical is that a green leaf
should count toward the law that all ravens are
black.
Goodman propounds his puzzle by requiring us
to imagine that emeralds, having been identified by
some criterion other than color, are now being
examined one after another, and all up to now are
found to be green. Then he proposes to call any­
thing grue that is examined today or earlier and
found to be green or is not examined before tomor­
row and is blue. Should we expect the first one
examined tomorrow to be green, because all exam­
ined up to now were green? But all examined up to
Originally published in Nicholas Rescher et al. (eds),
Essays in Honor of Carl G. Hempel (Dordrecht: Reidel,
1969). Copyright ~J w. V. Quine. Reprinted with per­
mission of Kluwer Academic Publishers.
----------------
now were also grue; so why not expect the first one
tomorrow to be grue, and therefore blue?
The predicate "green, " Goodman says, 3 is
projectible; "grue" is not. He says this by way of
putting a name to the problem. His step toward
solution is his doctrine of what he calls entrench­
ment, 4 which I shall touch on later. Meanwhile the
terminological point is simply that projectible
predicates are predicates ( and 'f/ whose shared
instances all do count, for whatever reason, toward
confirmation of [All ( are 'f/I.
Now I propose assimilating Hempel's puzzle to
Goodman's by inferring from Hempel's that the
complement of a projectible predicate need not be
projectible. "Raven" and "black" are projectible; a
black raven does count toward "All ravens are
black. " Hence a black raven counts also, indirectly,
toward "All non-black things are non-ravens, "
since this says the same thing. But a green leaf
does not count toward "All non-black things are
non-ravens, " nor, therefore, toward "All ravens
are black"; "non-black" and "non-raven" are not
projectible. "Green" and "leaf' are projectible,
and the green leaf counts toward "All leaves are
green" and "All green things are leaves"; but only a
black raven can confirm "All ravens are black, " the
complements not being projectible.
If we see the matter in this way, we must guard
against saying that a statement [All ( are 'f/I is law­
like only if ( and 'f/ are projectible. "All non-black
things are non-ravens" is a law despite its non­
projectible terms, since it is equivalent to "All
ravens are black. " Any statement is lawlike that is \nW. V. Quine
logically equivalent to [All ( are TIl for some projec­
tible ( and TI. 5
Having concluded that the complement of a
projectible predicate need not be projectible, we
may ask further whether there is any projectible
predicate whose complement is projectible. I can
conceive that there is not, when complements are
taken strictly. We must not be misled by limited or
relative complementation; "male human" and
"non-male human" are indeed both projectible.
To get back now to the emeralds, why do we
expect the next one to be green rather than gruel
The intuitive answer lies in similarity, however
subjective. Two green emeralds are more similar
than two grue ones would be if only one of the grue
ones were green. Green things, or at least green
emeralds, are a kind. 6 A projectible predicate is one
that is true of all and only the things of a kind.
What makes Goodman's example a puzzle, how­
ever, is the dubious scientific standing of a general
notion of similarity, or of kind.
The dubiousness of this notion is itself a remark­
able fact. For surely there is nothing more basic to
thought and language than our sense of similarity;
our sorting of things into kinds. The usual general
term, whether a common noun or a verb or an
adjective, owes its generality to some resemblance
among the things referred to. Indeed, learning to
use a word depends on a double resemblance: first,
a resemblance between the present circumstances
and past circumstances in which the word was
used, and second, a phonetic resemblance between
the present utterance of the word and past utter­
ances of it. And every reasonable expectation
depends on resemblance of circumstances, together
with our tendency to expect similar causes to have
similar effects.
The notion of a kind and the notion of similarity
or resemblance seem to be variants or adaptations
of a single notion. Similarity is immediately defin­
able in terms of kind; for, things are similar when
they are two of a kind. The very words for "kind"
and "similar" tend to run in etymologically cognate
pairs. Cognate with "kind" we have "akin" and
"kindred. " Cognate with "like" we have "ilk. "
Cognate with "similar" and "same" and "resem­
ble" there are "sammeln" and "assemble, " suggest­
ing a gathering into kinds.
We cannot easily imagine a more familiar or
fundamental notion than this, or a notion more
ubiquitous in its applications. On this score it is
like the notions of logic: like identity, negation,
alternation, and the rest. And yet, strangely, there
is something logically repugnant about it. For we
are baffled when we try to relate the general notion
of similarity significantly to logical terms. One's
first hasty suggestion might be to say that things
are similar when they have all or most or many
properties in common. Or, trying to be less vague,
one might try defining comparative similarity - "a
is more similar to b than to e" - as meaning that a
shares more properties with b than with e. But any
such course only reduces our problem to the
unpromising task of settling what to count as a
property.
The nature of the problem of what to count as a
property can be seen by turning for a moment to set
theory. Things are viewed as going together into
sets in any and every combination, describable and
indescribable. Any two things are joint members of
any number of sets. Certainly then, we cannot
define "a is more similar to b than to e" to mean
that a and b belong jointly to more sets than a and e
do. If properties are to support this line of defini­
tion where sets do not, it must be because proper­
ties do not, like sets, take things in every random
combination. It must be that properties are shared
only by things that are significantly similar. But
properties in such a sense are no clearer than kinds.
To start with such a notion of property, and define
similarity on that basis, is no better than accepting
similarity as undefined.
The contrast between properties and sets which
I suggested just now must not be confused with the
more basic and familiar contrast between proper­
ties, as intensional, and sets as extensional. Proper­
ties are intensional in that they may be counted as
distinct properties even though wholly coinciding
in respect of the things that have them. There is no
call to reckon kinds as intensional. Kinds can be
seen as sets, determined by their members. It is just
that not all sets are kinds.
If similarity is taken simple-mindedly as a yes­
or-no affair, with no degrees, then there is no
containing of kinds within broader kinds. For, as
remarked, similarity now simply means belonging
to some one same kind. If all colored things com­
prise a kind, then all colored things count as sim­
ilar, and the set of all red things is too narrow to
count as a kind. If on the other hand the set of all
red things counts as a kind, then colored things do
not all count as similar, and the set of all colored
things is too broad to count as a kind. We cannot
have it both ways. Kinds can, however, overlap; the
red things can comprise one kind, the round
another. \nWhen we move up from the simple dyadic rela­
tion of similarity to the more serious and useful
triadic relation of comparative similarity, a cor­
relative change takes place in the notion of kind.
Kinds come to admit now not only of overlapping
but also of containment one in another. The set of
all red things and the set of all colored things can
now both count as kinds; for all colored things can
now be counted as resembling one another more
than some things do, even though less, on the
whole, than red ones do.
At this point, of course, our trivial definition of
similarity as sameness of kind breaks down; for
almost any two things could count now as common
members of some broad kind or other, and anyway
we now want to define comparative or triadic sim­
ilarity. A definition that suggests itself is this: a is
more similar to b than to c when a and b belong
jointly to more kinds than a and c do. But even this
works only for finite systems of kinds.
The notion of kind and the notion of similarity
seemed to be substantially one notion. We observed
further that they resist reduction to less dubious
notions, as of logic or set theory. That they at any
rate be definable each in terms of the other seems
little enough to ask. We just saw a somewhat limp­
ing definition of comparative similarity in terms of
kinds. What now of the converse project, definition
of kind in terms of similarity?
One may be tempted to picture a kind, suitable
to a comparative similarity relation, as any set
which is "qualitatively spherical" in this sense: it
takes in exactly the things that differ less than so­
and-so much from some central norm. If without
serious loss of accuracy we can assume that there
are one or more actual things (paradigm cases) that
nicely exemplify the desired norm, and one or more
actual things (foils) that deviate just barely too
much to be counted into the desired kind at all,
then our definition is easy: the kind with paradigm a
and foil b is the set of all the things to which a is
more similar than a is to b. More generally, then, a
set may be said to be a kind if and only if there are a
and b, known or unknown, such that the set is the
kind with paradigm a and foil b.
If we consider examples, however, we see that
this definition does not give us what we want as
kinds. Thus take red. Let us grant that a central
shade of red can be picked as norm. The trouble is
that the paradigm cases, objects in just that shade of
red, can come in all sorts of shapes, weights, sizes,
and smells. Mere degree of overall similarity to any
one such paradigm case will afford little evidence of
Natural Kinds
degree of redness, since it will depend also on
shape, weight, and the rest. If our assumed relation
of comparative similarity were just comparative
chromatic similarity, then our paradigm-and-foil
definition of kind would indeed accommodate red­
kind. What the definition will not do is distill
purely chromatic kinds from mixed similarity.
A different attempt, adapted from Carnap, is
this: a set is a kind if all its members are more
similar to one another than they all are to anyone
thing outside the set. In other words, each non­
member differs more from some member than that
member differs from any member. However, as
Goodman showed in a criticism of Carnap/ this
construction succumbs to what Goodman calls the
difficulty of imperfect community. Thus consider
the set of all red round things, red wooden things,
and round wooden things. Each member of this set
resembles each other member somehow: at least in
being red, or in being round, or in being wooden,
and perhaps in two or all three of these respects or
others. Conceivably, moreover, there is no one
thing outside the set that resembles every member
of the set to even the least of these degrees. The set
then meets the proposed definition of kind. Yet
surely it is not what anyone means by a kind. It
admits yellow croquet balls and red rubber balls
while excluding yellow rubber balls.
The relation between similarity and kind, then,
is less clear and neat than could be wished. Defini­
tion of similarity in terms of kind is halting, and
definition of kind in terms of similarity is unknown.
Still the two notions are in an important sense
correlative. They vary together. If we reassess
something a as less similar to b than to c, where it
had counted as more similar to b than to c, surely we
will correspondingly permute a, b, and c in respect
of their assignment to kinds; and conversely.
I have stressed how fundamental the notion of
similarity or of kind is to our thinking, and how
alien to logic and set theory. I want to go on now to
say more about how fundamental these notions are
to our thinking, and something also about their
non-logical roots. Afterward I want to bring out
how the notion of similarity or of kind changes as
science progresses. I shall suggest that it is a mark
of maturity of a branch of science that the notion of
similarity or kind finally dissolves, so far as it is
relevant to that branch of science. That is, it ultim­
ately submits to analysis in the special terms of that
branch of science and logic.
For deeper appreciation of how fundamental
similarity is, let us observe more closely how it \nW. V. Quine
figures in the learning of language. One learns by
ostension what presentations to call yellow; that is,
one learns by hearing the word applied to samples.
All he has to go on, of course, is the similarity of
further cases to the samples. Similarity being a
matter of degree, one has to learn by trial and
error how reddish or brownish or greenish a thing
can be and still be counted yellow. When he finds
he has applied the word too far out, he can use the
false cases as samples to the contrary; and then he
can proceed to guess whether further cases are
yellow or not by considering whether they are more
similar to the in-group or the out-group. What one
thus uses, even at this primitive stage of learning, is
a fully functioning sense of similarity, and relative
similarity at that: a is more similar to b than to c.
All these delicate comparisons and shrewd infer­
ences about what to call yellow are, in Sherlock
Holmes's terminology, elementary. Mostly the
process is unconscious. It is the same process by
which an animal learns to respond in distinctive
ways to his master's commands or other discrimi­
nated stimulations.
The primitive sense of similarity that underlies
such learning has, we saw, a certain complexity of
structure: a is more similar to b than to c. Some
people have thought that it has to be much more
complex still: that it depends irreducibly on
respects, thus similarity in color, similarity in
shape, and so on. According to this view, our learn­
ing of yellow by ostension would have depended on
our first having been told or somehow apprised that
it was going to be a question of color. Now hints of
this kind are a great help, and in our learning we
often do depend on them. Still one would like to be
able to show that a single general standard of sim­
ilarity, but of course comparative similarity, is all
we need, and that respects can be abstracted after­
ward. For instance, suppose the child has learned
of a yellow ball and block that they count as yellow,
and of a red ball and block that they do not, and
now he has to decide about a yellow cloth. Presum­
ably he will find the cloth more similar to the
yellow ball and to the yellow block than to the red
ball or red block; and he will not have needed any
prior schooling in colors and respects. Carnap
undertook to show long ago how some respects,
such as color, could by an ingenious construction
be derived from a general similarity notion; 8 how­
ever, this development is challenged, again, by
Goodman's difficulty of imperfect community.
A standard of similarity is in some sense innate.
This point is not against empiricism; it is a com-
monplace of behavioral psychology. A response to a
red circle, if it is rewarded, will be elicited again by
a pink ellipse more readily than by a blue triangle;
the red circle resembles the pink ellipse more than
the blue triangle. Without some such prior spacing
of qualities, we could never acquire a habit; all
stimuli would be equally alike and equally differ­
ent. These spacings of qualities, on the part of men
and other animals, can be explored and mapped in
the laboratory by experiments in conditioning and
extinction. 9 Needed as they are for all learning,
these distinctive spacings cannot themselves all be
learned; some must be innate.
If then I say that there is an innate standard of
similarity, I am making a condensed statement that
can be interpreted, and truly interpreted, in beha­
vioral terms. Moreover, in this behavioral sense it
can be said equally of other animals that they have
an innate standard of similarity too. It is part of our
animal birthright. And, interestingly enough, it is
characteristically animal in its lack of intellectual
status. At any rate we noticed earlier how alien the
notion is to mathematics and logic.
This innate qualitative spacing of stimulations
was seen to have one of its human uses in the
ostensive learning of words like "yellow. " I should
add as a cautionary remark that this is not the only
way of learning words, nor the commonest; it is
merely the most rudimentary way. It works when
the question of the reference of a word is a simple
question of spread: how much of our surroundings
counts as yellow, how much counts as water, and so
on. Learning a word like "apple" or "square" is
more complicated, because here we have to learn
also where to say that one apple or square leaves off
and another begins. The complication is that
apples do not add up to an apple, nor squares,
generally, to a square. "Yellow" and "water" are
mass terms, concerned only with spread; "apple"
and "square" are terms of divided reference, con­
cerned with both spread and individuation. Osten­
sion figures in the learning of terms of this latter
kind too, but the process is more complex. 1O And
then there are all the other sorts of words, all those
abstract and neutral connectives and adverbs and
all the recondite terms of scientific theory; and
there are also the grammatical constructions them­
selves to be mastered. The learning of these things
is less direct and more complex still. There are
deep problems in this domain, but they lie aside
from the present topic.
Our way of learning "yellow, " then, gives less
than a full picture of how we learn languge. Yet \nmore emphatically, it gives less than a full picture
of the human usc of an innate standard of similar­
ity, or innate spacing of qualities. For, as remarked,
every reasonable expectation depends on similarity.
Again on this score, other animals are like man.
Their expectations, if we choose so to conceptua­
lize their avoidance movements and salivation and
pressing of levers and the like, are clearly depen­
dent on their appreciation of similarity. Or, to put
matters in their methodological order, these avoid­
ance movements and salivation and pressing of
levers and the like are typical of what we have to
go on in mapping the animals' appreciation of
similarity, their spacing of qualities.
Induction itself is essentially only more of the
same: animal expectation or habit formation. And
the ostensive learning of words is an implicit case of
induction. Implicitly the learner of "yellow" is
working inductively toward a general law of Eng­
lish verbal behavior, though a law that he will never
try to state; he is working up to where he can in
general judge when an English speaker would
assent to "yellow" and when not.
Not only is ostensive learning a case of induc­
tion; it is a curiously comfortable case of induction,
a game of chance with loaded dice. At any rate this
is so if, as seems plausible, each man's spacing of
qualities is enough like his neighbor's. For the
learner is generalizing on his yellow samples by
similarity considerations, and his neighbors have
themselves acquired the use of the word "yellow, "
in their day, by the same similarity considerations.
The learner of "yellow" is thus making his induc­
tion in a friendly world. Always, induction expres­
ses our hope that similar causes will have similar
effects; but when the induction is the ostensive
learning of a word, that pious hope blossoms into
a foregone conclusion. The uniformity of people's
quality spaces virtually assures that similar pre­
sentations will elicit similar verdicts.
It makes one wonder the more about other
inductions, where what is sought is a generalization
not about our neighbor's verbal behavior but about
the harsh impersonal world. It is reasonable that
our quality space should match our neighbor's, we
being birds of a feather; and so the general trust­
worthiness of induction in the ostensive learning of
words was a put-up job. To trust induction as a
way of access to the truths of nature, on the other
hand, is to suppose, more nearly, that our quality
space matches that of the cosmos. The brute irra­
tionality of our sense of similarity, its irrelevance to
anything in logic and mathematics, offers little
Natural Kinds
reason to expect that this sense is somehow in
tune with the world - a world which, unlike lan­
guage, we never made. Why induction should be
trusted, apart from special cases such as the ostens­
ive learning of words, is the perennial philosophical
problem of induction.
One part of the problem of induction, the part
that asks why there should be regularities in nature
at all, can, I think, be dismissed. That there are or
have been regularities, for whatever reason, is an
established fact of science; and we cannot ask better
than that. Why there have been regularities is an
obscure question, for it is hard to see what would
count as an answer. What does make clear sense is
this other part of the problem of induction: why
does our innate subjective spacing of qualities
accord so well with the functionally relevant group­
ings in nature as to make our inductions tend to
come out right? Why should our subjective spacing
of qualities have a special purchase on nature and a
lien on the future?
There is some encouragement in Darwin. If
people's innate spacing of qualities is a gene-linked
trait, then the spacing that has made for the most
successful inductions will have tended to predom­
inate through natural selection. 11 Creatures invete­
rately wrong in their inductions have a pathetic but
praiseworthy tendency to die before reproducing
their kind.
At this point let me say that I shall not be
impressed by protests that I am using inductive
generalizations, Darwin's and others, to justify
induction, and thus reasoning in a circle. The
reason I shall not be impressed by this is that my
position is a naturalistic one; I see philosophy not as
an a priori propaedeutic or groundwork for science,
but as continuous with science. I see philosophy
and science as in the same boat a boat which, to
revert to Neurath's figure as I so often do, we can
rebuild only at sea while staying afloat in it. There
is no external vantage point, no first philosophy.
All scientific findings, all scientific conjectures that
are at present plausible, are therefore in my view as
welcome for use in philosophy as elsewhere. For
me, then, the problem of induction is a problem
about the world: a problem of how we, as we now
are (by our present scientific lights), in a world we
never made, should stand better than random or
coin-tossing chances of coming out right when we
predict by inductions which are based on our in­
nate, scientifically unjustified similarity standard.
Darwin's natural selection is a plausible partial
explanation. \nW. V. Quine
It may, in view of a consideration to which I next
turn, be almost explanation enough. This consid­
eration is that induction, after all, has its con­
spicuous failures. Thus take color. Nothing in
experience, surely, is more vivid and conspicuous
than color and its contrasts. And the remarkable
fact, which has impressed scientists and philo­
sophers as far back at least as Galileo and Des­
cartes, is that the distinctions that matter for basic
physical theory are mostly independent of color
contrasts. Color impresses man; raven black
impresses Hempel; emerald green impresses
Goodman. But color is cosmically secondary.
Even slight differences in sensory mechanisms
from species to species, Smart remarks, 12 can
make overwhelming differences in the grouping
of things by color. Color is king in our innate
quality space, but undistinguished in cosmic cir­
cles. Cosmically, colors would not qualify as kinds.
Color is helpful at the food-gathering level. Here
it behaves well under induction, and here, no
doubt, has been the survival value of our color­
slanted quality space. It is just that contrasts that
are crucial for such activities can be insignificant
for broader and more theoretical science. If man
were to live by basic science alone, natural selection
would shift its support to the color-blind mutation.
Living as he does by bread and basic science
both, man is torn. Things about his innate similar­
ity sense that are helpful in the one sphere can be a
hindrance in the other. Credit is due man's invet­
erate ingenuity, or human sapience, for having
worked around the blinding dazzle of color vision
and found the more significant regularities else­
where. Evidently natural selection has dealt with
the conflict by endowing man doubly: with both a
color-slanted quality space and the ingenuity to rise
above it.
He has risen above it by developing modified
systems of kinds, hence modified similarity stand­
ards for scientific purposes. By the trial-and-error
process of theorizing he has regrouped things into
new kinds which prove to lend themselves to many
inductions better than the old.
A crude example is the modification of the
notion of fish by excluding whales and porpoises.
Another taxonomic example is the grouping of
kangaroos, opossums, and marsupial mice in a
single kind, marsupials, while excluding ordinary
mice. By primitive standards the marsupial mouse
is more similar to the ordinary mouse than to the
kangaroo; by theoretical standards the reverse is
true.
A theoretical kind need not be a modification of
an intuitive one. It may issue from theory full­
blown, without antecedents; for instance the kind
which comprises positively charged particles.
We revise our standards of similarity or of nat­
ural kinds on the strength, as Goodman remarks, 13
of second-order inductions. New groupings,
hypothetically adopted at the suggestion of a grow­
ing theory, prove favorable to inductions and so
become "entrenched. " We newly establish the pro­
jectibility of some predicate, to our satisfaction, by
successfully trying to project it. In induction noth­
ing succeeds like success.
Between an innate similarity notion or spacing of
qualities and a scientifically sophisticated one,
there are all gradations. Sciences, after all, differ
from common sense only in degree of methodolo­
gical sophistication. Our experiences from earliest
infancy are bound to have overlaid our innate spa­
cing of qualities by modifying and supplementing
our grouping habits little by little, inclining us
more and more to an appreciation of theoretical
kinds and similarities, long before we reach the
point of studying science systematically as such.
Moreover, the later phases do not wholly supersede
the earlier; we retain different similarity standards,
different systems of kinds, for use in different
contexts. We all still say that a marsupial mouse is
more like an ordinary mouse than a kangaroo,
except when we are concerned with genetic mat­
ters. Something like our innate quality space con­
tinues to function alongside the more sophisticated
regroupings that have been found by scientific
experience to facilitate induction.
We have seen that a sense of similarity or of
kinds is fundamental to learning in the widest
sense - to language learning, to induction, to
expectation. Toward a further appreciation of
how utterly this notion permeates our thought, I
want now to point out a number of other very
familiar and central notions which seem to depend
squarely on this one. They are notions that are
definable in terms of similarity, or kinds, and
further irreducible.
A notable domain of examples is the domain of
dispositions, such as Carnap's example of solubility
in water. To say of some individual object that it is
soluble in water is not to say merely that it always
dissolves when in water, because this would be true
by default of any object, however insoluble, if it
merely happened to be destined never to get into
water. It is to say rather that it would dissolve if it
were in water; but this account brings small com-\nfort, since the device of a subjunctive conditional
involves all the perplexities of disposition terms
and more. Thus far I simply repeat Carnap. 14 But
now I want to point out what could be done in this
connection with the notion of kind. Intuitively,
what qualifies a thing as soluble though it never
gets into water is that it is of the same kind as the
things that actually did or will dissolve; it is similar
to them. Strictly we can't simply say "the same
kind, " nor simply "similar, " when we have wider
and narrower kinds, less and more similarity. Let
us, hen mend our definition by saying that the
soluble things are the common members of all
such kinds. A thing is soluble if each kind that is
broad enough to embrace all actual victims of solu­
tion embraces it too.
Graphically the idea is this: we make a set of all
the some-time victims, all the things that actually
did or will dissolve in water, and then we add just
enough other things to round the set out into a
kind. This is the water-soluble kind.
If this definition covers just the desired things,
the things that are really soluble in water, it owes its
success to a circumstance that could be otherwise.
The needed circumstance is that a sufficient variety
of things actually get dissolved in water to assure
their not all falling under anyone kind narrower
than the desired water-soluble kind itself. But it is a
plausible circumstance, and I am not sure that its
accidental character is a drawback. If the trend of
events had been otherwise, perhaps the solubility
concept would not have been wanted.
However, if I seem to be defending this defini­
tion, I must now hasten to add that of course it has
much the same fault as the definition which used
the subjunctive conditional. This definition uses
the unreduced notion of kind, which is certainly
not a notion we want to rest with either; neither
theoretical kind nor intuitive kind. My purpose in
giving the definition is only to show the link
between the problem of dispositions and the prob­
lem of kinds.
As between theoretical and intuitive kinds, cer­
tainly the theoretical ones are the ones wanted for
purposes of defining solubility and other disposi­
tions of scientific concern. Perhaps "amiable" and
"reprehensible" are disposition terms whose defi­
nitions should draw rather on intuitive kinds. IS
Another dim notion, which has intimate connec­
tions with dispositions and subjunctive condi­
tionals, is the notion of cause; and we shall see
that it too turns on the notion of kinds. Hume
explained cause as invariable succession, and this
Natural Kinds
makes sense as long as the cause and effect are
referred to by general terms. We can say that fire
causes heat, and we can mean thereby, as Hume
would have it, that each event classifiable under
the head of fire is followed by an event classifiable
under the head of heat, or heating up. But this
account, whatever its virtues for these general cau­
sal statements, leaves singular causal statements
unexplained.
What does it mean to say that the kicking over of
a lamp in Mrs Leary's barn caused the Chicago
fire? It cannot mean merely that the event at Mrs
Leary's belongs to a set, and the Chicago fire
belongs to a set, such that there is invariable suc­
cession between the two sets: every member of the
one set is followed by a member of the other. This
paraphrase is trivially true and too weak. Always, if
one event happens to be followed by another, the
two belong to certain sets between which there is
invariable succession. We can rig the sets arbitra­
rily. Just put any arbitrary events in the first set,
including the first of the two events we are inter­
ested in; and then in the other set put the second of
those two events, together with other events that
happen to have occurred just after the other mem­
bers of the first set.
Because of this way of trivialization, a singular
causal statement says no more than that the one
event was followed by the other. That is, it says no
more if we use the definition just now contem­
plated; which, therefore, we must not. The trouble
with that definition is clear enough: it is the famil­
iar old trouble of the promiscuity of sets. Here, as
usual, kinds, being more discriminate, enable us to
draw distinctions where sets do not. To say that
one event caused another is to say that the two
events are of kinds between which there is invari­
able succession. If this correction does not yet take
care of Mrs Leary's cow, the fault is only with
invariable succession itself, as affording too simple
a definition of general causal statements; we need
to hedge it around with provisions for partial or
contributing causes and a good deal else. That
aspect of the causality problem is not my concern.
What I wanted to bring out is just the relevance of
the notion of kinds, as the needed link between
singular and general causal statements.
We have noticed that the notion of kind, or
similarity, is crucially relevant to the notion of
disposition, to the subjunctive conditional, and
to singular causal statements. From a scientific
point of view these are a pretty disreputable
lot. The notion of kind, or similarity, is equally \nw. V. Quine
disreputable. Yet some such notion, some similar­
ity sense, was seen to be crucial to all learning, and
central in particular to the processes of inductive
generalization and prediction which are the very
life of science. It appears that science is rotten to
the core.
Yet there may be claimed for this rot a certain
undeniable fecundity. Science reveals hidden mys­
teries, predicts successfully, and works technolog­
ical wonders. If this is the way of rot, then rot is
rather to be prized and praised than patronized.
Rot, actually, is not the best model here. A better
model is human progress. A sense of comparative
similarity, I remarked earlier, is one of man's an­
imal endowments. Insofar as it fits in with regular­
ities of nature, so as to afford us reasonable success
in our primitive inductions and expectations, it is
presumably an evolutionary product of natural
selection. Secondly, as remarked, one's sense of
similarity or one's system of kinds develops and
changes and even turns multiple as one matures,
making perhaps for increasingly dependable pre­
diction. And at length standards of similarity set in
which are geared to theoretical science. This devel­
opment is a development away from the immedi­
ate, subjective, animal sense of similarity to the
remoter objectivity of a similarity determined by
scientific hypotheses and posits and constructs.
Things are similar in the later or theoretical sense
to the degree that they are interchangeable parts of
the cosmic machine revealed by science.
This progress of similarity standards, in the
course of each individual's maturing years, is a
sort of recapitulation in the individual of the race's
progress from muddy savagery. But the similarity
notion even in its theoretical phase is itself a muddy
notion still. We have offered no definition of it in
satisfactory scientific terms. We of course have a
behavioral definition of what counts, for a given
individual, as similar to what, or as more similar to
what than to what; we have this for similarity old
and new, human and animal. But it is no definition
of what it means really for a to be more similar to b
than to c; really, and quite apart from this or that
psychological subject.
Did I already suggest a definition to this pur­
pose, metaphorically, when I said that things are
similar to the extent that they are interchangeable
parts of the cosmic machine? More literally, could
things be said to be similar in proportion to how
much of scientific theory would remain true on
interchanging those things as objects of reference
in the theory? This only hints a direction; consider
for instance the dimness of "how much theory. "
Anyway the direction itself is not a good one; for it
would make similarity depend in the wrong way on
theory. A man's judgments of similarity do and
should depend on his theory, on his beliefs; but
similarity itself, what the man's judgments purport
to be judgments of, purports to be an objective
relation in the world. It belongs in the subject
matter not of our theory of theorizing about the
world, but of our theory of the world itself. Such
would be the acceptable and reputable sort of simi­
larity concept, if it could be defined.
It does get defined in bits: bits suited to special
branches of science. In this way, on many limited
fronts, man continues his rise from savagery,
sloughing off the muddy old notion of kind or
similarity piecemeal, a vestige here and a vestige
there. Chemistry, the home science of water-solu­
bility itself, is one branch that has reached this
stage. Comparative similarity of the sort that mat­
ters for chemistry can be stated outright in chemi­
cal terms, that is, in terms of chemical composition.
Molecules will be said to match if they contain
atoms of the same elements in the same topological
combinations. Then, in principle, we might get at
the comparative similarity of objects a and b by
considering how many pairs of matching molecules
there are, one molecule from a and one from beach
time, and how many un matching pairs. The ratio
gives even a theoretical measure of relative similar­
ity, and thus abundantly explains what it is for a to
be more similar to b than to c. Or we might prefer to
complicate our definition by allowing also for
degrees in the matching of molecules; molecules
having almost equally many atoms, or having atoms
whose atomic numbers or atomic weights are
almost equal, could be reckoned as matching better
than others. At any rate a lusty chemical similarity
concept is assured.
From it, moreover, an equally acceptable con­
cept of kinds is derivable, by the paradigm-and-foil
definition noted early in this paper. For it is a
question now only of distilling purely chemical
kinds from purely chemical similarity; no admix­
ture of other respects of similarity interferes.
We thus exonerate water-solubility, which, the
last time around, we had reduced no further than
to an unexplained notion of kind. Therewith also
the associated subjunctive conditional, "If this
were in water, it would dissolve, " gets its bill of
health.
The same scientific advances that have thus
provided a solid underpinning for the definition \nof solubility in terms of kinds, have also, ironically
enough, made that line of definition pointless by
providing a full understanding of the mechanism
of solution. One can redefine water-solubility by
simply describing the structural conditions of that
mechanism. This embarrassment of riches is, I
suspect, a characteristic outcome. That is, once
we can legitimize a disposition term by defining
the relevant similarity standard, we are apt to
know the mechanism of the disposition, and so
bypass the similarity. Not but that the similarity
standard is worth clarifying too, for its own sake or
for other purposes.
Philosophical or broadly scientific motives can
impel us to seek still a basic and absolute concept of
similarity, along with such fragmentary similarity
concepts as suit special branches of science. This
drive for a cosmic similarity concept is perhaps
identifiable with the age-old drive to reduce things
to their elements. It epitomizes the scientific
spirit, though dating back to the pre-Socratics: to
Empedocles with his theory of four elements, and
above all to Democritus with his atoms. The
modern physics of elementary particles, or of hills
in space-time, is a more notable effort in this
direction.
This idea of rationalizing a single notion of relat­
ive similarity, throughout its cosmic sweep, has its
metaphysical attractions. But there would remain
still need also to rationalize the similarity notion
more locally and superficially, so as to capture only
such similarity as is relevant to some special
science. Our chemistry example is already a case
of this, since it stops short of full analysis into
neutrons, electrons, and the other elementary par­
ticles.
A more striking example of superficiality, in this
good sense, is afforded by taxonomy, say in zoo­
logy. Since learning about the evolution of species,
we are in a position to define comparative similarity
suitably for this science by consideration of family
trees. For a theoretical measure of the degree of
similarity of two individual animals we can devise
some suitable function that depends on proximity
and frequency of their common ancestors. Or a
more significant concept of degree of similarity
might be devised in terms of genes. When kind is
construed in terms of any such similarity concept,
fishes in the corrected, whale-free sense of the
word qualify as a kind, while fishes in the more
inclusive sense do not.
Natural Kinds
Different similarity measures, or relative simi­
larity notions, best suit different branches of
science; for there are wasteful complications in
providing for finer gradations of relative similarity
than matter for the phenomena with which the
particular science is concerned. Perhaps the
branches of science could be revealingly classified
by looking to the relative similarity notion that is
appropriate to each. Such a plan is reminiscent of
Felix Klein's so-called Erlangerprogramm in geo­
metry, which involved characterizing the various
branches of geometry by what transformations
were irrelevant to each. But a branch of science
would only qualify for recognition and classifica­
tion under such a plan when it had matured to the
point of clearing up its similarity notion. Such
branches of science would qualify further as uni­
fied, or integrated into our inclusive systematiza­
tion of nature, only insofar as their several
similarity concepts were compatible; capable of
meshing, that is, and differing only in the fineness
of their discriminations.
Disposition terms and subjunctive conditionals
in these areas, where suitable senses of similarity
and kind are forthcoming, suddenly turn respect­
able; respectable and, in principle, superfluous. In
other domains they remain disreputable and prac­
tically indispensable. They may be seen perhaps as
unredeemed notes; the theory that would clear up
the unanalyzed underlying similarity notion in
such cases is still to come. An example is the dis­
position called intelligence - the ability, vaguely
speaking, to learn quickly and to solve problems.
Sometime, whether in terms of proteins or colloids
or nerve nets or overt behavior, the relevant branch
of science may reach the stage where a similarity
notion can be constructed capable of making even
the notion of intelligence respectable. And super­
fluous.
In general we can take it as a very special mark
of the maturity of a branch of science that it
no longer needs an irreducible notion of similarity
and kind. It is that final stage where the animal
vestige is wholly absorbed into the theory. In
this career of the similarity notion, starting in its
innate phase, developing over the years in the
light of accumulated experience, passing then
from the intuitive phase into theoretical similarity,
and finally disappearing altogether, we have a
paradigm of the evolution of unreason into
sCience. \nW. V. Quine
Notes
C. G. Hempel, Aspects of Scientific Explanation and
Other Essays (New York: Free Press, 1965), p. IS.
2 Nelson Goodman, Fact, Fiction, and Forecast (1st edn,
Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, India­
napolis: 1955; 2nd edn, : Bobbs-Merrill, 1965), p. 74. I
am indebted to Goodman and to Burton Dreben for
helpful criticisms of earlier drafts of the present
paper.
3 Goodman, Fact, pp. 82f.
4 Ibid. , pp. 95ff.
5 I mean this only as a sufficient condition of lawlike­
ness. See Donald Davidson, "Emeroses by other
names, " Journal of Philosophy 63 (1966), pp. 778-80.
6 This relevance of kind is noted by Goodman, Fact, 1st
edn, pp. 119f; 2nd edn, pp. 121f.
7 Nelson Goodman, The Structure of Appearance, 2nd
edn (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966), pp. 163f.
8 Rudolf Carnap, The Logical Structure of the World
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967), pp.
141-7 (German edn, 1928).
9 See my Word and Object (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT
Press, 1960), pp. 83f, for further discussion and refer­
ences.
10 See ibid. , pp. 90--5.
11 This was noted by S. Watanabe on the second page of
his paper "Une Explication mathematique du c1asse­
ment d'objects, " in S. Dockx and P. Bernays (eds),
Information and Prediction in Science (New York:
Academy Press, 1965).
12 J. J. c. Smart, Philosopkv and Scientific Realism (New
York: Humanities Press, 1963), pp. 68-72.
13 Goodman, Fact, pp. 95ff.
14 Rudolf Carnap, "Testability and meaning, " Philoso­
phy of Science 3 (1936), pp. 419-71; 4 (1937), pp. 1-40.
15 Here there followed, in previous printings, 26 lines
which I have deleted. They were concerned with
explaining certain subjunctive conditionals on the
basis of the notion of kind. Paul Berent pointed out
to me that the formulation was wrong, for it would
have equated those conditionals to their converses. \n19
Hilary Putnam
It has been maintained by such philosophers as
Quine and Goodman that purely 'extensional'
language suffices for all the purposes of properly
formalized scientific discourse. Those entities that
were traditionally called 'universals' - properties,
concepts, forms, etc. - are rejected by these exten­
sionalist philosophers on the ground that 'the prin­
ciple of individuation is not clear'. It is conceded
that science requires that we allow something tan­
tamount to quantification over non-particulars (or,
anyway, over things that are not material objects,
not space-time points, not physical fields, etc. ),
but, the extensionalists contend, quantification
over sets serves the purposes nicely. The 'ontology'
of modern science, at least as Quine formalizes it,
comprises material objects (or, alternatively, space­
time points), sets of material objects, sets of sets of
material objects, .. ., but no properties, concepts, or
forms. Let us thus examine the question: can the
principle of individuation for properties ever be
made clear?
Properties and Reduction
It seems to me that there are at least two notions of
'property' that have become confused in our
minds. There is a very old notion for which the
Originally published in N. Rescher et al. (eds), Essays
in Honor of Carl G. Hempel (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1969).
Reprinted by permission of Kluwer Academic Publish­
ers.
word 'predicate' used to be employed (using 'pre­
dicate' as a term only for expressions and never for
properties is a relatively recent mode of speech: 'Is
existence a predicate? ' was not a syntactical ques­
tion), and there is the notion for which I shall use
the terms 'physical property', 'physical magni­
tude', 'physical relation', etc. , depending on
whether the object in question is one-place, a func­
tor, more than one-place, etc. Ignore, if possible
the connotations of 'physical', which are rather
misleading (I would be pleased if someone sug­
gested a better terminology for the distinction
that I wish to draw), and let me try to tell you
what distinction it is that I mean to mark by the
use of the terms 'predicate' (which I shall revive, in
its classical sense) and 'physical property'.
The principle of individuation for predicates is
well known: the property of being P (where 'prop­
erty' is understood in the sense of 'predicate') is
one and the same property as the property of being
Q - i. e. , to say of something that it is P and to say of
something else that it is Q is to apply the same
predicate to the two things - just in case 'x is P' is
synonymous (in the wide sense of 'analytically
equivalent to') 'x is Q. Doubt about the clarity of
the principle of individuation for predicates thus
reduces to doubt about the notion of synonymy.
While I share Quine's doubts about the existence of
a clear notion of synonymy, I have more hope than
he does that a satisfactory concept can be found,
although that is not to be the subject of this paper.
Consider, however, the situation which arises
when a scientist asserts that temperature is mean \nHilary Putnam
molecular kinetic energy. On the face of it, this is a
statement of identity of properties. What is being
asserted is that the physical property of having a
particular temperature is really (in some sense of
'really') the same proper~y as the property of having
a certain molecular energy; or (more generally) that
the physical magnitude temperature is one and the
same physical magnitude as mean molecular kinetic
energy. If this is right, then, since 'x has such-and­
such a temperature' is not synonymous with 'x has
bla-bla mean molecular kinetic energy', even when
'bla-bla' is the value of molecular energy that cor­
responds to the value 'such-and-such' of the tem­
perature, it must be that what the physicist means
by a 'physical magnitude' is something quite other
than what philosophers have called a 'predicate' or
a 'concept'.
To be specific, the difference is that, whereas
synonymy of the expressions 'x is P' and 'x is Q is
required for the predicates P and Q to be the
'same', it is not required for the physical property
P to be the same physical property as the physical
property Q Physical properties can be 'synthet­
ically identical'.
This fact is closely connected with reduction.
'Temperature is mean molecular kinetic energy' is
a classical example of a reduction of one physical
magnitude to another; and the problem of stating a
'principle of individuation' for physical properties,
magnitudes, etc. , reduces, as we shall see, to the
problem of describing the methodological con­
straints on reduction. Not all reductions involve
properties or magnitudes; for example, 'Water is
H 20' asserts the identity of each body of water
with a certain aggregation of H 20 molecules, give
or take some impurities, not the identity of 'the
property of being water' and 'the property of being
H 20' - although one might assert that those are the
same physical property, too - but many reductions
do: e. g. , the reduction of gravitation to space-time
curvature, of surface tension to molecular attrac­
tion, and so on.
I shall suppose, then, that there is a notion of
property - for which I use the adjective 'physical',
mainly because 'physical magnitude' already
exists with a use similar to the use I wish to
make of 'physical property', which satisfies the
condition that the property P can be synthet­
ically identical with the property Q, the criterion
being that this is said to be true just in case P
'reduces' (in the sense of empirical reduction) to
Q, or Q to P, or both P and Q 'reduce' to the
same R.
2 Can one get an Extensional Criterion
for the Identity of Properties?
The criterion for the identity of properties just
given is not extensional, because the relation of
reduction is not extensional. Water reduces
to H 20, and H 20 is coextensive with (H20 V
Unicorn), but water does not reduce to (H20 V
Unicorn). The difficulty is simply that
(x)(x is water == x is an aggregation of
H 20 molecules)
is not merely true but nomological ('lawlike'), while
(x)(x is water == oX is an aggregation of H20
molecules V x is a unicorn)
is extensionally true (assuming there are no uni­
corns), but not lawlike (unless the non-existence of
unicorns is a law of nature, in which case things
become still more complicated).
This raises the question: can one hope to get a
criterion for the identity of properties (in the sense
of 'physical property') expressible in an extensional
language? The problem is related to such problems
as the problem of getting a necessary and sufficient
condition for 'nomological', and of getting one for
causal statements, expressible in an extensional
language, and what I shall say about this problem
is closely related to the way in which I propose to
treat those other problems.
3 Fundamental Magnitudes
For reasons which will become clear later, I wish to
begin by discussing the notion of a fundamental
magnitude in physics. It seems clear that no ana­
~ytic necessary and sufficient condition for some­
thing to be a fundamental magnitude can be given.
At any rate, I shall not even try to give one. But just
how serious is this? There do seem to be methodo­
logical principles, albeit vague ones, governing the
physicist's decision to take certain terms as funda­
mental magnitude terms and not others. Relying on
these principles, and on his scientific intuition, the
physicist arrives at a list of 'fundamental magni­
tudes'. At this point he has a necessary and suffi­
cient condition for something to be a fundamental
magnitude - his list. To be sure, this is an empirical
necessary and sufficient condition, not an analytic \none. But so what? If one has a confirmation proce­
dure, even a vague one, for a term T, and by using
that procedure one can arrive at a biconditional of
the form (x) (T(x) ='. .. x. .. ) that one accepts as
empirically true (and the condition. .. x. .. occur­
ring on the right side of the biconditional is pre­
cise), then what problem of 'explicating the notion
of T-hood' remains? Such a term T may be
regarded as a programmatic term: we introduce it
not by a definition, but by a trial-and-error proce­
dure (often an implicit one); and the program is
(using the trial-and-error procedure) to find an
empirically correct necessary and sufficient condi­
tion for' T-hood' which is precise. If this is success­
ful, then the notion of 'T-hood' is precise enough
for all scientific purposes. Even if it is unsuccessful,
one might succeed in discovering in each individual
case whether T applies or not without ever obtain­
ing any general necessary and sufficient condition:
if even this is unsuccessful, someone is sure to
propose that we drop the notion T altogether.
Even if it is not reasonable to ask for an analytic
necessary and sufficient condition in the case of
programmatic terms, it is surely reasonable to ask
for some indication of the associated trial-and-error
procedure, provided that we do not demand more
precision in the reply than can reasonably be
expected in descriptions of the scientific method
at the present stage of knowledge. What is the
associated 'trial-and-error procedure', or 'con­
firmation procedure', in the case of the term 'fun­
damental magnitude'?
One obvious condition is that fundamental mag­
nitude terms must be 'projectible' in the sense of
Goodman. Since this is a general requirement on
all terms in empirical science, except complex­
compound expressions, and since discussing it
properly involves (as Goodman rightly stresses),
attacking the whole problem of induction, I shall
simply take it for granted. (Goodman's solution is,
in effect, to say that a term is projectible if we do in
fact project it sufficiently often. This leaves the
whole problem of why we project some terms to
begin with and not others up to psychology. I am
inclined to believe that this, far from being a defect
in Goodman's approach, is its chief virtue. It is
hard to see, once one has passed Goodman's 'in­
telligence test for philosophers' (as Ullian has
described Goodman's discussion of green and
gruel, how this question could be anything but a
question for psychology. But anyone who feels that
there is some further philosophical work to be done
here is welcome to do it; my feeling is that what we
On Properties
have here is not so much an unsolved philosophical
problem as an undefined one. )
A second condition is that these terms must
characterize all things - i. e. , all particles, in a par­
ticle formulation of physics, and all space-time
points, in a field formulation of physics. (I believe
that one will get different, though interdefinable,
lists of fundamental magnitudes depending on
which of these two types of formulation one
chooses for physics. )
A third condition is that one of these terms must
be 'distance', or a term with the aid of which
'distance' is definable, and that the positions of
things must be predictable from the values of the
fundamental magnitudes at a given time by means
of the assumed laws. (This last requirement applies
only before 'quantization'. )
A fourth condition is that the laws must assume
an especially simple form - say, differential equa­
tions (and linear rather than nonlinear, first-order
rather than second-order, etc. , as far as possible), if
these terms are taken as primitive.
Looking over these conditions, we see that what
one has is not one trial-and-error procedure but
two. For the laws (or, rather, putative laws) of
physics are not fixed in advance, but are to be
discovered at the same time as the fundamental
magnitudes. If we assume, however, that the laws
are to be expressible in a reasonably simple way as
differential equations in the fundamental magni­
tudes, and that statistics enter (in fundamental
particle physics) only through the procedure of
passing from a deterministic theory to a corres­
ponding quantum-mechanical theory (the so-called
procedure of 'quantization'), then the double trial­
and-error procedure is reasonably clear. What one
does is to simultaneously look for laws expressible
in the form specified (which will predict the posi­
tion of particles), and to look for terms which are
'projectible' and by means of which such laws can
be formulated.
To avoid misunderstandings, let me make it
clear that I am not claiming that it is 'part of the
concept' (as people say) of a fundamental law that it
must be a differential equation, etc. I am saying that
that is what we in fact look for now. If it turns out
that we cannot get that, then we will look for the
next best thing. We do not know now what the next
best thing would be; partly this is a question of
psychology, and partly it depends on what math­
ematical forms for the expressions of laws have
actually been thought of at the time. I deny that
the double trial-and-error procedure is fixed by \nHilary Putnam
rules (or, at least, it is a daring and so far unsup­
ported guess that it is fixed by rules), unless one is
willing to count 'look for laws in a form that seems
simple and natural' as a rule. But the procedure is
'fixed' by the de facto agreement of scientists on
what is a simple and natural form for the formula­
tion of physical laws. It seems to me to be a great
mistake in the philosophy of science to overplay
the importance of rules, and to underestimate the
importance of regularities Regularities in what
scientists take to be 'simple' and 'natural' may be
a matter of psychology rather than methodology;
but (a) the line between methodology and psy­
chology is not at all that sharp; and (b) methodology
may well depend on such psychological regularities.
4 A Criterion for the Identity of
'Physicalz' Properties
H. Feigl has distinguished two notions of the 'phys­
ical'. In Feiglese, every scientific predicate is
'physical]', i. e. , 'physical' in the sense of having
something to do with causality, space, and time;
but only the predicates of physics are physical in
the narrower sense, 'physicalz'. In this terminology,
what I have been calling 'physical properties' should
have been called 'physical] properties'. Our prob­
lem is to find a criterion for the identity of physical]
properties. In this section I shall approach this
problem by discussing the special problem of a
criterion of identity for physicalz properties.
Assuming that the presently accepted list of funda­
mental magnitudes is complete, i. e. , that there are
no further fundamental magnitudes to be discov­
ered, the natural procedure is to correlate physicalz
properties with equivalence classes of predicates
definable with the aid of the fundamental magni­
tude terms. Each defined term in the vocabulary of
physics (i. e. , of elementary particle physics) corres­
ponds to a physicalz property, and vice versa; two
terms correspond to the same physicalz property
just in case they belong to the same equivalence
class. But what should the equivalence relation be?
There are two natural proposals, I think, leading
to two quite different notions of physicalz property.
One proposal, which I shall not investigate here,
would be to take nomological coextensiveness as the
equivalence relation; the other would be to take
logical equivalence. I shall choose logical equival­
ence, because, although we want to allow 'synthetic
identities' between physicalz properties and, for
example, observation properties (e. g. , temperature
is mean molecular kinetic energy), it does not seem
natural or necessary to consider two terms as cor­
responding to the same physicalz property when
both are already 'reduced' (i. e. , expressed in terms
of the fundamental magnitude terms), and in their
reduced form they are not logically equivalent.
How shall we understand 'logical equivalence',
however? I propose to understand 'logical equiva­
lence' as meaning logical equivalence in the nar­
rower sense (not allowing considerations of
'synonymy'); so that p] and P z will be regarded as
corresponding to the same physicalz property only
if: (a) p] and P z are built up out of fundamental
magnitude terms alone with the aid of logical and
mathematical vocabulary; and (b) (x)(p](x) ==
Pz(x)) is a truth of pure logic or mathematics.
(The criterion as just given is for one-place predi­
cates; it should be obvious how it is intended to be
extended to relations and functors. )
The proposed criterion of identity implicitly
takes the stand that no relations among the funda­
mental magnitudes should be considered as 'ana­
lytic'. This seems reasonable to me in view of the
strongly 'law-cluster' character of the fundamental
magnitude terms, but a word of explanation may be
in order. Consider, for the sake of an example or two,
some of the relations among the fundamental mag­
nitude terms that have seemed analytic in the past.
For 'distance' ('d(x, y)'), the following relation has
often been considered to be 'part of the meaning';
(d(x, y) is notequalto zero unless x = y. Yetjustthis
relation is given up (for 'space-time distance', at
least) by the Minkowskian metric for space-time.
Similarly, that d(x, y) has no upper bound is given
up when we go over from Euclidean to Riemannian
geometry. These examples indicate, to me at any
rate, that, when fundamental magnitude terms are
involved, it is foolish to regard any statement (out­
side of a logical or mathematical truth) as 'analytic'.
But is it safe to regard even logic and math­
ematics as analytic? The answer seems to depend
on just what is being packed into the notion
'analytic'. If 'analytic' is a covert way of saying
'true by linguistic convention alone', then the
view that logic and mathematics are 'analytic' is
highly suspect. Certainly I do not presuppose
this view (which I do not in any case accept) here.
But if 'analytic' means 'true by virtue of linguistic
convention and logic or mathematics', then trivially
all truths of logic or mathematics are 'analytic'. But
this thesis is compatible, for example, with the
radical thesis that logic and mathematics are
empirical, subject to revision for experimental \nreasons, etc. I do not wish to rule out this attitude
towards logic and mathematics (which, in fact, I
hold). Thus, when I say that logical equivalence
is the criterion for the identity of physical2 pro­
perties, I do not mean logical equivalence accord­
ing to what we today take to be the laws of logic
and mathematics; I simply mean equivalence
according to whatever may in fact be the truths of
logic. If we change our logic, then we may have to
change our minds about what physical2 properties
are in fact identical; but the criterion of identity
will not have changed; it will just be that we made
a mistake in its application in some particular cases.
5 Basic Terms of 'Non-fundamental'
Disciplines
The issues involved in the reduction of theoretical
terms in 'non-fundamental' disciplines to physical2
terms are so well known by now, that I shall be very
brief. (I shall lean on the discussion by Kemeny and
Oppenheim, which I regard as still being the best
paper on the subject, l and on the subsequent paper
by Oppenheim and myself. 2 The basic requirement
in every reduction, as enunciated by Kemeny and
Oppenheim, is that all the observable phenomena
explainable by means of the reduced theory should
be explainable by means of the reducing theory.
This means that the observation terms must be
counted as part of the reducing theory - in the
present case, physics - and that we must suppose
that we have at least one true biconditional of the
form (x)(O(x) == P(x)), where P is a physical2
term, for each undefined observation term O.
(This requirement is not made by Kemeny and
Oppenheim, but it seems the simplest way of
ensuring that the maximum possible observational
consequences will be derivable from the reducing
theory. )
In the paper by Oppenheim and Putnam men­
tioned above, it is stressed that the reduction at
issue need not be made directly to physics; if, for
example, the laws of psychology are ever reduced
to those of cell biology (explanation in terms of
reverberating circuits of neurons, etc. ), while the
laws of biology are reduced to laws of physics and
chemistry, which is itself reduced to physics, then
the laws of psychology will have been reduced to those
of physics from the point of view of the logician of
science, even if no one should ever care to write
out the definition of a single psychological term
directly in physicalz language.
On Properties
Once one has found a way of explaining the
phenomena in physicalz terms (in the sense just
explained), then the next step is to see if anything
can be found (from the standpoint of the new
explanation of the phenomena directly by means
of the laws of physics) which answers to the old
theoretical primitives. It is not necessary for this
purpose that the old laws should be exactly deriv­
able from the proposed identification. If we can
find a relative interpretation of the old theories
into the theory consisting of the laws of physics
plus the 'bridge laws' connecting physicalz terms
with observation terms, which permits the deduc­
tion of a good approximation theory to the old
theories, then we identify the things and properties
referred to by the basic terms of the old theories
with the things and properties referred to by the
corresponding physical2 terms (even if some con­
ventional extension of meaning is involved, as in
the case of 'water' and 'hoe).
On the other hand, it may happen that some
basic term of the old theories does not answer to
anything (in the light of our new way of explaining
the phenomena). In this case, we simply drop the
old theories (or those laws involving the term in
question, at any rate) and explain the phenomena
by means of'lower'-level theories, including, in the
last resort, direct explanation by means of physics
plus bridge laws.
The second case is classified by Kemeny and
Oppenheim as reduction by replacement; the first
case is classified as reduction by means of bicondi­
tionals. Both types of reduction are exemplified in
science, and in some cases it is arguable whether, in
view of the shifts of meaning involved, a given
reduction should be classified as a reduction by
replacement or by means of biconditionals. The
important point is that after the reduction of a
discipline, those basic terms that remain, that are
still regarded as corresponding to 'physical proper­
ties' (in the sense of, physic all') at all, are reduced
by means of biconditionals (or identity-signs, as in
the case of 'Temperature is mean molecular kinetic
energy'). For terms which are 'reduced by replace­
ment' are dropped, so that the only basic terms that
survive are the ones that we reduce by the other
method.
6 Psychological Properties
What first led me to write a paper on the topic of
'properties' was the desire to study reduction in the \nHilary Putnam
case of psychology. I am inclined to hold the view
that psychological properties would be reduced not
to physicalz properties in the usual sense (i. e. , first­
order combinations of fundamental magnitudes),
but to functional states, where crude examples of
the kinds of properties I call 'functional states'
would be (a) the property of being a finite auto­
maton with a certain machine table; and (b) the
property of being a finite automaton with a certain
machine table and being in the state described in a
certain way in the table. To say that a finite auto­
maton has a certain machine table is to say that
there are properties (in the sense of ph ysical\ proper­
ties) which the object has (i. e. , it always has one of
them), and which succeed each other in accordance
with a certain rule. Thus the property of having a
certain machine table is a property of having proper­
ties which. .. - although a property of the first level
(a property of things), it is of 'second order' in
the old Russell - Whitehead sense, in that its
definition involves a quantification over (first­
order) physical\ properties. This is a general char­
acteristic of all 'functional' properties, as I use the
term: although physical\ properties in a wide sense,
they are second-order physical\ properties. How
then should a reduction to such properties be ana­
lyzed - e. g. , pain to a certain functional state (as I
proposed in an earlier paper)?
The answer is, that if we are willing to accept the
hypothesis that all first-order physical\ properties
will turn out to be reducible to physicalz proper­
ties, then all second-order physical\ properties will
automatically reduce to second-order physicalz
properties. If we succeed in reducing psychological
properties to properties of the form: the property (of
second-order) of having (first-order) physical\ prop­
erties which. .. , then we make the further reduction
to (second-order) physicalz properties by simply
making the theoretical identification of the fore­
going physical\ property with the corresponding
physicalz property, that is, with the (second-order)
physicalz property of having (first-order) physica/z
properties which. ..
It is likely, however, that this unusual type of
reduction will have to be combined with the more
familiar type if psychology is ever to be reduced.
For, although a reduction of psychological states to
properties of the kind just described would enable
us to predict many of the aspects of the behavior of
the corresponding species and to understand the
functional organization of that behavior, there are
undoubtedly aspects of human behavior whose
explanation will require a reference not just to the
functional organization of the human brain and
nervous system, but to the details of the physical
realization of that functional organization. An ana­
logous complication has already appeared in the
case of the reduction of chemistry to physics, and
is beginning to appear in the case of molecular
biology. Although many chemical phenomena can
be explained 'at the chemical level', in some cases it
is necessary to descend to the level of elementary
particle physics, even to explain such familiar facts
as the liquidity of water and the hardness of dia­
mond; and although many cellular phenomena can
be explained at the level of whole cells, nuclei, etc. ,
in the most important cases it is necessary to 'des­
cend' to explanation directly in physical-chemical
terms.
It should be noted that if we accept the strict
extensionalism which is urged by Quine, then all
questions of reduction of properties trivialize upon
the passing-over to corresponding questions about
sets. Temperature as a physical magnitude which is
not intrinsically quantified has no place in Quine's
scheme: instead, we are urged to take as primitive
'temperature-in-degrees-centigrade', or some
such. And the statement that temperature is mean
molecular kinetic energy passes over into the harm­
less statement that 'temperature in degrees centi­
grade is directly proportional to mean molecular
kinetic energy in c. g. s. units'. I have discussed this
difficulty with Quine, and he has suggested meet­
ing it by saying that 'temperature in degrees centi­
grade is a quantification of mean molecular kinetic
energy'. (This would indicate the question 'Why is
temperature in degrees centigrade directly propor­
tional to mean molecular kinetic energy in c. g. s.
units? ' is not a happy question. ) Discussing this
move would involve discussing: (a) whether it is
really satisfactory to think of mean molecular
kinetic energy as a class of equivalence-classes as
Quine also suggests; and (b) whether the relation
'the functionfis a quantification of S' does not, on
the natural understanding of such phrases as 'a
quantification of kinetic energy', turn out to be an
intensional one. Of course, one can take the relation
extensionally as meaning that temperature is a one­
one function of the equivalence-classes, subject to a
continuity condition; but then one will not have
distinguished between the cases in which one mag­
nitude is a function of another, and the cases in
which one magnitude reduces to another, which is
just our problem.
In the same way, there would be no sense, if
Q! Iine were right, in discussing whether pain is a \nbrain state, or a functional state, or yet another kind
of state. 'Pain' is construed by Quine as a predicate
whose arguments are an organism and a time; if the
set of ordered pairs (0, t) such that ° is in pain at t
is identical with the set of ordered pairs (0, t) such
that ° satisfies some other condition at t, then pain
(the relation) is (extensionally) the relation that
holds between an organism and a time just in case
the organism satisfies that other condition. Pain
could be both a brain state and a functional state.
In some world, pain could even be 'identical' with
pricking one's finger - if the organisms in that
world experienced pain when and only when they
pricked a finger.
Quine does not find this result counterintuitive,
because he does not find intensional differences
'philosophically explanatory'. I believe that point­
ing to differences that are there is philosophically
explanatory; and it seems to me that these particu­
lar differences are 'there'. But I do not expect that
either of us will succeed in convincing the other.
7 Prospect for an Extensional Criterion
for the Identity of Properties
In the light of the foregoing discussion, I can give a
brief answer to the question: can we get a criterion
for the identity of properties (in the sense of
physicalt properties) which is expressible in exten­
sionallanguage? The answer is that we cannot today,
as far as I am aware, but that prospects seem reason­
ably good for obtaining one eventually. The reduc­
tion of those observation terms that one might want
to take as undefined terms in a reasonable formal­
ization of science seems fully possible, not with­
standing some formidable complexities still to be
unraveled. Also, it is assumed in present science that
the number of fundamental magnitudes is finite
(since there are assumed to be only four fundamen­
tal kinds of forces); and the assumption that the
basic terms of the 'non-fundamental' disciplines
will eventually be reduced is at least reasonable.
Of course, the present discussion is entirely
empirical in spirit. Indeed, my whole purpose is
to break away from two recent traditions (, recent
tradition' is deliberate) which seem to me to be
sterile and already exhausted: the tradition of
'explication' and the tradition of 'ordinary language
analysis'. It may turn out that the number of fun­
damental magnitudes is infinite; or that some prop­
erties other than the ones studied in physics have
also to be taken as 'fundamental' (although it is easy
On Properties
to see how the discussion should be modified in
this case); or that there are no fundamental proper­
ties (e. g. , there is a level still more 'fundamental'
than the level of elementary particles, and a level
still more 'fundamental' than that, etc. ) If anyone
of these possibilities turns out to be real, then I am
content to leave it to some philosopher of that
future to reopen this discussion! The philosophical
point that I wish to make is that at present, when
we do not have a criterion for the identity of arbit­
rary physicalt properties that is expressible in
extensional language, we are still not all that badly
off. We do have a criterion for the identity of
physical2 properties, as we presently conceive
physical2 properties, and this criterion can be
extended to other physicalt properties just as
rapidly as we succeed in reducing the disciplines
in which the corresponding physicalt terms appear
to physics. It does not appear unreasonable that we
should be unable, in the case of physicalt properties
which have not been reduced, to answer the ques­
tion of identity or non-identity with any certainty
prior to the reduction. Of course, in some cases we
can answer it; for example, properties which are not
coextensive are certainly not identical.
8 Are Properties Dispensable?
That there are many assertions that scientists make
that we do not know how to render in a formalized
notation without something tantamount to quanti­
fication over properties is easily seen. First, con­
sider the question we have mentioned several
times: whether there are any fundamental magni­
tudes not yet discovered. Second, consider the
scientist who utters a conjecture of the form 'I
think that there is a single property, not yet dis­
covered, which is responsible for such-and-such'.
Thirdly, consider the assertion that two things have
an unspecified observable property in common.
I believe that all of these cases really reduce to the
second: the case of saying that something's having a
property P is responsible/or (or 'causes', etc. ) such­
and-such. Let us call a description of the form 'the
property P, the presence of which (in such-and­
such cases) is responsible for (or causes, etc. )
such-and-such', a causal description of a property.
Let us call a description of the form 'the property of
being P' a canonical description of a property. Then
the difficulty is basically this: that there are proper­
ties for which we know a causal description but no
canonical description. And when we wish to speak \nHilary Putnam
of such properties, an existential quantifier over all
properties seems unavoidable.
Consider the first case: the case of saying that
there is a fundamental magnitude not yet discov­
ered. This comes down to saying that there are
phenomena (which itself involves a quantifier
over observable properties! ) for which some prop­
erty P is responsible, such that the property P is not
definable (in some specified way) in terms of the
properties currently listed as 'fundamental'. Con­
sider the third case: quantifying over observable
properties. This might be handled in the case of
humans by giving a list of all observable properties
(although the impracticality of this proposal is
obvious); but we also talk of properties that other
species can observe and we cannot. But presumably
this comes down to talking of those properties P
that act as the stimuli for certain responses, and this
could presumably be construed as a reference to the
properties satisfying certain causal descriptions.
Probably, then (although I do not feel absolutely
sure of this), it is ultimately only in causal contexts
that quantification over properties is indispensable.
One proposal which has been made for handling
such references in an extensional way is this: the
assertion that 'A's having the property P at tj is the
cause of B's having the property Qat tj', for ex­
ample, is handled by saying that 'P(A, to)' is part of
an explanans, whose corresponding explanandum is
'Q(B, tj)'. The 'explanans' and the 'explanandum'
are respectively the premise and the conclusion in
an argument which meets the conditions for an
explanation as set forth in the familiar covering­
law model. Does this obviate the need for property­
talk?
I do not wish to discuss here the familiar objec­
tions to handling causal statements via the cover­
ing-law model (e. g. , Bromberger's ingenious
objection that this model would permit one to say
that the period of a pendulum's being so-and-so
caused the string to have such-and-such a length).
But even without going into the adequacy of this
model itself, two points need to be made.
First of all, the proposed analysis of causal state­
ments only works when the properties in question
are specified by canonical descriptions. When the
property hypothesized to be the cause is mentioned
only by a causal description - when part of the
explanans is that there exists a property with certain
causal efficacies - then this analysis does not apply.
Of course, one could treat such explanations as
programmatic: when the scientist says, 'I hypothe­
size that there is a property which is responsible for
such-and-such, and which obeys some law of the
following form', one could 'translate' this by 'I
propose to introduce a new primitive P into the
language of science, and I suggest that some theory
containing the term P in such-and-such a way will
turn out to be confirmed'; but this is clearly inad­
equate. (The theory might never be confirmed,
because, for example, the money to perform the
experiments was not forthcoming, and it might still
be true that there was a property P which. .. , etc. )
Or one might propose to substitute 'is true' for 'will
turn out to be confirmed'; but then one runs into
the difficulty that one is speaking of 'truth' in a
language which contains a primitive one cannot
translate into one's metalanguage (and which has
not, indeed, been given any precise meaning). Or
one might say that the scientist has not made any
statement at all; that he has just said, in effect' Let's
look for a new theory of the following kind. .. '; but
this seems just plain false.
Secondly, the covering-law theory of explana­
tion uses the term 'nomological' ('lawlike') which
has admittedly never been explicated. What are the
prospects for an explication of this term, in com­
parison with the prospects of the notion 'property'?
The following would be my program for arriving
at a more precise description of the class of 'nomo­
logical statements': first, I think that we should try
to formulate a hypothesis as to the form in which
the fundamental laws can be written. This is a
much weaker requirement than the requirement
that we actually find the laws. The same mathema­
tical form - for example, differential equations in
the 'fundamental magnitudes' of classical physics -
can be used for the laws of both classical physics
and relativity physics. If one takes 'd(x, y)' (the
distance from x to y, where x and yare spatial
points at one time) as primitive, then, indeed, this
is context-dependent in relativity physics (i. e. ,
d(x, y), or even what x's and y's are spatial points
at one time, is relative to the reference system), but
this is irrelevant to the statement of the laws, since
these are the same in all reference systems. The
change in the geometry is just a change in the laws
obeyed by d(x, y); but laws are still expressible as
differential equations valid at all points of space
and time, and involving only the fundamental mag­
nitudes. Conversely, it seems reasonable to say that
any physical relation that can be expressed as a
differential equation without boundary conditions,
valid at all points in space and time, and in just the
fundamental magnitudes, should count as a law.
Once such a form has been found, the true state-\nments of that form are defined to be the 'nomolo­
gical' statements of physics. Secondly, as soon as
onc succeeds in reducing the basic terms of some
'non-fundamental' discipline to physics, one can
define the concept 'nomological' for that discipline:
namely, a statement in the vocabulary of that dis­
cipline is nomological if and only if it is equivalent,
via the accepted reducing biconditionals, to a
nomological statement of physics.
It should not be supposed from the foregoing
that I think that 'law of nature' means 'statement
which is reducible to (or which itself is) a nomolo­
gical statement of physics'. Rather, the situation
seems to me to be as follows. Each of the scientific
disciplines has pretty much its own list of 'funda­
mental magnitudes' and its own preferred form or
forms for the expression of 'laws'. Thus the dis­
cussion in the section of this paper headed 'Funda­
mental Magnitudes' could be repeated, with
suitable modifications, for each of the other discip­
lines. In each case there seem to be certain magni­
tudes which are 'dependent', in the sense that it is
the business of the discipline (at least prima facie­
a discipline may, of course, change its mind about
what its 'business' is) to predict their time-course,
and certain magnitudes which are independent, in
the sense that they are introduced in order to help
predict the values of the dependent magnitudes. In
physics, for example, it was the position of particles
that was, above all, dependent. In economics it
would be prices and amounts of production. In
each case the scientist looks for a set of properties
including his 'dependent variables' which are 'pro­
jectible', and which will suffice for the statement of
'laws' - i. e. , in order for properties to be accepted
as the 'fundamental' ones, it must be possible to
formulate (hopefully) true general statements in
terms of those properties, which have one of the
forms recognized as a form for the expression of
laws at that stage in the development of science,
and which will predict, at least statistically, the
time-course of the dependent variables.
As we mentioned just before in the case of phy­
sics, it may be that one cannot get true general
statements which will do what one wants in the
form that one originally takes to be the preferred
form for the expression of laws. For example,
although the laws of relativity theory can be stated
as differential equations in the classical 'funda­
mental magnitudes', just as the laws of classical
physics were, the laws of quantum mechanics
require additional 'fundamental magnitudes' (e. g. ,
spin), and a more complex mathematical form - one
On Properties
has to introduce operators on Hilbert spaces. Simi­
larly, it might be that the form preferred for the
expression oflaws in, say, economics at a particular
time is too restrictive. When this turns out to be the
case, one goes to the 'next best' form, where what is
'next best' is determined by the scientists in the
field on the basis of their scientific intuition, in the
light of the mathematical methods available at
the time for their purposes.
The foregoing suggests that one might seek to
explicate the notion of a fundamental law for each
of the basic scientific disciplines, and then define a
'nomological statement' simply as a statement
which is either itself a fundamental law of one of
these disciplines, or which follows from the funda­
mental laws of one or more disciplines. However,
this approach seems to overlook something.
What is overlooked is the enormous impact that
the successes of reduction are having on our con­
cept of a natural law. Thus, suppose the Weber­
Fechner Law is true without exception (which it in
fact is not), and that it is in terms of 'fundamental
magnitudes' of psychology, and of the right form to
be a 'psychological law'. Then, if it were not for the
strong tendency in science in the direction of phy­
sicalistic reduction, there would be no question but
that it is a 'law of nature'. But let us suppose that
when we possess reduction-biconditionals for the
concepts involved, we find that the equivalent
statement of physics is not 'necessary' at the level
of physics, and that this is so because there is a
perfectly possible mutation such that, if it took
place, then the 'Weber-Fechner Law' would fail.
In that case, it seems to me that we would not
conclude that the 'Weber-Fechner Law' was a
natural law, albeit one with an unstated scope lim­
itation (although some ordinary language philo­
sophers have urged such a course), but rather that
it was not a law at all, but a good approximation to a
more complex statement which is a law. It seems to
me, in short, that a decisive condition for a state­
ment's being law is that the 'equivalent' physicalz
statement be a law of physics, although this decis­
ive condition is itself not part of the 'meaning' of
the word 'law', but rather a condition erected by
science relatively recently. (Actually, things are
much more complicated than the foregoing sug­
gests. For the reductive definitions of the basic
terms of the 'non-fundamental' disciplines are
themselves selected largely on the basis that they
enable us to derive the laws of those disciplines. On
the other hand, once a reduction has been accepted,
there is a great reluctance to change it. ) \nHilary Putnam
It is on the basis of the considerations just
reviewed that I earlier advanced the suggestion
that the following be our program for gaining a
precise description of the class of nomological
statements: to first try to specify a form in which
all the fundamental laws of physics (and only laws,
though not necessarily only fundamental ones) can
be written; and then to characterize the nomolo­
gical statements as the statements which follow
from true statements of that form together with
empirical reduction-biconditionals. (The remain­
ing part of this program - finding a suitable char­
acterization of the law of physics - say, that they all
be differential equations in the fundamental mag­
nitudes, valid at every point of space and time, at
least 'before quantization' - and finding the
empirical reduction-biconditionals - is, of course,
a task for science and not for philosophy. In a sense,
that is the whole point of this paper. )
It is evident that if this particular program for
characterizing the nomological statements ever
succeeds, so must the program for characterizing
'identity of properties'. Indeed, the program for
characterizing the nomological statements is in
one way harder of fulfillment than the program
for characterizing identity of properties, in that
the latter program requires only that we know the
reduction-biconditionals (and reduction-identities)
and the fundamental magnitudes of physics, but
not that we ever have a suitable characterization of
the form of the physical laws.
What of the more conventional program for
explicating 'nomological', as represented by the
writings of Reichenbach, Goodman, et aU This
program is to characterize fundamental laws (in
all disciplines at once) as true generalizations of a
certain form, where the specification of the form
involves not only considerations of logical form in
the usual sense, but such restrictions on the choice
of the predicates as Goodman's requirement of
projectibility. It is, further, a part of this program
to be independent of the sorts of empirical consid­
erations that I have constantly been bringing up -
one is apparently to discover a form in which all
and only laws of nature can be written (i. e. , no true
statement can have the form in question and not be
a law of nature), and to do this by reflection on the
Notes
1 John Kemeny and Paul Oppenheim, 'On reduction, '
Philosophical Studies 7 (1956), pp. 6-19.
2 Paul Oppenheim and Hilary Putnam, 'Unity of
meaning of 'law' (and, perhaps, on the methodo­
logy of science) alone. In short, what I hope scien­
tists may be able to do empirically in the next
couple of hundred years, these philosophers
would like to do a priori. Good luck to them!
It should be noted that if these philosophers
ever succeed, then they will also succeed in provid­
ing us with one criterion for the identity of proper­
ties (though not the one I have suggested): for
nomological equivalence, in spite of some counter­
intuitive consequences, is another criterion for the
identity of physical] properties that I think would
be workable (if one were willing to change one's
intuitions a bit), and that deserves further investi­
gation. Moreover, if one could 'explicate "nomolo­
gical"', then one should also be able to explicate
'reduction law', and hence to explicate the criterion
for the identity of physical] properties suggested in
this paper.
In terms of the foregoing discussion, my answer
to the question of whether quantification over
properties is indispensable goes as follows. First,
there are important locutions which are most
naturally formalized as quantifications over prop­
erties, and for which there is no obvious formaliza­
tion today in extensional language. Secondly, the
concept of a property is intimately connected with
the notions nomological, explanation, cause, etc. , and
even comes close to being definable in terms of
these notions. Yet these notions are generally
admitted to be indispensable in science, even by
those philosophers who reject analytic, necessary,
synonymy, etc. (i. e. , the notions most closely con­
nected with the other concept of property men­
tioned at the beginning of this paper, the concept
of a predicate, or the concept of a concept). The
notion is indispensable, then, in the sense in which
any notion is (i. e. , we might use different words, but
we would have to somehow be able to get the
notion expressed); and, if the discussion of the
prospects for a criterion of identity earlier in this
paper was not unduly optimistic, science is well on
its way to giving us as precise a criterion for the
identity of properties as we could ask for. Let us,
then, keep our properties, while not in any way
despising the useful work performed for us by our
classes!
science as a working hypothesis, ' in Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy f! !, Science, vol. 2 (Minneapolis: Uni­
versity of Minnesota Press, 1958), pp. 8-36. \nSydney Shoemaker
I
It is events, rather than objects or properties, that
are usually taken by philosophers to be the terms of
the causal relationship. But an event typically con­
sists of a change in the properties or relationships
of one or more objects, the latter being what Jaeg­
won Kim has called the "constituent objects" of
the event. l And when one event causes another,
this will be in part because of the properties pos­
sessed by their constituent objects. Suppose, for
example, that a man takes a pill and, as a result,
breaks out into a rash. Here the cause and effect
are, respectively, the taking of the pill and the
breaking out into a rash. Why did the first event
cause the second? Well, the pill was pencillin, and
the man was allergic to penicillin. No doubt one
could want to know more - for example, about the
biochemistry of allergies in general and this one in
particular. But there is a good sense in which what
has been said already explains why the one event
caused the other. Here the pill and the man are the
constituent objects of the cause event, and the man
is the constituent object of the effect event. Follow­
ing Kim we can also speak of events as having
"constituent properties" and "constituent times. "
In this case the constituent property of the cause
event is the relation expressed by the verb "takes",
while the constituent property of the effect event is
Originally published in Peter van Inwagen (ed. ), Time
and Cause (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1980). Reprinted by
permission of Kluwer Academic Publishers.
expressed by the predicate "breaks out into a rash".
The constituent times of the events are their times
of occurrence. Specifying the constituent objects
and properties of the cause and effect will tell us
what these events consisted in, and together with a
specification of their constituent times will serve to
identify them; but it will not, typically, explain why
the one brought about the other. We explain this by
mentioning certain properties of their constituent
objects. Given that the pill was penicillin, and that
the man was allergic to penicillin, the taking of the
pill by the man was certain, or at any rate very
likely, to result in an allergic response like a rash.
To take another example, suppose a branch is
blown against a window and breaks it. Here the
constituent objects include the branch and the
window, and the causal relationship holds because
of, among other things, the massiveness of the one
and the fragility of the other.
It would appear from this that any account of
causality as a relation between events should
involve, in a central way, reference to the proper­
ties of the constituent objects of the events. But this
should not encourage us to suppose that the notion
of causality is to be analyzed away, in Humean
fashion, in terms of some relationship between
properties - for example, in terms of regularities
in their instantiation. For as I shall try to show, the
relevant notion of a property is itself to be
explained in terms of the notion of causality in a
way that has some strikingly non-Humean conse­
quences. \nSydney Shoemaker
II
Philosophers sometimes use the term "property"
in such a way that for every predicate P true of a
thing there is a property of the thing which is
designated by the corresponding expression of the
form "being P". If"property" is used in this broad
way, every object will have innumerable properties
that are unlikely to be mentioned in any causal
explanation involving an event of which the object
is a constituent. For example, my typewriter has
the property of being over one hundred miles from
the current heavyweight boxing champion of the
world. It is not easy to think of a way in which its
having this property could help to explain why an
event involving it has a certain effect, and it seems
artificial, at best, to speak of my typewriter's acqui­
sition of this property as one of the causal effects of
the movements of the heavyweight champion.
It is natural, however, to feel that such proper­
ties are not "real" or "genuine" properties. Our
intuitions as to what are, and what are not, genuine
properties are closely related to our intuitions as to
what are, and what are not, genuine changes. A
property is genuine if and only if its acquisition or
loss by a thing constitutes a genuine change in that
thing. One criterion for a thing's having changed is
what Peter Geach calls the "Cambridge criterion. "
He formulates this as follows: "The thing called 'x'
has changed if we have 'P(x) at time t' true and 'P
(x) at time tl' false, for some interpretations of'P, '
't, ' and 'tl. ', ,2 But, as Geach points out, this gives
the result that Socrates undergoes a change when
he comes to be shorter than Theaetetus in virtue of
the latter's growth, and even that he undergoes a
change every time a fresh schoolboy comes to
admire him. Such "changes", those that intuitively
are not genuine changes, Geach calls "mere
'Cambridge' changes. " For Geach, real changes
are Cambridge changes, since they satisfy the Cam­
bridge criterion, but some Cambridge changes,
namely those that are mere Cambridge changes,
fail to be real changes. Since it is mere Cambridge
changes, rather than Cambridge changes in gen­
eral, that are to be contrasted with real or genuine
changes, I shall introduce the hyphenated expres­
sion "mere-Cambridge" to characterize these. And
I shall apply the terms "Cambridge" and "mere­
Cambridge" to properties as well as to changes.
Mere-Cambridge properties will include such
properties as being "grue" (in Nelson Goodman's
sense), historical properties like being over twenty
years old and having been slept in by George
Washington, relational properties like being fifty
miles south of a burning barn, 3 and such properties
as being such that Jimmy Carter is President of the
United States.
It is worth mentioning that in addition to distin­
guishing between real and mere-Cambridge prop­
erties and changes, we must also distinguish
between real and mere-Cambridge resemblance or
similarity, and between real and mere-Cambridge
differences. Cambridge similarities hold in virtue
of the sharing of Cambridge properties. And mere­
Cambridge similarities hold in virtue of the sharing
of mere-Cambridge properties: there is such a
similarity between all grue things; there is one
between all things fifty miles south of a burning
barn; there is one between all beds slept in by
George Washington; and there is one between all
things such that Jimmy Carter is President of the
United States. It will be recalled that the notion of
similarity, or resemblance, plays a prominent role
in Hume's account of causality. His first definition
of cause in the Treatise is "an object precedent and
contiguous to another, and where all the objects
resembling the former are plac'd in a like relation of
priority and contiguity to those objects, that re­
semble the latter. ,, 4 Hume clearly regarded the
notion of resemblance as quite unproblematical
and in no need of elucidation. 5 Yet it is plain that
he needs a narrower notion of resemblance than
that of Cambridge resemblance if his definition of
causality is to have the desired content. Cambridge
resemblances are too easily come by; any two
objects share infinitely many Cambridge proper­
ties, and so "resemble" one another in infinitely
many ways. There are also infinitely many Cam­
bridge differences between any two objects. What
Hume needs is a notion of resemblance and differ­
ence which is such that some things resemble a
given thing more than others do, and such that
some things may resemble a thing exactly (without
being numerically identical to it) while others
resemble it hardly at all. Only "real" or "genuine"
resemblance will serve his purposes. If it turns out,
as I think it does, that in order. to give a satisfactory
account of the distinction between real and mere­
Cambridge properties, changes, similarities, and
differences, we must make use of the notion of
causality, the Humean project of defining causality
in terms of regularity or "constant conjunction",
notions that plainly involve the notion of resem­
blance, is seriously undermined.
I have no wish to legislate concerning the correct
use of the terms "property", "changes", "similar", \nand so forth. It would be rash to claim that the
accepted use of the term "property" is such that
what I have classified as mere-Cambridge proper­
ties are not properties. But I do think that we have a
notion of what it is to be a property which is such
that this is so - in other words, which is such that not
every phrase of the form "being so and so" stands
for a property which something has just in case the
corresponding predicate of the form "is so and so"
is true of it, and is such that sometimes a predicate is
true of a thing, not because (or only because) of any
properties it has, but because something else, per­
haps something related to it in certain ways, has
certain properties. It is this narrow conception of
what it is to be a property, and the correlative
notions of change and similarity, that I am con­
cerned to elucidate in this essay. (I should mention
that I am concerned here only with the sorts of
properties with respect to which change is possible;
my account is not intended to apply to such proper­
ties of numbers as being even and being prime. )
III
John Locke held that "Powers make a great part of
our complex Ideas of substances. ,, 6 And there is one
passage in which Locke seems to suggest that all
qualities of substances are powers; he says, in
explanation of his usage of the term 'quality', that
"the Power to produce any Idea in our mind, I call
quali~y of the Subject wherein that power is. ,, 7 This
suggests a theory of properties, namely that prop­
erties are causal powers, which is akin to the theory
I shall be defending. As it happens, this is not
Locke's view. If one ascribed it to him on the
basis of the passage just quoted, one would have
to ascribe to him the view that all qualities are what
he called 'secondary qualities' - powers to produce
certain mental effects ('ideas') in us. But Locke
recognized the existence of powers that are not
secondary qualities, namely powers (for example,
the power in the sun to melt wax) to produce
effects in material objects. These have been called
'tertiary qualities'. And he distinguished both of
these sorts of powers from the 'primary qualities'
on which they 'depend'. Nevertheless, the view
which Locke's words unintentionally suggest is
worth considering.
What would seem to be the same view is some­
times put by saying that all properties are disposi­
tional properties. But as thus formulated, this view
seems plainly mistaken. Surely we make a distinc-
Causality and Properties
tion between dispositional and nondispositional
properties, and can mention paradigms of both
sorts. Moreover, it seems plain that what disposi­
tional properties something has, what powers it
has, depends on what nondispositional properties
it has - just as Locke thought that the powers of
things depend on their primary qualities and those
of their parts.
In fact, I believe, there are two different distinc­
tions to be made here, and these are often con­
flated. One is not a distinction between kinds of
properties at all, but rather a distinction between
kinds of predicates. Sometimes it belongs to the
meaning, or sense, of a predicate that if it is true
of a thing, then under certain circumstances the
thing will undergo certain changes or will produce
certain changes in other things. This is true of what
are standardly counted as dispositional predicates,
for example, 'flexible', 'soluble', 'malleable', 'mag­
netized', and 'poisonous'. Plainly not all predicates
are of this sort. Whether color predicates are is a
matter of controversy. But whatever we say about
this, it seems plain that predicates like 'square',
'round' and 'made of copper' are not dispositional
in this sense. There are causal powers associated
with being made of copper - for example, being an
electrical conductor. But presumably this associa­
tion is not incorporated into the meaning of the
term 'copper'.
The first distinction, then, is between different
sorts of predicates, and I think that the term 'dis­
positional' is best employed as a predicate of pre­
dicates, not of properties. A different distinction is
between powers, in a sense I am about to explain,
and the properties in virtue of which things have
the powers they have. 8 For something to have a
power, in this sense, is for it to be such that its
presence in circumstances of a particular sort will
have certain effects. 9 One can think of such a power
as a function from circumstances to effects. Thus if
something is poisonous, its presence in someone's
body will produce death or illness; in virtue of this,
being poisonous is a power. Here it is possible for
things to have the same power in virtue of having
very different properties. Suppose that one poison­
ous substance kills by affecting the heart, while
another kills by directly affecting the nervous sys­
tem and brain. They produce these different effects
in virtue of having very different chemical
compositions. They will of course differ in their
powers as well as in their properties, for one will
have the power to produce certain physiological
effects in the nervous system, while the other will \nSydney Shoemaker
have the power to produce quite different physio­
logical effects in the heart. But there is one power
they will share, in virtue of having these different
powers, namely that of producing death if ingested
by a human being. Properties here play the role,
vis-a-vis powers, that primary qualities play in
Locke; it is in virtue of a thing's properties that
the thing has the powers (Locke's secondary and
tertiary qualities) that it has.
There is a rough correspondence between this
distinction between powers and properties and the
earlier distinction between dispositional and non­
dispositional predicates. By and large, dispositional
predicates ascribe powers, while non dispositional
monadic predicates ascribe properties that are not
powers in the same sense.
IV
On the view of properties 1 want to propose, while
properties are typically not powers of the sort
ascribed by dispositional predicates, they are
related to such powers in much the way that such
powers are related to the causal effects which they
are powers to produce. Just as powers can be
thought of as functions from circumstances to
causal effects, so the properties on which powers
depend can be thought of as functions from prop­
erties to powers (or, better, as functions from sets
of properties to sets of powers). One might even say
that properties are second-order powers; they are
powers to produce first-order powers (powers to
produce certain sorts of events) if combined with
certain other properties. But the formulation 1 shall
mainly employ is this: what makes a property the
property it is, what determines its identity, is its
potential for contributing to the causal powers of
the things that have it. This means, among other
things, that if under all possible circumstances
properties X and Y make the same contribution
to the causal powers of the things that have them,
X and Yare the same property.
To illustrate this, let us take as our example of a
property the property of being 'knife-shaped' - 1
shall take this to be a highly determinate property
which belongs to a certain knife in my kitchen and
to anything else of exactly the same shape. Now if
all that 1 know about a thing is that it has this
property, 1 know nothing about what will result
from its presence in any circumstances. What has
the property of being knife-shaped could be a knife,
made of steel, but it could instead be a piece of balsa
wood, a piece of butter, or even an oddly shaped
cloud of some invisible gas. There is no power
which necessarily belongs to all and only the things
having this property. But if this property is com­
bined with the property of being knife-sized and
the property of being made of steel, the object
having these properties will necessarily have a
number of powers. It will have the power of cutting
butter, cheese, and wood, if applied to these sub­
stances with suitable pressure, and also the power
of producing various sorts of sense-impressions in
human beings under appropriate observational
conditions, and also the power of leaving an
impression of a certain shape if applied to soft
wax and then withdrawn, and so on. The combina­
tion of the property of being knife-shaped with the
property of being made of glass will result in a
somewhat different set of powers, which will over­
lap with the set which results from its combination
with the property of being made of steel. Likewise
with its combination with the property of being
made of wood, the property of being made of
butter, and so on.
Let us say that an object has power P condition­
ally upon the possession of the properties in set Q if
it has some property r such that having the proper­
ties in Q together with r is causally sufficient for
having P, while having the properties in Q is not by
itself causally sufficient for having P. Thus, for
example, a knife-shaped object has the power of
cutting wood conditionally upon being knife-sized
and made of steel; for it is true of knife-shaped
things, but not of things in general, that if they
are knife-sized and made of steel, they will have the
power to cut wood. When a thing has a power
conditionally upon the possession of certain prop­
erties, let us say that this amounts to its having a
conditional power. Our knife-shaped object has the
conditional power of being able to cut wood if
knife-sized and made of steel. The identity condi­
tion for conditional powers is as follows: if A is the
conditional power of having power P conditionally
upon having the properties in set Q and B is the
conditional power of having P' conditionally upon
having the properties in set Q', then A is identical
to B just in case P is identical to P' and Q is
identical to Q'. Having introduced this notion of
a conditional power, we can express my view by
saying that properties are clusters of conditional
powers. (I shall count powers simpliciter as a special
case of conditional powers. ) 1 have said that the
identity of a property is determined by its causal
potentialities, the contributions it is capable of \nmaking to the causal powers of things that have it.
And the causal potentialities that are essential to a
property correspond to the conditional powers that
make up the cluster with which the property can be
identified; for a property to have a causal potenti­
ality is for it to be such that whatever has it has a
certain conditional power.
This account is intended to capture what is
correct in the view that properties just are powers,
or that all properties are dispositional, while
acknowledging the truth of a standard objection
to that view, namely that a thing's powers or dis­
positions are distinct from, because 'grounded in',
its intrinsic properties. 10
Before I give my reasons for holding this view, I
should mention one prima facie objection to it.
Presumably the property of being triangular and
the property of being trilateral do not differ in the
contributions they make to the causal powers of the
things that have them, yet it is natural to say that
these, although necessarily coextensive, are differ­
ent properties. It seems to me, however, that what
we have good reason for regarding as distinct are
not these properties, as such, but rather the con­
cepts of triangularity and trilaterality, and the
meanings of the expressions 'triangular' and
'trilateral'. If we abandon, as I think we should,
the idea that properties are the meanings of
predicate expressions, and if we are careful to
distinguish concepts from what they are concepts
of, I see no insuperable obstacle to regarding the
properties themselves as identical.
v
My reasons for holding this theory of properties
are, broadly speaking, epistemological. Only if
some causal theory of properties is true, I believe,
can it be explained how properties are capable of
engaging our knowledge, and our language, in the
way they do.
We know and recognize properties by their
effects, or, more precisely, by the effects of the
events which are the activations of the causal
powers which things have in virtue of having the
properties. This happens in a variety of ways.
Observing something is being causally influenced
by it in certain ways. If the causal potentialities
involved in the possession of a property are such
that there is a fairly direct causal connection
between the possession of it by an object and the
sensory states of an observer related to that object
Causality and Properties
in certain ways, e. g. , looking at it in good light, we
say that the property itself is observable. If the
relationship is less direct, e. g. , if the property can
affect the sensory states of the observer only by
affecting the properties of something else which
the observer observes, a scientific instrument, say,
we speak of inferring that the thing has the prop­
erty from what we take to be the effects of its
possession. In other cases we conclude that some­
thing has a property because we know that it has
other properties which we know from other cases to
be correlated with the one in question. But the
latter way of knowing about the properties of
things is parasitic on the earlier ways; for unless
the instantiation of the property had, under some
circumstances, effects from which its existence
could be concluded, we could never discover laws
or correlations that would enable us to infer its
existence from things other than its effects.
Suppose that the identity of properties consisted
of something logically independent of their causal
potentialities. Then it ought to be possible for there
to be properties that have no potential whatever for
contributing to causal powers, i. e. , are such that
under no conceivable circumstances will their pos­
session by a thing make any difference to the way
the presence of that thing affects other things or to
the way other things affect it. Further, it ought to
be possible that there be two or more different
properties that make, under all possible circum­
stances, exactly the same contribution to the causal
powers of the things that have them. Further, it
ought to be possible that the potential of a property
for contributing to the production of causal powers
might change over time, so that, for example, the
potential possessed by property A at one time is the
same as that possessed by property B at a later time,
and that possessed by property B at the earlier time
is the same as that possessed by property A at the
later time. Thus a thing might undergo radical
change with respect to its properties without
undergoing any change in its causal powers, and a
thing might undergo radical change in its causal
powers without undergoing any change in the
properties that underlie these powers.
The supposition that these possibilities are
genuine implies, not merely (what might seem
harmless) that various things might be the case
without its being in any way possible for us to
know that they are, but also that it is impossible
for us to know various things which we take our­
selves to know. If there can be properties that have
no potential for contributing to the causal powers \nSydney Shoemaker
of the things that have them, then nothing could be
good evidence that the overall resemblance
between two things is greater than the overall
resemblance between two other things; for even if
A and B have closely resembling effects on our
senses and our instruments while C and D do not,
it might be (for all we know) that C and D share
vastly more properties of the causally impotent
kind than do A and B. Worse, if two properties
can have exactly the same potential for contribut­
ing to causal powers, then it is impossible for us
even to know (or have any reason for believing) that
two things resemble one another by sharing a single
property. Moreover, if the properties and causal
potentialities of a thing can vary independently of
one another, then it is impossible for us to know (or
have any good reason for believing) that something
has retained a property over time, or that some­
thing has undergone a change with respect to the
properties that underlie its causal powers. On these
suppositions, there would be no way in which a
particular property could be picked out so as to
have a name attached to it; and even if, per impossi­
bile, a name did get attached to a property, it would
be impossible for anyone to have any justification
for applying the name on particular occasions.
It may be doubted whether the view under attack
has these disastrous epistemological consequences.
Surely, it may be said, one can hold that it is a
contingent matter that particular properties have
the causal potentialities they have, and nevertheless
hold, compatibly with this, that there are good
theoretical reasons for thinking that as a matter of
fact different properties differ in their causal
potentialities, and that any given property retains
the same potentialities over time. For while it is
logically possible that the latter should not be so,
according to the contingency view, the simplest
hypothesis is that it is so; and it is reasonable
to accept the simplest hypothesis compatible with
the data.
Whatever may be true in general of appeals to
theoretical simplicity, this one seems to me extre­
mely questionable. For here we are not really
dealing with an explanatory hypothesis at all. If
the identity of properties is made independent of
their causal potentialities, then in what sense do we
explain sameness or difference of causal potential­
ities by positing sameness or difference of proper­
ties? There are of course cases in which we explain
a constancy in something by positing certain
underlying constancies in its properties. It is genu­
inely explanatory to say that something retained
the same causal power over time because certain
of its properties remained the same. And this pro­
vides, ceteris paribus, a simpler, or at any rate more
plausible, explanation of the constancy than one
that says that the thing first had one set of under­
lying properties and then a different set, and that
both sets were sufficient to give it that particular
power. For example, if the water supply was poi­
sonous all day long, it is more plausible to suppose
that this was due to the presence in it of one
poisonous substance all day rather than due to its
containing cyanide from morning till noon and
strychnine from noon till night. But in such cases
we presuppose that the underlying property con­
stancies carry with them constancies in causal
potentialities, and it is only on this presupposition
that positing the underlying constancies provides
the simplest explanation of the constancy to be
explained. Plainly this presupposition cannot be
operative if what the 'inference to the best expla­
nation' purports to explain is, precisely, that same­
ness of property goes with sameness of causal
potentialities. It is not as if a property had the
causal potentialities in question as a result of having
yet other causal potentialities, the constancy of the
latter explaining the constancy of the former. This
disassociation of property identity from identity of
causal potentiality is really an invitation to elim­
inate reference to properties from our explanatory
hypotheses altogether; if it were correct, then we
could, to use Wittgenstein's metaphor, 'divide
through' by the properties and leave the explanat­
ory power of what we say about things untouched.
It might be objected that even if my arguments
establish that the causal potentialities of a genuine
property cannot change over time, they do not
establish that these causal potentialities are essen­
tial to that property, in the sense of belonging to it
in all possible worlds. The immutability of proper­
ties with respect to their causal potentialities, it
might be said, is simply a consequence of the
immutability of laws - of the fact that it makes no
sense to speak of a genuine law holding at one time
and not at another. And from the fact that the laws
governing a property cannot change over time, it
does not follow, it may be said, that the property
cannot be governed by different laws in different
possible worlds.
Let me observe first of all that in conceding that
the immutability of the causal potentialities of
genuine properties is a consequence of the immut­
ability of laws, the objection concedes a large part
of what I want to maintain. It is not true in general \nof mere-Cambridge properties that their causal
potentialities cannot change over time; for example,
this is not true of grueness on the Barker-Achinstein
definition of grue, where something is grue just in
case it is green and the time is before T (say AD
2000) or it is blue and the time is T or afterwards. 11
That genuine properties are marked off from mere­
Cambridge properties by their relation to causal
laws (and that it is nonsense to speak of a world in
which it is the mere-Cambridge properties rather
than the genuine ones that are law-governed in a
way that makes their causal potentialities immuta­
ble) is a central part of my view.
There is, moreover, a prima facie case for saying
that the immutability of the causal potentialities of
a property does imply their essentiality; or in other
words, that if they cannot vary across time, they
also cannot vary across possible worlds. Most of us
do suppose that particulars can (or do) have differ­
ent properties in different possible worlds. We
suppose, for example, that in some possible worlds
I am a plumber rather than a philosopher, and that
in some possible worlds my house is painted yellow
rather than white. But it goes with this that par­
ticulars can change their properties over time. It is
possible that I, the very person who is writing this
essay, might have been a plumber, because there is
a possible history in which I start with the proper­
ties (in this case relational as well as intrinsic)
which I had at some time in my actual history,
and undergo a series of changes which result in
my eventually being a plumber. If I and the world
were never such that it was then possible for me to
become a plumber, it would not be true that I might
have been a plumber, or (in other words) that there
is a possible world in which I am one. There is, in
short, a close linkage between identity across time
and identity across possible worlds; the ways in
which a given thing can be different in different
possible worlds depend on the ways in which such a
thing can be different at different times in the
actual world. But now let us move from the case
of particulars to that of properties. There is no such
thing as tracing a property through a series of
changes in its causal potentialities - not if it is a
genuine property, i. e. , one of the sort that figures in
causal laws. And so there is no such thing as a
possible history in which a property starts with
the set of causal potentialities it has in the actual
world and ends with a different set. To say the
least, this calls into question the intelligibility of
the suggestion that the very properties we desig­
nate with words like 'green', 'square', 'hard', and so
Causality and Properties
on, might have had different causal potentialities
than they in fact have.
However, this last argument is not conclusive.
My earlier arguments, if sound, establish that there
is an intimate connection between the identity of a
property and its causal potentialities. But it has not
yet been decisively established that all of the causal
potentialities of a property are essential to it. The
disastrous epistemological consequences of the
contingency view would be avoided if for each
property we could identify a proper subset of its
causal potentialities that are essential to it and
constitutive of it, and this would permit some of a
property's causal potentialities, those outside the
essential cluster, to belong to it contingently, and
so not belong to it in some other possible worlds.
There would, in this case, be an important differ­
ence between the trans-world identity of properties
and that of particulars - and it is a difference which
there is in my own view as well. If, as I believe, the
assertion that a certain particular might have had
different properties than it does in the actual world
(that in some other possible world it does have
those properties) implies that there is a possible
history 'branching off' from the history of the
actual world in which it acquires those properties,
this is because there is, putting aside historical
properties and 'identity properties' (like being
identical to Jimmy Carter), no subset of the proper­
ties of such a thing which constitutes an individual
essence of it, i. e. , is such that, in any possible
world, having the properties in that subset is neces­
sary and sufficient for being that particular thing.
To put this otherwise, the reason why the possible
history in which the thing has different properties
must be a branching-off from the history of the
actual world is that the individual essence of a
particular thing must include historical properties.
Now I am not in a position to object to the sugges­
tion that properties differ from particulars in hav­
ing individual essences which do not include
historical properties and which are sufficient for
their identification across possible worlds; for I
hold that the totality of a property's causal poten­
tialities constitutes such an individual essence. So a
possible alternative to my view is one which holds
that for each property there is a proper subset of its
causal potentialities that constitutes its individual
essence. Such a view has its attractions, and is
compatible with much of what I say in this essay;
in particular, it is compatible with the claim that
within any possible world properties are identical
just in case they have the same causal potentialities. \nSydney Shoemaker
But I shall argue in section I x that this view is
unworkable, and that there is no acceptable alter­
native to the view that all of the causal potentialities
of a property are essential to it.
VI
As was intended, my account of properties does not
apply to what I have called mere-Cambridge prop­
erties. When my table acquired the property of
being such that Gerald Ford is President of the
United States, which it did at the time Nixon
resigned from the presidency, this presumably
had no effect on its causal powers. Beds that were
slept in by George Washington may command a
higher price than those that lack this historical
property, but presumably this is a result, not of
any causal potentialities in the beds themselves, but
of the historical beliefs and interests of those who
buy and sell them. And grueness, as defined by
Goodman, is not associated in the way greenness
and blueness are with causal potentialities. (In this
sense, which differs from that invoked in section V,
something is grue at a time just in case it is green at
that time and is first examined before T, say, AD
2000, or is blue at that time and is not first exam­
ined before T. ) It can happen that the only differ­
ence between something that is grue and something
that is not is that one of them has and the other
lacks the historical property of being (or having
been) first examined before the time T mentioned
in Goodman's definition of grue; and presumably
this does not in itself make for any difference in
causal potentialities. It can also happen that two
things share the property of being grue in virtue of
having properties that have different potentialities
- that is, in virtue of one of them being green (and
examined before T) and the other being blue (and
not so examined).
There is an epistemological way of distinguish­
ing genuine and mere-Cambridge properties that is
prima facie plausible. If I wish to determine
whether an emerald is green at t, the thing to do,
if I can manage it, is to examine the emerald at t.
But examination of a table will not tell me it is such
that Gerald Ford is President of the United States,
or whether it is fifty miles south of a burning barn.
And if I am ignorant of the date, or if t is after T
(the date in Goodman's definition), examination of
an emerald will not tell me whether it is grue.
Likewise, while scrutiny of a bed may reveal a
plaque claiming that it was slept in by George
Washington, it will not tell me whether this claim
is true. Roughly, if a question about whether a
thing has a property at a place and time concerns
a genuine nonrelational property, the question is
most directly settled by observations and tests in
the vicinity of that place and time, while if it con­
cerns a mere-Cambridge property it may be most
directly settled by observations and tests remote
from that place and time, and observations and
tests made at that place and time will either be
irrelevant (as in the case of the property of being
such that Jimmy Carter is President) or insufficient
to settle the question (as in the case of grue).
It would be difficult to make this into a precise
and adequate criterion of genuineness of property,
and I do not know whether this could be done. But
I think that to the extent that it is adequate, its
adequacy is explained by my account of properties
in terms of causal powers. Properties reveal their
presence in actualizations of their causal potential­
ities, a special case of this being the perception of a
property. And the most immediate and revealing
effects of an object's having a property at a par­
ticular place and time are effects that occur in the
immediate vicinity of that place and time. To be
sure, we cannot rule out on purely philosophical
grounds the possibility of action at a spatial and/ or
temporal distance. And the more prevalent such
action is, the less adequate the proposed epistemo­
logical criterion will be. But there do seem to be
conceptual limitations on the extent to which
causal action can be at a spatial or temporal dis­
tance. It is doubtful, to say the least, whether there
could be something whose causal powers are all
such that whenever any of them is activated the
effects of its activation are spatially remote from
the location of the thing at that time, or occur at
times remote from the time of activation.
Causation and causal powers are as much
involved in the verification of ascriptions of mere­
Cambridge properties as in the verification of
ascriptions of genuine ones. But in the case of
mere-Cambridge properties some of the operative
causal powers will either belong to something other
than the object to which the property is ascribed, or
will belong to that object at a time other than that at
which it has that property. Thus if I verify that a
man has the property of being fifty miles south of a
burning barn, it will be primarily the causal powers
of the barn, and of the intervening stretch of land
(which, we will suppose, I measure), rather than
the causal powers of the man, that will be respons­
ible for my verifying observations. \nVII
It will not have escaped notice that the account of
properties and property identity I have offered
makes free use of the notion of a property and the
notion of property identity. It says, in brief, that
properties are identical, whether in the same poss­
ible world or in different ones, just in case their
coinstantiation with the same properties gives rise
to the same powers. This is, if anything, even more
circular than it looks. For it crucially involves the
notion of sameness of powers, and this will have to
be explained in terms of sameness of circumstances
and sameness of effects, the notions of which both
involve the notion of sameness of property. And of
course there was essential use of the notion of a
property in my explanation of the notion of a con­
ditional power.
It is worth observing that there is a distinction
between kinds of powers that corresponds to the
distinction, mentioned earlier, between genuine
and mere-Cambridge properties.
12
Robert Boyle's
famous example of the key can be used to illustrate
this.
13
A particular key on my key chain has the
power of opening locks of a certain design. It also
has the power of opening my front door. It could
lose the former power only by undergoing what we
would regard as real change, for example, a change
in its shape. But it could lose the latter without
undergoing such a change; it could so do in virtue
of the lock on my door being replaced by one of a
different design. Let us say that the former is an
intrinsic power and the latter a mere-Cambridge
power. It is clear that in my account of properties
the word 'power' must refer only to intrinsic
powers. For if it refers to mere-Cambridge powers
as well, then what seems clearly to be a mere­
Cambridge property of my key, namely being
such that my door has a lock of a certain design,
will make a determinate contribution to its having
the powers it has, and so will count as a genuine
property of it. But it seems unlikely that we could
explain the distinction between intrinsic and mere­
Cambridge powers without making use of the
notion of a genuine change and that of a genuine
property. And so again my account of the notion of
a property in terms of the notion of a power can be
seen to be circular.
How much do these circularities matter? Since
they are, I think, unavoidable, they preclude a
reductive analysis of the notion of a property in
terms of the notion of causality. But they by no
means render my account empty. The claim that
Causality and Properties
the causal potentialities of a property are essential
to it, and that properties having the same causal
potentialities are identical, is certainly not made
vacuous by the fact that the explanation of the
notion of a causal potentiality, or a conditional
power, must invoke the notion of a property. As I
see it, the notion of a property and the notion of a
causal power belong to a system of internally
related concepts, no one of which can be explicated
without the use of the others. Other members of
the system are the concept of an event, the concept
of similarity, and the concept of a persisting sub­
stance. It can be worthwhile, as a philosophical
exercise, to see how far we can go in an attempt
to reduce one of these concepts to others - for both
the extent of our success and the nature of our
failures can be revealing about the nature of the
connections between the concepts. But ultimately
such attempts must fail. The goal of philosophical
analysis, in dealing with such concepts, should not
be reductive analysis but rather the charting of
internal relationships. And it is perfectly possible
for a "circular" analysis to illuminate a network of
internal relationships and have philosophically
interesting consequences.
VIII
According to the theory of properties I am propos­
ing, all of the causal potentialities possessed by a
property at any time in the actual world are essen­
tial to it and so belong to it at all times and in all
possible worlds. This has a very strong conse­
quence, namely that causal necessity is just a spe­
cies of logical necessity. If the introduction into
certain circumstances of a thing having certain
properties causally necessitates the occurrence of
certain effects, then it is impossible, logically
impossible, that such an introduction could fail to
have such an effect, and so logically necessary that
it has it. To the extent that causal laws can be
viewed as propositions describing the causal poten­
tialities of properties, it is impossible that the same
properties should be governed by different causal
laws in different possible worlds, for such proposi­
tions will be necessarily true when true at all.
It is not part ofthis theory, however, that causal
laws are analytic or knowable a priori. I suppose
that it is analytic that flexible things bend under
suitable pressure, that poisonous things cause
injury to those for whom they are poisonous, and
so on. But I do not think that it is analytic that \nSydney Shoemaker
copper is an electrical conductor, or that knife­
shaped things, if knife-sized and made of steel,
are capable of cutting butter. Nor does it follow
from the claim that such truths are necessary that
they are analytic. Kripke has made a compelling
case for the view that there are propositions that are
necessary a posteriori, that is, true in all possible
worlds but such that they can only be known
empirically. 14 And such, according to my theory,
is the status of most propositions describing the
causal potentialities of properties. The theory can
allow that our knowledge of these potentialities is
empirical, and that it is bound to be only partial.
But in order to show how, in the theory, such
empirical knowledge is possible, I must now bring
out an additional way in which the notion of caus­
ality is involved in the notion of a property.
One of the formulations of my theory says that
every property is a cluster of conditional powers.
But the converse does not seem to me to hold; not
every cluster of conditional powers is a property. If
something is both knife-shaped and made of wax,
then it will have, among others, the following con­
ditional powers: the power of being able to cut
wood conditionally upon being knife-sized and
made of steel (this it has in virtue of being knife­
shaped), and the power of being malleable condi­
tionally upon being at a temperature of lOO°F (this
it has in virtue of being made of wax). Intuitively,
these are not common components of any single
property. By contrast, the various conditional
powers a thing has in virtue of being knife-shaped
- for example, the power of being able to cut wood
conditionally upon being knife-sized and made of
steel, the power of being able to cut butter condi­
tionally upon being knife-sized and made of wood,
the power of having a certain visual appearance
conditionally upon being green, the power of hav­
ing a certain other visual appearance conditionally
upon being red, and so on - are all constituents of a
single property, namely the property of being
knife-shaped. The difference, I think, is that in
the one case the set of conditional powers has,
while in the other it lacks, a certain kind of causal
unity. I shall now try to spell out the nature of this
unity.
Some subsets of the conditional powers which
make up a genuine property will be such that it is a
consequence of causal laws that whatever has any
member of the subset necessarily has all of its
members. Thus, for example, something has the
power of leaving a six-inch-long knife-shaped
impression in soft wax conditionally upon being
six inches long if and only if it has the power of
leaving an eight-inch-long knife-shaped impres­
sion in soft wax conditionally upon being eight
inches long. Now some conditional powers will
belong to more than one property cluster; thus,
for example, there are many different-shape prop­
erties that give something the power of being able
to cut wood conditionally upon being made of steel.
But where a conditional power can be shared by
different properties in this way, it will belong to a
particular property cluster only if there is another
member of that cluster which is such that it is a
consequence of causal laws that whatever has that
other member has the conditional power in ques­
tion. And at the core of each cluster there will be
one or more conditional powers which are such that
as a consequence of causal laws whatever has any of
them has all of the conditional powers in the clus­
ter. For example, if something has, conditionally
upon being made of steel, the power of leaving a
knife-shaped impression in soft wax, then it cannot
fail to be knife-shaped, and so cannot fail to have all
of the other conditional powers involved in being
knife-shaped. I suggest, then, that conditional
powers X and Y belong to the same property if
and only if it is a consequence of causal laws that
either (I) whatever has either of them has the other,
or (2) there is some third conditional power such
that whatever has it has both X and Y.
Returning now to the conditional power of being
able to cut wood conditionally upon being made of
steel and the conditional power of being malleable
conditionally upon being at a temperature of
lOO°F, it seems to me that these do not qualify
under the proposed criterion as belonging to a
common property. It is obviously not true that
whatever has one of them must have the other.
And it does not appear that there is any third
conditional power which is such that whatever
has it must have the two conditional powers in
question.
If I am right in thinking that the conditional
powers constituting a property must be causally
unified in the way indicated, it is not difficult to
see how knowledge of the causal potentialities of
properties can develop empirically. The behavior
of objects, that is, the displays of their powers, will
reveal that they have certain conditional powers.
Once it is discovered that certain conditional
powers are connected in a lawlike way, we can use
these to 'fix the reference' of a property term to the
cluster containing those conditional powers and
whatever other conditional powers are related to \nthem in the appropriate lawlike relationships. IS
And we can then set about to determine empirically
what the other conditional powers in the cluster
are.
IX
As I observed earlier, my theory appears to have
the consequence that causal laws are logically
necessary, and that causal necessity is just a species
of logical necessity. While to some this may be an
attractive consequence, to many it will seem coun­
terintuitive. It does seem to most of us that we can
conceive of possible worlds which resemble the
actual world in the kinds of properties that are
instantiated in them, but differ from it in the causal
laws that obtain. My theory must maintain either
that we cannot really conceive of this or that con­
ceivability is not proof of logical possibility.
Anyone who finds both of these alternatives
unacceptable, but is persuaded by the arguments
in section V that the identity of properties is deter­
mined by their causal potentialities, will look for
ways of reconciling that conclusion with the view
that there can be worlds in which some of the
causal laws are different from, and incompatible
with, those that obtain in the actual world. I want
now to consider two ways in which one might
attempt to achieve such a reconciliation. First, it
might be held that while propositions describing
the causal potentialities of properties are neces­
sarily true if true at all, there are other lawlike
propositions, namely those asserting lawlike con­
nections between conditional powers, which are
contingent and so true in some possible worlds
and false in others. According to this view, when
we seem to be conceiving of worlds in which the
same properties are governed by different laws,
what we are really conceiving of are worlds in
which the same conditional powers stand to one
another in different lawlike connections than they
do in the actual world, and so are differently clus­
tered into properties. Second, it might be held that
my condition for the identity of properties across
possible worlds is too strict. The theory I have
advanced might be called the 'total cluster theory';
it identifies a property with a cluster containing all
of the conditional powers which anything has in
virtue of having that property, and maintains that
in any possible world anything that has that prop­
erty must have all of the members of that cluster.
One might attempt to replace this with a 'core
Causality and Properties
cluster theory', which identifies the property with
some proper subset of the conditional powers
something has in virtue of having that property.
On this theory, it is only some of the causal poten­
tialities possessed by a property in the actual world,
namely those constituted by the conditional powers
in its core cluster, that are essential to it - so it is
possible for the same property to have somewhat
different causal potentialities in different possible
worlds, because of different laws relating the con­
ditional powers in its core cluster with other
conditional powers.
I do not believe, however, that either of these
attempted reconciliations is successful. The first
involves the suggestion that it is at least sometimes
a contingent matter whether two conditional
powers belong to the same property, and hence
that there could be a world in which some of the
same conditional powers are instantiated as in this
world, but in which, owing to the holding of dif­
ferent laws, these are differently clustered into
properties. The difficulty with this is that the spe­
cification of a conditional power always involves, in
two different ways, reference to properties that are
instantiated in our world and which, ex hypothesi,
would not be instantiated in the alternative world
in question. It involves reference to the properties
on which the power is conditional, and also to the
properties in the instantiation of which the exercise
of the power would result. For example, one of the
conditional powers in the property of being knife­
shaped is the power, conditionally upon being
made of steel, of leaving a knife-shaped impression
if pressed into soft wax and then withdrawn. This
conditional power, although not by itself identical
to the property of being knife-shaped, could not be
exercised without that property being instantiated.
Neither could it be exercised without the property
of being made of steel being instantiated. And a
conditional power could not be instantiated in a
world in which the causal laws would not allow an
exercise of it. So in general, a conditional power
could not be instantiated in a world in which the
causal laws did not permit the instantiation of the
properties whose instantiation would be involved
in its instantiation or in its exercise.
Nothing I have said precludes the possibility of
there being worlds in which the causal laws are
different from those that prevail in this world.
But it seems to follow from my account of property
identity that, if the laws are different, then the
properties will have to be different as well. And it
does not appear that we have the resources for \nSydney Shoemaker
describing a world in which the properties that can
be instantiated differ from what I shall call the
'actual world properties', that is, those that can be
instantiated in the actual world. We have just seen
that we cannot do this by imagining the conditional
powers that exist in this world to be governed by
different laws, and so to be differently grouped into
properties.
It might seem that we can at least imagine a
world in which some of the properties that can be
instantiated are actual world properties while
others are not. But a specification of the causal
potentialities of one property will involve mention
of other properties, a specification of the causal
potentialities of those other properties will involve
mention of still other properties, and so on. If there
could be a world in which some but not all of the
actual world properties can be instantiated, this
could only be because those properties were cau­
sally insulated, as it were, from the rest - that is,
were such that their causal potentialities could be
fully specified without reference to the rest and
vice versa. It seems unlikely that any proper subset
of the actual world properties is causally insulated
in this way - and any that are insulated from all
properties we know about are thereby insulated
from our knowledge and our language. But could
there be a world in which the properties that can be
instantiated include all of the actual world proper­
ties plus some others? This would be possible only
if the two sets of properties, the actual world prop­
erties and the properties that cannot be instantiated
in the actual world, were causally insulated from
one another. And because of this, it would be
impossible for us to say anything about the proper­
ties that cannot be instantiated in the actual world;
for what we can describe is limited to what can be
specified in terms of properties that can be so
instantiated. What we could describe of such a
world would have to be compatible with the laws
that specify the causal potentialities of the actual
world properties and, what we have found to be
inseparable from these, the laws describing the
lawlike connections between the conditional
powers that constitute these properties.
Now let us consider the second attempt to
reconcile the claim that the identity of a property
is determined by its causal potentialities with the
apparent conceivability of worlds in which the
causal laws that obtain are different from, and
incompatible with, those that obtain in the actual
world. This involves the proposal that we adopt a
'core cluster theory' in place of the 'total cluster
theory', and make the identity of a property depend
on a proper subset, rather than on the totality, of
the causal potentialities it has in the actual world.
Like the first attempted reconciliation, this
involves the idea that at least some of the lawlike
connections between conditional powers hold only
contingently; it is this that is supposed to make it
possible for the composition of the total cluster
associated with a property to differ from one poss­
ible world to another, owing to different condi­
tional powers being causally linked with the
conditional powers in the property's essential core
cluster. But it would seem that the lawlike connec­
tions between those conditional powers included in
the essential core cluster will have to hold oflogical
necessity, i. e. , in all possible worlds. For if they
held only contingently, then in some possible
worlds they would not hold. In such a world, the
individual conditional powers which in the actual
world constitute the essential core of the property
could be instantiated, but the property itself could
not be instantiated. Even if these conditional
powers could be instantiated together in such a
world, their coinstantiation would not count as
the instantiation of a property, and so of that prop­
erty, since the requisite causal unity would be
lacking. But I have already argued, in discussing
the first attempted reconciliation, that it is not
possible that there should be a world in which
conditional powers that are instantiated in the
actual world can be instantiated while actual
world properties cannot be instantiated.
But if, as I have just argued, the lawlike connec­
tions between conditional powers within the essen­
tial core cluster will have to hold of logical
necessity, then we are faced with a problem.
Some lawlike connections between conditional
powers will hold contingently (according to the
core cluster theory), while others will hold as a
matter of logical necessity. How are we to tell
which are which? It does not appear that we can
distinguish these lawlike connections epistemolo­
gically, i. e. , by the way in which they arc known.
For if, as I am assuming, there are truths that are
necessary a posteriori, the fact that a connection is
discovered empirically is no guarantee that it does
not hold necessarily. Nor can it be said that we
identify the necessary connections by the fact that
they hold between conditional powers belonging to
some property's essential core cluster; for this pre­
supposes that we have some way of identifying
essential core clusters, and how are we to do this
if we do not already know which connections \nbetween conditional powers are necessary and
which are contingent?
It might be suggested that what constitutes a set
of conditional powers as constituting an essential
core cluster is just its being a lawlike truth that
whatever has any of its members has all of them,
and that it is by discovering such lawlike truths that
we identify essential core clusters. Given that the
lawlike connections between members of essential
core clusters hold of logical necessity, this would
amount to the claim that if two conditional powers
are so related that the possession of either of them
is both causally necessary and causally sufficient for
the possession of the other, then the lawlike con­
nection between them holds as a matter of logical
necessity, while if the possession of one is causally
sufficient but not causally necessary for the posses­
sion of the other, then the lawlike connection may
be contingent. I have no knock-down argument
against this view, but it seems to me implausible.
If it is possible for it to be a contingent fact that the
possession of one conditional power is causally
sufficient for the possession of another, then it
seems to me that it ought to be possible for it to
be a contingent fact that the possession of one
conditional power is both causally necessary and
causally sufficient for the possession of another;
that is, it ought to be possible for it to be contin­
gently true of two conditional powers that the
possession of either of them is causally sufficient
for the possession of the other. So if we deny that
the latter is a possibility, we should also deny
that the former is.
It may be suggested that it is our linguistic con­
ventions that make certain causal potentialities
essential to a property, and so determine the
makeup of a property's essential core cluster. But
this cannot be so. It may in some cases belong to the
conventionally determined sense of a property
word that the property it designates has certain
causal potentialities; while I think there is no need
for property words to have such Fregean senses,
and think that such words often function much as
Kripke thinks natural kind terms do, I have no wish
to deny that a property word can have a conven­
tionally determined sense. But there is only so
much that linguistic conventions can do; and one
thing they cannot do is to dictate to reality, creating
lawlike connections and de re necessities. Having
discovered that certain conditional powers neces­
sarily go together, and so are appropriately related
for being part of an essential core cluster, we can
lay down the convention that a certain word
Causality and Properties
applies, in any possible world, to those and only
those things having those conditional powers. But
this leaves open the question of how we know that
the conditional powers in question are appropri­
ately related - that they must go together in any
world in which either can be instantiated. And here
appeal to convention cannot help us.
It begins to appear that if we hold that some
lawlike connections are contingent, there is no
way in which we could discover which of the law­
like connections between conditional powers are
logically necessary and which are logically contin­
gent, and so no way in which we could identify the
essential core clusters of properties. This means
that when we conceive, or seem to be conceiving,
of a possible world in which the actual world prop­
erties are governed by somewhat different laws,
there is no way in which we can discover whether
we are conceiving of a genuine possibility. All that
any of our empirical investigations can tell us is
what lawlike connections obtain in the actual
world; and without some way of telling which of
these connections are contingent and which neces­
sary, this gives us no information about what can be
the case in other possible worlds. This makes all
talk about what logically might be and might have
been completely idle, except where questions of
logical possibility can be settled a priori. If the
core cluster theory makes the modal status of causal
connections, their being necessary or contingent,
epistemologically indeterminate in this way, it does
not really save the intuitions which lead us to resist
the total cluster theory, according to which all such
connections are necessary. Unless we are prepared
to abandon altogether the idea that there is a 'fact of
the matter' as to whether there are logically poss­
ible circumstances in which a given property would
make a certain contribution to the causal powers of
its subject, I think we must accept the total cluster
theory and its initially startling consequence that
all of the causal potentialities of a property are
essential to it.
x
If, as my theory implies, there are no situations that
are logically but not causally possible, how is it that
we are apparently able to conceive or imagine such
situations? Saul Kripke has suggested one answer
to a very similar question. 16 He holds that it is a
necessary truth that heat is molecular motion, but
recognizes that it seems as if we can imagine heat \nSydney Shoemaker
turning out to be something other than this.
According to Kripke, this appearance of conceiv­
ability is something to be explained away, and he
explains it away by claiming that the seeming con­
ceivability of heat turning out not to be molecular
motion consists in the actual conceivability of
something else: namely, of sensations of a certain
sort, those that we in fact get from heat, turning out
to be caused by something other than molecular
motion. The latter really is conceivable, he holds,
and for understandable reasons we mistake its con­
ceivability for the conceivability of something that
is in fact not conceivable.
But if conceivability is taken to imply possibility,
this account commits one to the possibility that the
sensations we get from heat might standardly be
caused by something other than molecular motion
(and so something other than heat); more than that,
it commits one to the possibility that this might be
so and that these sensations might be related to
other sensations and sense experiences in all the
ways they are (or have been to date) in the actual
world. And since the property of having such sen­
sations is one that is actualized in this world, this
would commit one, in my view, to the claim that it
is compatible with the laws of nature that prevail in
the actual world that these sensations should be so
caused and so related to other experiences. Now
this claim may be true - if 'may be' is used
epistemically. But it is hard to see how we are
entitled to be confident that it is. For might there
not be laws, unknown to us, that make it impossible
that the standard cause of these sensations should
be anything other than it is, given the way they are
related to the rest of our experience? If the seeming
conceivability of heat turning out to be something
other than molecular motion does not prove the
actual possibility of this, why should the seeming
conceivability of certain sensations being caused by
something other than molecular motion prove the
actual, and so causal, possibility of that? And if
seeming conceivability no more proves possibility
in the latter case than in the former, there seems
little point in distinguishing between conceivability
and seeming conceivability; we may as well allow
that it is conceivable (and not just seemingly con­
ceivable) that heat should turn out to be molecular
motion, and then acknowledge that conceivability
is not conclusive proof of possibility. We could use
the term 'conceivable' in such a way that it is
conceivable that P just in case not-P is not provable
a priori. Or we could use it in such a way that it is
conceivable that P just in case it is epistemically
possible that it is possible that P should be the case
- that is, just in case P's being possible is compat­
ible, for all we know, with what we know. These
uses of 'conceivable' are not equivalent, but on
both of them it is possible to conceive of what is
not possible.
XI
Although many of the implications of the account
I have advanced are radically at odds with Humean
views about causality, it does enable us to salvage
one of the central tenets of the Humean view:
namely, the claim that singular causal statements
are 'implicitly general'. As I see it, the generality of
causal propositions stems from the generality of
properties, that is, from the fact that properties
are universals, together with the fact which I
began this essay by pointing out: namely, that
causal relations hold between particular events in
virtue of the properties possessed by the constitu­
ent objects of those events, and the fact, which I
have tried to establish in the essay, that the identity
of a property is completely determined by its
potential for contributing to the causal powers of
the things that have it. If I assert that one event
caused another, I imply that the constituent objects
of the cause event had properties which always
contribute in certain ways to the causal powers of
the things that have them, and that the particular
episode of causation at hand was an actualization of
some of these potentialities. I may of course not
know what the relevant properties of the cause
event were; and if! do know this, I may know little
about their causal potentialities. This is closely
related to the now familiar point that in claiming
to know the truth of a singular causal statement one
is not committed to knowing the laws in virtue of
which it holds. 17 Moreover, a singular causal state­
ment does not commit one to the claim that the
instantiation of the relevant properties in relevant
similar circumstances always produces the effect
that it did in the case at hand, for the laws govern­
ing these properties may be statistical; the powers
to which the properties contribute may, accord­
ingly, be statistical tendencies or propensities, and
the causation may be nonnecessitating. Also, the
claim that singular causal statements are implicitly
general does not, as here interpreted, imply any­
thing about how such statements are known - in
particular, it does not imply the Humean view
that causal relationships can only be discovered \nvia the discovery of regularities or 'constant con­
junctions'. But where the present theory differs
most radically from theories in the Humean tradi­
tion is in what it claims about the modality of the
general propositions, the laws, that explain the
truth of singular causal propositions; for whereas
on the Humean view the truth of these propositions
is contingent, on my view it is logically necessary.
I thus find myself, in what I once would have
regarded as reactionary company, defending the
very sort of 'necessary connection' account of
causality which Hume is widely applauded for
having refuted.
Postscript18
Richard Boyd has offered the following as a
counterexample to the account of properties
proposed in this essay. Imagine a world in which
the basic physical elements include substances A,
B, C, and D. Suppose that X is a compound of A
and B, and Y is a compound of C and D. We can
suppose that it follows from the laws of nature
governing the elements that these two compounds,
although composed of different elements, behave
exactly alike under all possible circumstances - so
Notes
See Jaegwon Kim, "Causation, nomic subsumption,
and the concept of event, " Journal oI Philosophy 70
(1973), pp. 27--36. I should mention that it was reflec­
tion on this excellent paper that first led me to the
views developed in the present one.
2 Peter Geach, God and the Soul (London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul, 1969), p. 71. See also Jaegwon Kim,
"Non-causal connections", Nous 8 (1974), pp. 41-52,
and idem, "Events as property exemplifications, " in
M. Brand and D. Walton (eds), Action Theory
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1976), pp. 159-77.
I take this example from Kim, "Causation, nomic
subsumption, and the concept of event. "
4 David Hume, A Treatise oIHuman Nature, ed. L. A.
Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1888), p. 170
(bk I, pt iii, sect. 14).
"When any objects resemble each other, the resemb­
lance will at first strike the eye, or rather the mind,
and seldom requires a second examination" (ibid. ,
p. 70 (bk I, pt iii, sect. I)).
6 John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
ed. Peter H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1975), p. 300 (bk II, ch. 23, sect. 8).
7 Ibid. , p. 134 (bk II, ch. 8, sect. 8).
Causality and Properties
that the property of being made of X and the
property of being made of Y share all of their causal
potentialities. (This means, among other things,
that it follows from the laws that once a portion of
X or Y is formed, it cannot be decomposed into its
constituent elements. ) It would follow from my
account of properties that being made of X and
being made of Yare the same property. And this
seems counterintuitive. If, as appears, X and Y
would be different substances, the property of
being composed of the one should be different
from the property of being composed of the other.
I think that this example does show that my
account needs to be revised. I propose the follow­
ing as a revised account which is still clearly a
causal account of properties: for properties F and
G to be identical, it is necessary both that F and G
have the same causal potentialities and (this is the
new requirement) that whatever set of circum­
stances is sufficient to cause the instantiation of F
is sufficient to cause the instantiation of G, and vice
versa. This amounts to saying that properties are
individuated by their possible causes as well as by
their possible effects. No doubt Boyd's example
shows that other things I say in the essay need to
be amended.
8 What does 'in virtue of' mean here? For the moment
we can say that a thing has a power in virtue of having
certain properties if it is a lawlike truth that whatever
has those properties has that power. On the theory I
shall be defending, it turns out that this is a matter of
the possession of the properties entailing the posses­
sion of the power (i. e. , its being true in all possible
worlds that whatever has the properties has the
power).
9 In speaking of "circumstances" I have in mind the
relations of the object to other objects; instead of
speaking of "presence in circumstances of a particular
sort" I could instead speak of "possession of parti­
cular relational properties. " Being in such and such
circumstances is a mere-Cambridge property of an
object, not a genuine (intrinsic) property of it.
10 After this was written, I found that Peter Achinstein
has advanced a causal account of property identity
which, despite a different approach, is in some ways
similar to the account proposed here. See his "The
identity of properties, " American Philosophical Quar­
terly II (1974), pp. 257-76. There are also similarities,
along with important differences, between my views
and those presented by D. H. Mellor in "In defense of \nSydney Shoemaker
dispositions, " Philosophical Review 83 (1974), pp.
157-81, and those presented by R. Harre and E. H.
Madden in Causal Powers: A Theory oJNatural Neces­
sity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975).
II See S. F. Barker and P. Achinstein, "On the new
riddle of induction, " Philosophical Review 69 (1960),
pp. 511-22. The definition given there is not equival­
ent to that originally given by Goodman, in Fact,
Fiction and Forecast, 3rd edn (Indianapolis: Bobbs­
Merrill, 1975), p. 74, and it is the latter which is
employed elsewhere in the present essay.
12 This was called to my attention by Nicholas Stur­
geon.
13 See Boyle, "The origins and forms of qualities, " in
The Works oj the Honourable Robert Boyle (5 vols,
London, 1744), vol. 2, pp. 461ff.
14 See Saul Kripke, "Naming and necessity, " in D.
Davidson and G. Harman (eds), Semantics o(Natural
Language (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1972), pp. 253-355.
15 For the notion of 'reference fixing', see ibid. , pp.
269-75.
16 Ibid. , pp. 331-42.
17 See, e. g. , Donald Davidson, "Causal relations, " this
volume, ch. 33.
18 This was appended to the original publication of this
essay as a "Note added in proof. " \n----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------\n\nIntroduction
Things change over time. At least, that is what we
ordinarily believe. To say that something has chan­
ged must mean that it had a certain property, F, at
an earlier time, t), that it does not now have, at t2.
This seems to imply that the thing that had Fat t1
is the very thing that has non-F at t2. Rivers flow,
trees grow, and mountains erode. But we can track
the same rivers, trees, and mountains over time. Or
at least, so we think.
In "Identity through Time" (chapter 21),
Roderick Chisholm sets out the classic problems
associated with the idea that things persist through
time. More specifically, the main question he is
concerned with is how a thing can persist as "the
same thing" in spite of changes in its constituent
parts. This is the famous problem of the "Ship of
Theseus, " a ship all of whose wooden planks are
replaced one by one, over a long time (say, one
plank a day). Is the ship made of entirely new
wood the same ship we began with? What if the
old planks have been saved and assembled into a
ship, with each plank placed in its original place in
relation to other planks? Which ship is the original
ship identical with?
Chisholm systematically works out and defends
the view, which originated with Bishop Butler, that
in the strict sense ordinary material things, such as
ships, tables, and trees, do not persist through
time. There is no real identity over time; rather,
we only "feign" identity. (As we will see in the
section that follows, Chisholm argues that, unlike
material things, we, as persons, do persist through
time. )
W. V. Quine, in his "Identity, Ostension, and
Hypostasis" (chapter 22), brings a different per­
spective to persistence. Different masses of water
pass through a river, but the river persists none­
theless, since it is something constituted by these
passing river stages. An approach like this is called
a "four-dimensional" or "time-slice" view of per­
sisting things: things persists over time by having
different "temporal parts" at different times, just
as a table is one thing in spite of - in fact, in virtue
of - having different spatial parts in different
places. On this approach, a thing is a four-dimen­
sional object constituted by temporal parts. If you
Introduction
begin with these temporal parts or stages as the
basic items in your ontology, you face the question:
Under what conditions does a sum of such tem­
poral stages count as an enduring object? Quine
defends an essentially pragmatic answer to this
question.
In general, views concerning persisting things
fall in two groups: the continuant theories and the
temporal-part (or four-dimensional) theories. The
former explain persistence in terms of the same
three-dimensional objects being "fully" present at
each moment of their existence; it is only that they
have different properties at different times. The­
ories of the latter type explain a persisting object as
a series of temporal parts. It is therefore a four­
dimensional object consisting of temporal stages.
Where the continuant theorist will say "Object 0
has property F at time t, " the temporal-part theor­
ist will say "The temporal part of 0 at t has prop­
erty F. "
My summer suit comes in two separate parts, a
jacket and a pair of trousers. I keep the jacket in
my office, but my trousers are at home, a mile
away. My suit, therefore, is a "scattered object" -
scattered spatially. Richard Cartwright (chapter
23) explores the nature of such objects and the
principles that govern them, arguing that these
objects should be recognized as genuine things of
the world.
Judith Jarvis Thomson, in her "Parthood and
Identity across Time", (chapter 24), begins with a
problem Cartwright considers in his piece con­
cerning persisting objects. Her essay is a sustained
argument against the four-dimensional, temporal­
parts view of persisting things, and she proposes an
account of her own without recourse to temporal
parts. Mark Heller's "Temporal Parts of Four­
Dimensional Objects" (chapter 25) can be taken
as a response to Thomson. While acknowledging
that our ordinary ("folk") metaphysics views
persisting things as continuants, Heller believes
that continuant theories face serious difficulties,
and that the revisionist four-dimensional ism
gives us a more defensible metaphysics of per­
sistence.
Most of the items in the next part, "The Persist­
ence of the Self, " are directly relevant to the issues
discussed in the present section. \nPart V
Further reading
Forbes, Graeme, "Is there a problem about persistence? ,"
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, suppl. vol. 61
(1987), pp. 137-55.
Hirsch, Eli, The Concept of Identity (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1982).
Hoffman, Joshua, and Rosenkrantz, Gary S. , Substance:
Its Nature and Existence (London and New York:
Routledge, 1997).
Johnston, Mark, "Is there a problem about persistence? ,"
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Socie~y, suppl. vol. 61
(1987), pp. 107-35.
Loux, Michael ]. , Substance and Attribute (Dordrecht:
Reidel, 1978).
Odeberg, David S. , The Metaphysics ofIdenti~y Over Time
(New York: St Martin's Press, 1993).
Quinton, Anthony, The Nature of Things (London: Rout­
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1973).
Simons, Peter, Parts: A Study in Ontology (Oxford: Clar­
endon Press, 1987).
Strawson, P. F. , Individuals (London: Methuen, 1959).
Van Cleve, James, "Mereological essentialism, mereolo­
gical conjunctivism, and identity through time, "
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 11 (1986), pp. 141-56.
Van Inwagen, Peter, Material Things (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1990). \n21
Roderick M. Chisholm
The identity ofa person is a perfect identity; wherever
it is real, it admits of no degrees; and it is impossible
that a person should be in part the same, and in part
different. .. For this cause, I have first considered
personal identi~y, as that which is perfect in its kind,
and the natural measure o(that which is impe~fect.
Thomas Reid 1
1 The Ship of Theseus
To understand the philosophical problems
involved in persistence, in the fact that one and
the same thing may endure through a period of
time, we will begin with what Reid would have
called the 'imperfect' cases and remind ourselves
of some ancient philosophical puzzles. One such
puzzle is suggested by the familiar dictum of Hera­
clitus: 'You could not step twice in the same river;
for other and yet other waters are ever flowing on. '2
Another is the problem of the Ship of Theseus. 3
Updating the latter problem somewhat, let us
imagine a ship - the Ship of Theseus - that was
made entirely of wood when it came into being.
One day a wooden plank is cast off and replaced by
an aluminum one. Since the change is only slight,
there is no question as to the survival of the Ship of
Theseus. We still have the ship we had before; that
is to say, the ship that we have now is identical with
Originally published in Roderick M. Chisholm, Person
and Object (1976), ch. 3. Reprinted by permission of
Open Court, a division of Canis Publishing.
the ship we had before. On another day, another
wooden plank is cast off and also replaced by an
aluminum one. Still the same ship, since, as before,
the change is only slight. The changes continue, in
a similar way, and finally the Ship of Theseus is
made entirely of aluminum. The aluminum ship,
one may well argue, is the wooden ship we started
with, for the ship we started with survived each
particular change, and identity, after all, is trans­
itive.
But what happened to the discarded wooden
planks? Consider this possibility, suggested by
Thomas Hobbes: 'If some man had kept the old
planks as they were taken out, and by putting them
afterwards together in the same order, had again
made a ship of them, this, without doubt, had also
been the same numerical ship with that which was
at the beginning; and so there would have been two
ships numerically the same, which is absurd. ,4
Assuming, as perhaps one has no right to do, that
each of the wooden planks survived intact through­
out these changes, one might well argue that the
reassembled wooden ship is the ship we started
with. 'After all, it is made up of the very same
parts, standing in the very same relations, whereas
that ugly aluminum object doesn't have a single
part in common with our original ship. '
To compound the problem still further, let us
suppose that the captain of the original ship had
solemnly taken the vow that, ifhis ship were ever to
go down, he would go down with it. What, now, if
the two ships collide at sea and he sees them start to
sink together? Where does his duty lie - with the \nRoderick M. Chisholm
aluminum ship or with the reassembled wooden
ship?
'The carriage' is another ancient version of the
problem. Socrates and Plato change the parts of
their carriages piece by piece until, finally,
Socrates' original carriage is made up of all the
parts of Plato's carriage and Plato's carriage is
made up of all the parts of Socrates' original car­
riage. Have they exchanged their carriages or not,
and if so, at what point?
Perhaps the essence of the problem is suggested
by an even simpler situation. Consider a child
playing with his blocks. He builds a house with
ten blocks, uses it as a garrison for his toy soldiers,
disassembles it, builds many other things, then
builds a house again, with each of the ten blocks
occupying the position it had occupied before, and
he uses it again as a garrison for his soldiers. Was
the house that was destroyed the same as the one
that subsequently came into being?
These puzzles about the persistence of objects
through periods of time have their analogues for
the extension of objects through places in space.
Consider the river that is known in New Orleans as
'the Mississippi'. Most of us would say that the
source of the river is in northern Minnesota. But
what if one were to argue instead that the source is
in Montana, where it is known as 'the Missouri'?
Or that its source is in Pittsburgh, where it is
known as 'the Ohio', or that its source is farther
back where it is called 'the Allegheny', or in still
another place where it is called 'the Mononga­
hela, ?5
The accompanying diagram (Fig. 21. 1) provides
us with a schematic illustration.
Of the river that has its central point at (d), one
might wonder whether it flows south-easterly from
(a), or due south from (b), or south-westerly from
(c). (For simplicity, we ignore the Allegheny and
the Monongahela. ) If we are puzzled about the
beginning of the Mississippi, we should be equally
(a) (b) (c)
x x x
x x x
xxx
x
x
x
(d)
Figure 21. 1
puzzled about the end of the Rhine. Reading our
diagram from bottom to top (and again oversimpli­
fying), we could say that if the Rhine begins at (d),
then it ends either with the Maas at (a), or with the
Waal at (b), or with the Lek at (C). 6
Perhaps we can imagine three philosophers look­
ing down at the river(s) that end(s) at (d). One
insists that the river flows between (a) and (d),
another that it flows between (b) and (d) and the
third that it flows between (c) and (d); and each
insists that, since the arms (or tributaries) to which
the other two philosophers refer are distinct not
only from each other but from the river itself,
neither of the other two can be right. Their dis­
pute, clearly, would be analogous in significant
respects to the problem of the Ship of Theseus.
What are we to say of such puzzles? We might
follow the extreme course that Carneades took and
simply deny the principle of the transitivity of
identity. 7 In other words, we might say that things
identical with the same thing need not be identical
with each other. But if we thus abandon reason and
logic at the very outset, we will have no way of
deciding at the end what is the most reasonable
thing to say about ourselves and our persistence
through time.
We might be tempted to deny the possibility of
alteration. Thus one could say: 'Strictly speaking,
nothing alters - nothing is such that at one time it
has one set of properties and at another time it has
another set of properties. What happens is, rather,
that at one time there is a thing having the one set
of properties and at the other time there is another
thing having the other set of properties. ' But this
supposition, if we apply it to ourselves, is incon­
sistent with the data with which we have begun.
Each of us knows with respect to himself that he
now has properties he didn't have in the past and
that formerly he had properties he doesn't have
now. ('But a thing x isn't identical with a thing y
unless they have all their properties in common.
And if the present you has one set of properties and
the past you another, how can they be the same
thing? ') The answer is, of course, that there aren't
two you's, a present one having one set of proper­
ties and a past one having another. It is rather that
you are now such that you have these properties
and lack those, whereas formerly you were such
that you had those properties and lacked these.
The 'former you' has the same properties that the
'present you' now has, and the 'present you' had
the same properties that the 'former you' then
had. R \nBishop Butler suggested that it is only in 'a loose
and popular sense' that we may speak of the per­
sistence of such familiar things as ships, plants and
houses. And he contrasted this 'loose and popular
sense' with 'the strict and philosophical sense' in
which we may speak of the persistence of persons. 9
Let us consider these suggestions.
2 Playing Loose with the 'Is' ofIdentity
We will not pause to ask what Butler meant in
fact. Let us ask what he could have meant. He
suggested that there is a kind of looseness involved
when we say that such things as the Ship of The­
seus persist through time. What kind of looseness
is this?
It could hardly be that the Ship of Theseus, in
contrast with other things, is only loosely identical
with itself. Surely one cannot say that, while some
things are only loosely identical with themselves,
other things are tightly identical with themselves. 10
The statement 'This thing is more loosely identical
with itself than that thing', if it says anything at all,
tells us only that the first thing is more susceptible
than the second to loss of identity, and this means
only that the first is more readily perishable than
the second.
We should construe Butler's remark as saying,
not that there is a loose kind of identity, but rather
that there is a loose sense of 'identity' - a loose (and
popular) use of the 'is' of identity.
What would be a loose sense of 'A is B', or 'A is
identical with B' - a sense of 'A is B' which is
consistent with a denial of the strict sense of 'A
is B'? I suggest this: we use the locution 'A is B',
or 'A is identical with B', in a loose sense, if we use it
in such a way that it is consistent with saying 'A has
a certain property that B does not have' or 'Some
things are true of A that aren't true of B'.
Do we ever use the locution 'A is B' in this loose
way? It would seem, unfortunately, that we do.
I will single out five different types of such
misuse.
(I) One may say: 'Route 6 is Point Street in
Providence and is Fall River Avenue in Seekonk. '
Here we would seem to have the 'is' of identity,
since it is followed in each occurrence by a term
('Point Street' and 'Fall River Avenue') and not by
a predicate expression. But since Point Street and
Fall River Avenue have different properties (one is
in Providence and not in Seekonk, and the other is
Identity through Time
in Seekonk and not in Providence), the statement
may be said to play loose with 'is'.
As our brief discussion of the rivers may make
clear, this use of 'is' is readily avoided. We have
only to replace 'is' by 'is part of and then switch
around the terms, as in: 'Point Street in Providence
is part of Route 6 and Fall River Avenue in Seekonk
is part of Route 6. ' Or we could also say, of course:
'Point Street is part of Route 6 in Providence and
Fall River Avenue is part of Route 6 in Seekonk. '! !
(2) One may say 'This train will be two trains
after Minneapolis', or, traveling in the other direc­
tion, 'Those two trains will be one train after Min­
neapolis'. In the first case ('fission'), we are not
saying that there is one thing which will subse­
quently be identical with two things. We are say­
ing, rather, that there is one thing which will be
divided into two things, neither of them being
identical with the original thing, but each of them
being a part of the original thing. And in the second
case ('fusion'), we are not saying that there are two
things which are subsequently to become identical
with each other, or with a third thing. We are
saying rather that there are two things which will
both become parts of a third thing. (Why not cite
an amoeba as an instance of 'fission'? There is the
offchance that amoebas are persons, or at least may
be thought to be persons, and in such a case, as we
shall see, our treatment would have to be somewhat
different. )
(3) One may say: 'The President of the United
States was Eisenhower in 1955, Johnson in 1965,
and Ford in 1975. '! 2 Here one may seem to be
saying that there is, or was, something - namely,
the President of the United States - which was
identical with Eisenhower in 1955, with Johnson
in 1965, and with Ford in 1975. And so, given that
Eisenhower, Johnson and Ford were three differ­
ent people, one may seem to be saying that there is
one thing which has been identical with three dif­
ferent things. But this talk, too, is readily avoided.
We have only to reformulate the original sentence
in such a way that the temporal expression ('in
1955', 'in 1965' and 'in 1975') may be seen to
modify, not the verb 'was', but the term 'the Pres­
ident of the United States'. Thus we could say:
'The President of the United States in 1955 (the
person who officially presided over the United
States in 1955) was Eisenhower; the President of
the United States in 1965 was Johnson; and the
President of the United States in 1975 was Ford. '12 \nRoderick M. Chisholm
(4) Pointing to a musical instrument, one man
may say to another: 'What you have there is the
same instrument that I play, but the one that I play
isn't as old as that one. ' The first 'is' might be taken
to be the 'is' of identity, for it would seem to be
followed by a term ('the same instrument that I
play'), but the man is saying, of the thing desig­
nated by the first term ('what you have there'), that
it is older than the thing designated by the second.
But of course he didn't need to talk that way. He
could have said: 'What you have there is an instru­
ment of the same sort as the one that I play. '
We note a second example of this way of playing
loose with 'is' - not because the example introduces
any new considerations (for it doesn't), but because
it has attracted the attention of philosophers.
Consider the following list:
Socrates is mortal.
Socrates is mortal.
How many sentences have been listed? We could
say either 'exactly one' or 'exactly two'. That these
incompatible answers are both possible indicates
that the question is ambiguous. And so it has
been suggested that, to avoid the ambiguity, we
introduce the terms 'sentence-token' and 'sen­
tence-type' and then say 'There are two sentence­
tokens on the list and one sentence-type'. But if we
say this, then we can say: 'The first item on the list
is the same sentence-type as the second (for they
are syntactically just alike and say the same thing),
but the two are different sentence-tokens (for they
are two, one being in one place and the other in
another). ' Here, once again, we are playing loose
with 'is, .14 We needn't speak this way in order
to deal with the ambiguity of 'How many
sentences are there? ' We could say there are two
sentence-tokens and they are tokens of the same
(sentence-)type. The example does not differ in
principle, then, from 'The instrument Jones plays
is the same as the one Smith plays but is somewhat
older'.
It is sometimes said that we should distinguish
the two locutions 'A is identical with B and A is a
so-and-so' and 'A is the same so-and-so as B'. It has
even been suggested that, for purposes of philo­
sophy, the first of these two locutions should be
abandoned in favour of the second. IS According to
this suggestion, we should never say, simply and
absolutely, 'A is identical with B'; we should 'rela­
tivize the ascription of identity to a sortal', and say
something of the form 'A is the same so-and-so as
B', where the expression replacing 'so-and-so' is a
count-term, or sortal, such as 'man', 'dog', 'horse'.
But this suggestion has point only if we can find
instances of the following:
A is the same so-and-so as B, and A is a such­
and-such but is not the same such-and-such
as B.
Are there really any such A's and B's?
What would be an instance of the above formula?
In other words, what would be an instance of an A
which is 'the same so-and-so' as something B, but
which is not 'the same such-and-such' as B? The
only instances which have ever been cited, in
defending this doctrine of 'relativized identity',
would seem to be instances of one or the other of
the four ways of playing loose with 'is' that we have
just distinguished. For example: 'Different official
personages may be one and the same man' or 'This
is the same word as that'. What the suggestion
comes to, then, is that we abandon the strict use
of, is' and replace it by one or more of the loose uses
just discussed. There may be advantages to this
type of permissiveness, but it will not help us
with our philosophical problems. 16
Do these ways of playing loose with 'is' suggest a
true interpretation of the thesis we have attributed
to Bishop Butler - the thesis according to which it
is only in 'a loose and popular sense' that we may
speak of the persistence through time of such
familiar physical things as ships, plants and houses?
Is it only by playing loose with 'is' that we may say,
of the Ship of Theseus, that it is one and the same
thing from one period of time to another?
We can, of course, play loose with 'is' in one or
another of these ways when we talk about the Ship
of Theseus. Knowing that it is going to be broken
up into two ships, we might say: 'It's going to be
two ships. ' Or knowing that it was made by joining
two other ships, we might say: 'Once it had been
two ships. ' Or knowing that it makes the same ferry
run as does the Ship of Callicles, we might say:
'The Ship of Theseus and the Ship of Callicles are
the same ferry. ' But the Ship of Theseus doesn't
have to be talked about in these loose and popular
ways any more than anything else does.
(5) It may be that the Ship of Theseus and the
carriage and other familiar things involve still
another way of playing loose with 'is'. Thus Hume
said that it is convenient to 'feign identity' when we
speak about things which, though they 'arc sup-\nposed to continue the same, are such only as consist
of succession of parts, connected together by
resemblance, contiguity, or causation, .17 What
Hume here has in mind by 'feigning' may have
been put more clearly by Thomas Reid. (Though
Reid and Hume were far apart with respect to most
of the matters that concern us here, they seem to be
together with respect to this one. ) Reid wrote:
All bodies, as they consist of innumerable parts
that may be disjoined from them by a great
variety of causes, are subject to continual
changes of their substance, increasing, dimin­
ishing, changing insensibly. When such altera­
tions are gradual, because language could not
afford a different name for every different state
of such a changeable being, it retains the same
name, and is considered as the same thing.
Thus we say of an old regiment that it did
such a thing a century ago, though there now
is not a man alive who then belonged to it. We
say a tree is the same in the seed-bed and in the
forest. A ship of war, which has successively
changed her anchors, her tackle, her sails, her
masts, her planks, and her timbers, while she
keeps the same name is the same. 18
I believe that Reid is here saying two things. The
first is that, whenever there is a change of parts,
however insignificant the parts may be, then some
old thing ceases to be, and some new thing comes
into being. This presupposes that, strictly speak­
ing, the parts of a thing are essential to it, and
therefore when, as we commonly say, something
loses a part, then that thing strictly and philosoph­
ically ceases to be. 19
The second thing I take Reid to be saying is this.
If, from the point of view of our practical concerns,
the new thing that comes into being upon the
addition of parts is sufliciently similar to the old
one, then it is much more convenient for us to treat
them as if they were one than it is for us to take
account of the fact that they are diverse. This point
could also be put by saying that such things as the
Ship of Theseus and indeed most familiar physical
things are really 'fictions', or as we would say
today, 'logical constructions'. They are logical con­
structions upon things which cannot survive the
loss of their parts.
If Reid is right, then, 'The Ship of Theseus was
in Athens last week and will be in Kerkyra Melaina
next week' need not be construed as telling us that
there is in fact a certain ship that was in Athens last
Identity through Time
week and will be in Kerkyra Melaina next week. It
does not imply that any ship that was in the one
place is identical with any ship that will be in the
other place. And so if this is true, and if all the same
we say 'A ship that was in Athens last week is
identical with a ship that will be in Kerkyra Mel­
aina next week', then, once again, we are playing
loose with the 'is' of identity.
3 An Interpretation of Bishop Butler's
Theses
We have found away, then, of interpreting Bishop
Butler's two theses.
According to the first, familiar physical things
such as trees, ships, bodies and houses persist 'only
in a loose and popular sense'. This thesis may be
construed as presupposing that these things are
'fictions', logical constructions or entia per alio.
And it tells us that, from the fact that any such
physical thing may be said to exist at a certain place
P at a certain time t and also at a certain place Qat a
certain other time t, we may not infer that what
exists at P at t is identical with what exists at Qat t'.
According to the second thesis, persons persist
'in a striot and philosophical sense'. This may be
construed as telling us that persons are not thus
'fictions', logical constructions or entia per alio.
And so it implies that, if a person may be said to
exist at a certain place P at a certain time t and also
at a certain place Qat a certain other time t', then
we may infer that something existing at P at t is
identical with something existing at Qat t'.
We now consider the two theses in turn.
4 Feigning Identity
Could we think of familiar physical things, such as
ships and trees and houses, as being logical con­
structions? Let us consider just one type of physical
thing, for what we say about it may be applied,
mutatis mutandis, to the others (see Fig. 21. 2)
Mon AB
Tue BC
Wed CD
Figure 21. 2 \nRoderick M. Chisholm
Consider the history of a very simple table. On
Monday it came into being when a certain thing A
was joined with a certain other thing B. On Tues­
day A was detached from Band C was joined to B,
these things occurring in such a way that a table
was to be found during every moment of the pro­
cess. And on Wednesday B was detached from C
and D was joined with C, these things, too, occur­
ring in such a way that a table was to be found
during every moment of the process. Let us sup­
pose that no other separating or joining occurred.
I suggest that in this situation there are the
following three wholes among others: AB, that is,
the thing made up of A and B; BC, the thing made
up ofB and C; and CD, the thing made up ofC and
D. I will say that AB 'constituted' our table on
Monday, that BC 'constituted' our table on Tues­
day, and that CD 'constituted' our table on Wed­
nesday. Although AB, BC and CD are three
different things, they all constitute the same table.
We thus have an illustration of what Hume called
'a succession of objects'. 20
One might also say, of each of the three wholes,
AB, BC and CD, that it 'stands in for' or 'does duty
for' our table on one of the three successive days.
Thus if we consider the spatial location of the three
wholes, we see that the place of the table was
occupied by AB on Monday, by BC on Tuesday,
and by CD on Wednesday. Again, the table was red
on Monday if and only if AB was red on Monday,
and it weighed 10 pounds on Monday if and only
if AB weighed 10 pounds on Monday. And ana­
logously for BC on Tuesday and for CD on Wed­
nesday.
The situation may seem to involve two some­
what different types of individual thing. On the one
hand, there is what might be called the ens succes­
sivum - the 'successive table' that is made up of
different things at different times. 21 And on the
other hand, there are the things that do duty on the
different days for the successive table: namely, AB,
BC and CD. But any ens successivum may be viewed
as a logical construction upon the various things
that may be said to do duty for it.
Considering, then, just the simple situation I
have described, can we express the information
we have about the ens successivum in statements
that refer only to the particular things that stand
in or do duty for it? It should be clear that we can,
but let us consider the situation in some detail.
Looking back to our diagram, we can see that
Monday's table evolved into Tuesday's table, and
that Tuesday's table evolved into Wednesday's
table. We began with AB; then A was separated
from B and replaced by C, but in such a way that
there was a table to be found at every moment
during the process; then, in a similar way, B was
separated from C and replaced by D. We could
say, then, that BC was a 'direct table successor' of
AB and that CD was a 'direct table successor' of
AB.
Making use of the undefined concept of part, or
proper part, we may define the concept of 'table
successor' in the following way:
D. III. 1 x is at t a direct table successor of y at
t' = OJ (i) t does not begin before t'; (ii)
x is a table at t and y is a table at t'; and
(iii) there is a z, such that z is a part of x
at t and a part of y at t', and at every
moment between t' and t, inclusive, z is
itself a table.
Thus z is a table which is a proper part of a table.
(If we cut off a small part of a table, we may still
have a table left. But if the thing that is left is a
table, then, since it was there before, it was then
a table that was a proper part of a table. ) The
concept part, as it is understood here, is discussed
in detail in Appendix B ('Mereological essential­
ism, ). 22
We may also say, more generally, that the CD of
Wednesday is a 'table successor' of the AB ofMon­
day, even though CD is not a direct table successor
of AB. The more general concept is this:
D. III. 2 x is at t a table successor ofy at t' = OJ
(i) t does not begin before t'; (ii) x is a
table at t, andy is a table at t'; and (iii) x
has at t every property P such that (a) y
has P at t' and (b) all direct table suc­
cessors of anything having P have P.
The definition assures us that a direct table succes­
sor of a direct table successor is a table successor;
so, too, for a direct table successor of a direct table
successor. .. of a direct table successor. 23
We may now say that things that are thus related
by table succession 'constitute the same successive
table'.
D. III. 3 x constitutes at t the same successive
table that y constitutes at t' = OJ either
(a) x and only x is at t a table successor
of y at t', or (b) y and only y is at t' a
table successor of x at t. \nEach such thing may be said to 'constitute a suc­
cessive table'.
D. III. 4 x constitutes at t a successive table = OJ
There are a y and a t' such that y is other
than x, and x constitutes at t the same
table that y constitutes at t'.
We are on the way, then, to reducing our suc­
cessive table to those things that are said to consti­
tute it.
Certain propositions, ostensibly about the suc­
cessive table, may be reduced in a straightforward
way to propositions about the things that are said to
constitute it. For example:
D. III. 5 There is exactly one successive table at
place P at time t = Of There is exactly
one thing at place P at time t that con­
stitutes a successive table at t.
Our definition of 'constituting the same successive
table' (D. III. 3) assures us that nothing will con­
stitute more than one successive table at any given
time.
Some of the properties that the table has at any
given time are thus such that the table borrows
them from the thing that constitutes it at that
time; but others are not. An example of a property
of the first sort may be that of being red; an example
of a property of the second sort may be that of
having once been blue. How are we to mark off the
former set of properties?
Some properties may be said to be 'rooted out­
side the times at which they are had'. Examples are
the property of being a widow and the property of
being a future President. If we know of anything that
it has the former property at any given time, then
we can deduce that the thing existed prior to that
time. And if we know of anything that it has the
latter property at any given time, then we can
deduce that the thing continues to exist after that
time. Let us say:
D. III. 6 G is rooted outside times at which it is
had = DI Necessarily, for any x and for
any period of time t, x has the property
G throughout t only if x exists at some
time before or after t.
Some properties may ~ but need not ~ be rooted
outside the times at which they are had. An exam­
ple is the property of being such that it is or was red.
Identity through Time
Our successive table may derive this from its pres­
ent constituent ~ if its present constituent is red.
But it may derive it from a former constituent ~ if
its present constituent is not red. The definition of
this type of property is straightforward:
D. III. 7 G may be rooted outside times at which
it is had = OJ G is equivalent to a dis­
junction of two properties one of which
is, and the other of which is not, rooted
outside times at which it is had.
Some properties, finally, are not such that they
may be rooted outside the times at which they are
had. 24 An example is being red.
Of the properties that our successive table has at
any given time, which are the ones that it borrows
from the thing that happens to constitute it at that
time? The answer is: those of its properties which
are not essential to it, and those of its properties
which are not such that they may be rooted outside
the times at which they are had. But the essential
properties of the successive table ~ e. g. , that it is a
successive table ~ and those of its properties which
may be rooted outside the times at which they are
had ~ e. g. , that it was blue or that it was or will be
blue ~ are not such that, for any time, they are
borrowed from the thing that constitutes the suc­
cessive table at that time.
We may say, more generally, of the ens successi­
vum and the thing that constitutes it at any given
time, that they are exactly alike at that time with
respect to all those properties which are such that
they are not essential to either and they may not be
rooted outside the times at which they are had.
Consider now the following definitional schema:
D. III. 8 The successive table that is at place P at
time tis F at t = OJ There is exactly one
thing at place P at t that constitutes a
successive table at t, and that thing is F
att.
This definition is applicable only if the predicates
that replace the schematic letter 'F' are properly
restricted. For the properties designated by such
predicates should be those which are not essential to
either and are not such that they may be rooted
outside the times at which they are had. Hence
acceptable replacements for 'F' would be: 'red',
'10 feet square', and 'such that it weighs 10 pounds'.
But not all the properties of the successive table
are derivable in this straightforward way from the \nRoderick M. Chisholm
properties of things that constitute it. For example,
if AB ceased to be after Monday, we could say of the
successive table on Monday, but not of AB, that it
was going to persist through Wednesday. Or if CD
came into being on Wednesday, we could say of the
successive table on Wednesday, but not of CD, that
it is at least two days old. Moreover, on Monday,
the successive table, but not AB, was such that it
would be constituted by CD on Wednesday; while
on Wednesday, the successive table, but not CD,
was such that it was constituted by AB on Monday.
Nevertheless all such truths about the successive
table may be reduced to truths about AB, BC and
CD. That this is so should be apparent from these
definitions.
D. III. 9 The successive table that is at place P at
time t has existed for at least three days
= Df There is exactly one x such that x
is at place P at time t and x constitutes a
successi ve table at t; there are a y and a
time t' such that x is at t a table-succes­
sor of y at t'; and t and t' are separated
by a period of three days.
This definition tells us, then, what it is for a suc­
cessive table to persist through time. And the fol­
lowing definition suggests the way in which, at any
time, the successive table may borrow its properties
from things that constitute it at other times:
D. III. 10 The successive table that is at place P at
time t is constituted by x at t' = Df
There is a y such that y is at place P
at time t; y constitutes a successive
table at t; and either x is identical
with y, and t is identical with t', or y
constitutes at t the same successive
table that x constitutes at t'.
It should now be obvious how to say such things as
'the successive table is red on Monday and green on
Wednesday'.
One may object, 'You are committed to saying
that AB, BC, CD, and our table are four different
things. It may well be, however, that each of the
three things AB, BC, CD satisfies the conditions of
any acceptable definition of the term "table".
Indeed your definitions presuppose that each of
them is a table. Hence you are committed to saying
that, in the situation described, there are four
tables. But this is absurd; for actually you have
described only one table. '
We will find a reply to this objection, if we
distinguish the strict and philosophical sense of
such expressions as 'There are four tables' from
their ordinary, or loose and popular, sense. To say
that there are four tables, in the strict and philoso­
phical sense, is to say that there are four different
things, each of them a table. But from the fact that
there are four tables, in this strict and philosophical
sense, it will not follow that there are four tables in
the ordinary, or loose and popular, sense. If there
are to be four tables in the ordinary, or loose and
popular, sense, it must be the case that there are
four things, not only such that each constitutes a
table, but also such that no two of them constitute
the same table. In other words, there must be four
entia successiva, each of them a table.
We may, therefore, explicate the ordinary, or
loose and popular, sense of 'There are n so-and­
so's at t' (or 'The number of so-and-so's at t is n') in
the following way:
D. III. 11 There are, in the loose and popular
sense, n so-and-so's at t = Dr There
are n things each of which constitutes
a so-and-so at t, and no two of which
constitute the same so-and-so at t.
The term 'so-and-so' in this schematic definition
may be replaced by any more specific count-term,
e. g. , 'table' or 'ship'. And the dejiniendum could be
replaced by 'The number of successive so-and-so's
attisn'.
Hence the answer to the above objection is this:
in saying that there are exactly three tables in the
situation described, one is speaking in the strict and
philosophical sense and not in the loose and popu­
lar sense. In saying that there is exactly one table,
one is speaking in the loose and popular sense and
not in the strict and philosophical sense. But the
statement that there are jour tables - AB, BC, CD
and the successive table - is simply the result of
confusion. One is trying to speak both ways at
once. 2S The sense in which we may say that there
is the successive table is not the sense in which we
may say that there is the individual thing AB, or
BC, or CD 26
The foregoing sketch, then, makes clear one way
in which we may feign identity when what we are
dealing with is in fact only a 'succession of related
objects'. The ways in which we do thus feign
identity are considerably more subtle and complex.
Playing loose with 'is' and 'same', we may even
speak of the sameness of a table when we are deal-\ning with successions of objects which are related,
not by what I have called table succession, but in
much more tenuous ways. Nevertheless, it should
be clear that if we are saying something we really
know, when we thus speak of the sameness of a
table, what we are saying could be re-expressed in
such a way that we refer only to the related objects
and not to the ostensible entities we think of them
as making up. And so, too, for other familiar things
- ships and trees and houses - that involve succes­
sions of related objects that stand in or do duty for
them at different times.
Notes
Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers oj Man,
essay III, ch. 14 in Sir William Hamilton (ed. ), The
Works oJ Thomas Reid, D. D. (Edinburgh: Maclachlan
& Stewart, 1854), p. 345.
2 Fragment 41-·2, as translated in Milton C. Nahm,
Selections Fom Early Greek Philosophy (New York:
F. S. Crofts, 1934), p. 91.
3 See Plato, Phaedo, 58A, and Xenophon, Memorabilia,
4. 8. 2. Leibniz speaks of the Ship of Theseus in New
Essays Concerning Human Understanding, II, ch. 27,
sect. 4, noting that any ordinary physical body may be
said to be 'like a river which always changes its water,
or like the ship of Theseus which the Athenians were
always repairing' (Open Court edn), p. 240.
4 Thomas Hobbes, Concerning Body, ch. 11 ('Of iden­
tity and difference'), sect. 7.
5 Cf. W. V. Q! line: 'Thus take the question of the
biggest fresh lake. Is Michigan-Huron admissible, or
is ita pair of lakes? .. . Then take the question of the
longest river. Is the Mississippi-Missouri admissible,
or is it a river and a half? ' (Word and Object (New
York: John Wiley, 1960), p. 128).
6 Using terms not commonly applied to rivers, we may
note for future reference that when our diagram is
read from top to bottom it illustrates Jusion and when
it is read from bottom to top it illustrates fission.
7 See note c of the article 'Carneades' in Pierre Bayle's
A General Dictiona~y: Historical and Critical, trans.
Rev. J. P. Bernard, Rev. Thomas Birch, John Locke­
man et al. (10 vols, London: James Bettenham, 1734-
41): 'He found uncertainty in the most evident
notions. All logicians know that the foundation of
the syllogism, and consequently the faculty of reason­
ing, is built on this maxim: Those things which are
identical with a third are the same with each other
(Quae sunt idem uno tertio sunt idem inter. Ie). It is
certain that Carneades opposed it strongly and dis­
played all his subtleties against it. '
8 Further aspects of this kind of problem are discussed
in Roderick M. Chisholm, Person and Object (La Salle,
Identity through Time
We could say, then, that such things are entia
per alio. They are ontological parasites that derive
all their properties from other things - from the
various things that do duty for them. An ens per
alio never is or has anything on its own. It is what
it is in virtue of the nature of something other
than itself. At every moment of its history an ens
per alio has something other than itself as its
stand-in.
But if there are entia per alio, then there are also
entia per se.
Ill. : Open Court, 1976), Appendix A ('The Doctrine
of Temporal Parts').
9 Dissertation I, in The Whole Works oj Joseph Butler,
LL. D. (London: Thomas Tegg, 1839), pp. 263-70.
But compare Locke's third letter to the Bishop of
Worcester: 'For it being his body both before and
after the resurrection, everyone ordinarily speaks of
his body as the same, though, in a strict and philoso­
phical sense, as your lordship speaks, it be not the very
same. '
\0 I have heard it suggested, however, that (a) whereas
the evening star is strictly identical with the evening
star, nevertheless (b) the evening star is identical but
not strictly identical with the morning star. The facts
of the matter would seem to be only these: the evening
star (i. e. , the morning star) is necessarily self-ident­
ical; it is not necessarily such that it is visible in the
evening or in the morning; it would be contradictory
to say that the evening star exists and is not identical
with the evening star, or that the morning star exists
and is not identical with the morning star; but it
would not be contradictory to say that the morning
star exists and the evening star exists and the morning
star is not identical with the evening star; and what­
ever is identical with the evening star (i. e. , with the
morning star) has all the properties that it does.
11 This example of the roads, like that of the rivers above
('the Mississippi-Missouri'), may suggest that the key
to our puzzles about identity through time may be
found in the doctrine of 'temporal parts'. According
to this doctrine, every individual thing x is such that,
for every period of time through which x exists, there
is a set of parts which are such that x is made up of
them at that time and they do not exist at any other
time. (Compare: every individual thing x is such that,
for every portion of space that x occupies at any time,
there is at that time a set of parts of x which then
occupy that place and no other place. ) I consider this
doctrine in detail in Person and Object, Appendix A. I
there conclude that it will not help us with our \nRoderick M. Chisholm
problems about identity through time and that there is
no sufficient reason for accepting it.
12 Contrast P. T. Geach, Reference and Generality
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1962), p. 157:
'. .. different official personages may be one and the
same man. ' Possibly an illustration would be: 'The
fire-chief isn't the same personage as the Sunday­
school superintendent (for one is charged with
putting out fires and the other with religious ins­
truction); yet Jones is both. ' But here one seems
to be playing loose with 'isn't', for what one has in
mind, presumably, is something of this sort: 'Being
the fire-chief commits one to different things than
does being the Sunday-school superintendent, and
Jones is both. '
13 There may be temptations in thus playing loose with
'is'. Suppose there were a monarchy wherein the
subjects found it distasteful ever to affirm that the
monarch vacated his throne. Instead of saying that
there have been so many dozen kings and queens in
the history of their country, they will say that the
monarch has now existed for many hundreds of
years and has had so many dozen different names.
At certain times it has been appropriate that these
names be masculine, like 'George' and 'Henry', and
at other times it has been appropriate that they be
feminine, like 'Victoria' and 'Elizabeth'. What, then,
if we knew about these people and were to hear such
talk as this: 'There has existed for many hundreds of
years an x such that x is our monarch; x is now
feminine, though fifty years ago x was masculine,
and fifty years before that x was feminine'? We should
not conclude that there was in that land a monarch
who is vastly different from any of the people in ours.
We should conclude rather that the speakers were
either deluded or pretending.
14 Other examples are suggested by: 'He has a copy of
The Republic on his desk and another on the table, and
he doesn't have any other books. How many books
does he have? ' 'He played the Appassionata once in the
afternoon and once again in the evening, but nothing
further. How many sonatas did he play? '
15 Compare P. T. Geach in Logic Matters (Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1972),
pp. 238-49; and Reference and Generality, pp. 149ff.
The suggestion is criticized in detail by David Wig­
gins, in Identity and Spatio-Temporal Continuity
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), pp. 1-26. Compare W. V.
Quine in a review of Reference and Generality in Phi­
losophical Review, 73 (1964), pp. 100-4, and Fred
Feldman, 'Geach and relativized identity', Review of
Metaphysics 22 (1968), pp. 547-55.
16 Compare P. T. Geach: 'Even if the man Peter Geach
is the same person as the man Julius Caesar, they are
certainly different men; they were for example born at
different times to a different pair of parents' (God and
the Soul (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1969), p.
6). John Locke says very similar things; see the Fraser
edn of the Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
pp. 445, 450ff.
17 David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, bk I, sect.
6; L. A. Selby-Bigge edn, (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1896), p. 255.
18 Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, p. 346.
19 This thesis is discussed and defended in my Person
and Object, Appendix B ('Mereological essentialism').
20 See Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, bk I, pt iv, sect.
6 (Selby-Bigge edn, p. 255): 'all objects, to which we
ascribe identity, without observing their invariable­
ness and uninterrupted ness, are such as consist of a
succession of related objects. ' In this same section.
Hume affirms a version of the principle of mereolo­
gical essentialism.
21 We could define an ens successivum by saying, with St
Augustine, that it is 'a single thing. .. composed of
many, all of which exist not together'; see Confessions,
bk IV, ch. II. St Thomas says in effect that a success­
ivum is a thing such that some of its parts do not
coexist with others of its parts ('una pars non est
cum alia parte'); see the Commentary on the Sentences,
bk I, dist. VIII, Q 2, Art. 1, ad 4. The term ens
successivum has traditionally been applied to such
things as periods of time (e. g. , days, weeks, months)
and events; compare Aristotle's Physics, bk III, ch. 6,
206a.
22 See Chisholm, Person and Object.
23 Definition D. III. 2 thus makes use of the general
device by means of which Frege defined the ancestral
relation; see G. Frege, The Foundations of Arithmetic
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1950), sect. 79. A more intuitive
reading of clause (iii) might be: '(iii) x belongs at t to
every class c which is such that (a) y belongs to c at t'
and (b) all direct table successors of anything belong­
ing to c belong to c. '
24 The distinction among these several types of property
are used in my Person and Object, ch. 4, to mark off
those states of affairs that are events. (We had noted in
the previous chapter that, although 'John is walking'
refers to an event, 'John will walk' and 'John is such
that either he is walking or he will walk' do not refer to
events. )
25 Compare Hume: 'Tho' we commonly be able to dis­
tinguish pretty exactly betwixt numerical and specific
identity, yet it sometimes happens that we confound
them, and in our thinking and reasoning employ the
one for the other. (Treatise of Human Nature, bk I,
pt iv, sect. 6 ('Of Personal Identity'), Selby-Bigge
edn, pp. 257-8.
26 It may be noted that we have defined the loose and
popular sense of the expression 'There are n so-and­
so's at t' and not the more general 'The number of sn­
and-so's that there ever will have been is n'. For the
loose and popular sense of this latter expression is not
sufficiently fixed to be explicated in any strict and
philosophical sense. The following example may
make this clear. In the infantry of the United States \nArmy during World War II each private carried
materials for half a tent - something like one piece
of canvas, a pole and ropes. Two privates could then
assemble their materials and create a tent which would
be disassembled in the morning. On another night the
two privates might find different tent companions.
Occasionally when the company was in camp, the
various tent parts were collected, stored away, and
then reissued, but with no attempt to assign particular
Identity through Time
parts to their former holders. Supposing, to simplify
the matter considerably, that all the tents that there
ever will have been were those that were created by
the members of a certain infantry company, how,
making use of our ordinary criteria, would we go
about answering the question 'Just how many tents
have there been? ' Would an accounting of the history
of the joinings of the various tent parts be sufficient to
give us the answer? \n22
w. V. Quine
I
Identity is a popular source of philosophical per­
plexity. Undergoing change as I do, how can I be
said to continue to be myself? Considering that a
complete replacement of my material substance
takes place every few years, how can I be said
to continue to be I for more than such a period at
best?
It would be agreeable to be driven, by these or
other considerations, to belief in a changeless and
therefore immortal soul as the vehicle of my per­
sisting self-identity. But we should be less eager to
embrace a parallel solution of Heracleitus's parallel
problem regarding a river: 'You cannot bathe in the
same river twice, for new waters are ever flowing in
upon you. '
The solution of Heracleitus's problem, though
familiar, will afford a convenient approach to some
less familiar matters. The truth is that you can
bathe in the same river twice, but not in the same
river stage. You can bathe in two river stages which
are stages of the same river, and this is what con­
stitutes bathing in the same river twice. A river is a
process through time, and the river stages are its
momentary parts. Identification of the river bathed
in once with the river bathed in again is just what
determines our subject matter to be a river process
as opposed to a river stage.
Originally published in W. V. Quine, From a Logical Point
of View (1953). Copyright. :g by the President and Fel­
lows of Harvard College. Reprinted by permission of
Harvard University Press.
Let me speak of any multiplicity of water mole­
cules as a water. Now a river stage is at the same
time a water stage, but two stages of the same river
are not in general stages of the same water. River
stages are water stages, but rivers are not waters.
You may bathe in the same river twice without
bathing in the same water twice, and you may, in
these days of fast transportation, bathe in the same
water twice while bathing in two different rivers.
We begin, let us imagine, with momentary
things and their interrelations. One of these
momentary things, called a, is a momentary stage
of the river Cayster, in Lydia, around 400 Be.
Another, called b, is a momentary stage of the
Cayster two days later. A third, c, is a momentary
stage, at this same latter date, of the same multi­
plicity of water molecules which were in the river at
the time of a. Half of c is in the lower Cayster
valley, and the other half is to be found at diffuse
points in the Aegean Sea. Thus tl, b, and c are three
objects, variously related. We may say that a and b
stand in the relation of river kinship, and that tl and
c stand in the relation of water kinship.
Now the introduction of rivers as single entities,
namely, processes or time-consuming objects, con­
sists substantially in reading identity in place of
river kinship. It would be wrong, indeed, to say
that a and b are identical; they are merely river­
kindred. But if we were to point to a, and then wait
the required two days and point to b, and affirm
identity of the objects pointed to, we should
thereby show that our pointing was intended not
as a pointing to two kindred river stages but as a
pointing to a single river which included them \nboth. The imputation of identity is essential, here,
to fixing the reference of the ostension.
These reflections are reminiscent of Hume's
account of our idea of external objects. Hume's
theory was that the idea of external objects arises
from an error of identification. Various similar
impressions separated in time are mistakenly trea­
ted as identical; and then, as a means of resolving
this contradiction of identifying momentary events
which are separated in time, we invent a new non­
momentary object to serve as subject matter of our
statement of identity. Hume's charge of erroneous
identification here is interesting as a psychological
conjecture on origins, but there is no need for us to
share that conjecture. The important point to
observe is merely the direct connection between
identity and the positing of processes, or time­
extended objects. To impute identity rather than
river kinship is to talk of the river Cayster rather
than of a and b.
Pointing is of itself ambiguous as to the temporal
spread of the indicated object. Even given that the
indicated object is to be a process with considerable
temporal spread, and hence a summation of
momentary objects, still pointing does not tell us
which summation of momentary objects is
intended, beyond the fact that the momentary
object at hand is to be in the desired summation.
Pointing to a, if construed as referring to a time­
extended process and not merely to the momentary
object a, could be interpreted either as referring to
the river Cayster of which a and b are stages, or as
referring to the water of which a and c are stages, or
as referring to anyone of an unlimited number of
further less natural summations to which a also
belongs.
Such ambiguity is commonly resolved by
accompanying the pointing with such words as
'this river', thus appealing to a prior concept of a
river as one distinctive type of time-consuming
process, one distinctive form of summation of
momentary objects. Pointing to a and saying 'this
river' - or 0 bE 0 JrOTCJ: J-LOS, since we are in 400 Be -
leaves no ambiguity as to the object of reference if
the word 'river' itself is already intelligible. 'This
river' means 'the riverish summation of momen­
tary objects which contains this momentary object'.
But here we have moved beyond pure ostension
and have assumed conceptualization. Now suppose
instead that the general term 'river' is not yet
understood, so that we cannot specify the Cayster
by pointing and saying 'This river is the Cayster'.
Suppose also that we are deprived of other descrip-
Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis
tive devices. What we may do then is point to a and
two days later to b and say each time, 'This is the
Cayster'. The word 'this' so used must have
referred not to a nor to b, but beyond to something
more inclusive, identical in the two cases. Our
specification of the Cayster is not yet unique, how­
ever, for we might still mean any of a vast variety of
other collections of momentary objects, related in
other modes than that of river kinship; all we know
is that a and b are among its constituents. By
pointing to more and more stages additional to a
and b, however, we eliminate more and more
alternatives, until our listener, aided by his own
tendency to favor the most natural groupings, has
grasped the idea of the Cayster. His learning of this
idea is an induction: from our grouping the sample
momentary objects a, b, d, g, and others under the
head of Cayster, he projects a correct general
hypothesis as to what further momentary objects
we would also be content to include.
Actually there is in the case of the Cayster the
question of its extent in space as well as in time.
Our sample pointings need to be made not only on
a variety of dates, but at various points up and
down stream, if our listener is to have a represent­
ative basis for his inductive generalization as to the
intended spatiotemporal spread of the four-dimen­
sional object Cayster.
In ostension, spatial spread is not wholly separ­
able from temporal spread, for the successive
ostensions which provide samples over the spatial
spread are bound to consume time. The insepar­
ability of space and time characteristic of relativity
theory is foreshadowed, if only superficially, in this
simple situation of ostension.
The concept of identity, then, is seen to perform
a central function in the specifying of spatiotempo­
rally broad objects by ostension. Without identity,
n acts of os tension merely specify up to n objects,
each of indeterminate spatiotemporal spread. But
when we affirm identity of object from ostension to
ostension, we cause our n ostensions to refer to the
same large object, and so afford our listener an
inductive ground from which to guess the intended
reach of that object. Pure ostension plus identifica­
tion conveys, with the help of some induction,
spatiotemporal spread.
II
Now between what we have thus far observed and
the ostensive explanation of general terms, such as \nW. V. Quine
'red' or 'river', there is an evident similarity. When
I point in a direction where red is visible and say
'This is red', and repeat the performance at various
places over a period of time, I provide an inductive
basis for gauging the intended spread of the attri­
bute of redness. The difference would seem to be
merely that the spread concerned here is a concep­
tual spread, generality, rather than spatiotemporal
spread.
And is this really a difference? Let us try shifting
our point of view so far as to think of the word 'red'
in full analogy to 'Cayster'. By pointing and saying
'This is Cayster' at various times and places, we
progressively improve our listener's understanding
as to what portions of space-time we intend our
word 'Cayster' to cover; and by pointing and saying
'This is red' at various times and places, we pro­
gressively improve our listener's understanding as
to what portions of space-time we intend our word
'red' to cover. The regions to which 'red' applies
are indeed not continuous with one another as
those are to which 'Cayster' applies, but this surely
is an irrelevant detail; 'red' surely is not to be
opposed to 'Cayster', as abstract to concrete,
merely because of discontinuity in geometrical
shape. The territory of the United States including
Alaska is discontinuous, but it is nonetheless a
single concrete object; and so is a bedroom suite,
or a scattered deck of cards. Indeed, every physical
object that is not subatomic is, according to phy­
sics, made up of spatially separated parts. So why
not view 'red' quite on a par with 'Cayster', as
naming a single concrete object extended in space
and time? From this point of view, to say that
a certain drop is red is to affirm a simple spatio­
temporal relation between two concrete objects; the
one object, the drop, is a spatiotemporal part of the
other, red, just as a certain waterfall is a spatiotem­
poral part of Cayster.
Before proceeding to consider how it is that a
general equating of universals to particulars breaks
down, I want to go back and examine more closely
the ground we have already been over. We have
seen how identity and ostension are combined in
conceptualizing extended objects, but we have not
asked why. What is the survival value of this prac­
tice? Identity is more convenient than river kinship
or other relations, because the objects related do
not have to be kept apart as a multiplicity. As long
as what we may propose to say about the river
Cayster does not in itself involve distinctions
between momentary stages a, b, etc. , we gain for­
mal simplicity of subject matter by representing
our subject matter as a single object, Cayster,
instead of a multiplicity of objects a, b, etc. , in
river kinship. The expedient is an application, in
a local or relative way, of Occam's razor: the enti­
ties concerned in a particular discourse are reduced
from many, a, b, etc. , to one, the Cayster. Note,
however, that from an overall or absolute point of
view the expedient is quite opposite to Occam's
razor, for the multiple entities a, b, etc. , have not
been dropped from the universe; the Cayster has
simply been added. There are contexts in which we
shall still need to speak differentially of a, b, and
others rather than speaking indiscriminately of the
Cayster. Still the Cayster remains a convenient
addition to our ontology because of the contexts
in which it does effect economy.
Consider, somewhat more generally, a discourse
about momentary objects all of which happen still
to be river stages, but not entirely river-kindred. If
it happens in this particular discourse that what­
ever is affirmed of any momentary object is
affirmed also of every other which is river-kindred
to it, so that no distinctions between stages of the
same river are relevant, then clearly we can gain
simplicity by representing our subject matter as
comprising a few rivers rather than the many
river stages. Diversities remain among our new
objects, the rivers, but no diversities remain
beyond the needs of the discourse with which we
are occupied.
I have been speaking just now of integration of
momentary objects into time-consuming wholes,
but it is clear that similar remarks apply to integra­
tion of individually indicable localities into spa­
tially extensive wholes. Where what we want to
say about certain broad surfaces does not concern
distinctions between their parts, we simplify our
discourse by making its objects as few and large as
we can - taking the various broad surfaces as single
objects.
Analogous remarks hold, and very conspicu­
ously, for conceptual integration - the integrating
of particulars into a universal. Suppose a discourse
about person stages, and suppose that whatever is
said about any person stage, in this particular dis­
course, applies equally to all person stages which
make the same amount of money. Our discourse is
simplified, then, by shifting its subject matter from
person stages to income groups. Distinctions
immaterial to the discourse at hand are thus
extruded from the subject matter.
In general we might propound this maxim of the
identification of indiscernibles: Objects indistin-\nguishable from one another within the terms of a
given discourse should be construed as identical for
that discourse. More accurately: the references to
the original objects should be reconstrued for pur­
poses of the discourse as referring to other and
fewer objects, in such a way that indistinguishable
originals give way each to the same new object.
For a striking example of the application of this
maxim, consider the familiar so-called proposi­
tional calculus. To begin with, let us follow the
lead of some modern literature by thinking of the
'p', 'q', etc. of this calculus as referring to proposi­
tional concepts, whatever they may be. But we
know that propositional concepts alike in truth­
value are indistinguishable within the terms of
this calculus, interchangeable so far as anything
expressible in this calculus is concerned. Then
the canon of identification of indiscernibles directs
us to reconstrue 'p', 'q', etc. as referring merely to
truth-values - which, by the way, was Frege's
interpretation of this calculus.
For my own part, I prefer to think of'p', 'q', etc.
as schematic letters standing in place of statements
but not referring at all. But if they are to be treated
as referring, the maxim is in order.
Our maxim of identification of indiscernibles is
relative to a discourse, and hence vague insofar as
the cleavage between discourses is vague. It applies
best when the discourse is neatly closed, like the
propositional calculus; but discourse generally
departmentalizes itself to some degree, and this
degree will tend to determine where and to what
degree it may prove convenient to invoke the
maxim of identification of indiscernibles.
III
Now let us return to our reflections on the nature
of universals. Earlier we represented this category
by the example 'red', and found this example to
admit of treatment as an ordinary spatiotemporally
extended particular on a par with the Cayster. Red
was the largest red thing in the universe - the
scattered total thing whose parts are all the red
things. Similarly, in the recent example of income
groups, each income group can be thought of sim­
ply as the scattered total spatiotemporal thing
which is made up of the appropriate person stages,
various stages of various persons. An income group
is just as concrete as a river or a person, and, like a
person, it is a summation of person stages. It differs
from a person merely in that the person stages
Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis
which go together to make up an income group
are another assortment than those which go
together to make up a person. Income groups are
related to persons much as waters are related to
rivers; for it will be recalled that the momentary
object a was part in a temporal way both of a river
and of a water, while b was a part ofthe same river
but not of the same water, and c was a part of the
same water but not of the same river. Up to now,
therefore, the distinction between spatiotemporal
integration and conceptual integration appears idle;
all is spatiotemporal integration.
Now let me switch to a more artificial example.
Suppose our subject matter consists of the visibly
outlined convex regions, small and large, in figure
22. 1. There are 33 such regions. Suppose further
that we undertake a discourse relatively to which
any geometrically similar regions are interchange­
able. Then our maxim of identification of indis­
cernibles directs us for purposes of this discourse to
speak not of similarity but of identity; to say not
that x and yare similar but that x = y, thus recon­
struing the objects x and y as no longer regions but
shapes. The subject matter then shrinks in multi­
plicity from 33 to 5: the isosceles right triangle, the
square, the two-to-one rectangle, and two forms of
trapezoid.
Each of these five is a universal. Now just as we
have reconstrued the color red as the total spatio­
temporal thing made up of all the red things, so
suppose we construe the shape square as the total
region made up by pooling all the five square
regions. Suppose also we construe the shape iso­
sceles right triangle as the total region made up by
pooling all the 16 triangular regions. Similarly
suppose we construe the shape two-to-one rectan­
gle as the total region made up by pooling the four
two-to-one rectangular regions; and similarly for
the two trapezoidal shapes. Clearly this leads to
trouble, for our five shapes then all reduce to one,
the total region. Pooling all the triangular regions
gives simply the total square region; pooling all the
Figure 22. 1 \nW. V. Quine
square regions gives the same; and similarly for the
other three shapes. We should end up, intolerably,
by concluding identity among the five shapes.
So the theory of universals as concrete, which
happened to work for red, breaks down in general. l
We can imagine that universals in general, as enti­
ties, insinuated themselves into our ontology in the
following way. First we formed the habit of intro­
ducing spatiotemporally extended concrete things,
according to the pattern considered earlier. Red
entered with Cayster and the others as a concrete
thing. Finally triangle, square, and other universals
were swept in on a faulty analogy with red and
its ilk.
Purely as philosophical sport, without supposing
there to be any serious psychological or anthropo­
logical import in our reflections, let us now go back
to Hume's theory of external objects and carry it a
step further. Momentary impressions, according to
Hume, are wrongly identified with one another on
the basis of resemblance. Then, to resolve the
paradox of identity among temporally disparate
entities, we invent time-consuming objects as
objects of the identity. Spatial spread, beyond
what is given momentarily in an impression, may
be supposed introduced in similar fashion. The
entity red, call it a universal or a widespread parti­
cular as you please, may be viewed as entering by
the same process (though we are now beyond
Hume). Momentary localized red impressions are
identified one with another, and then a single entity
red is appealed to as vehicle of these otherwise
untenable identities. Similarly for the entity
square, and the entity triangle. Square impressions
are identified with one another, and then the single
entity square is imported as vehicle for the identity;
and correspondingly for triangle.
So far, no difference is noted between the intro­
duction of particulars and universals. But in retro­
spect we have to recognize a difference. If square
and triangle were related to the original square and
triangular particulars in the way in which concrete
objects are related to their momentary stages and
spatial fragments, then square and triangle would
turn out to be identical with each other - as lately
observed in terms of our artificial little universe of
regions.
Therefore we come to recognize two different
types of association: that of concrete parts in a
concrete whole, and that of concrete instances in
an abstract universal. We come to recognize a
divergence between two senses of 'is': 'This is the
Cayster' versus 'This is square'.
IV
Interrupting this speculative psychology, let us
return to our analysis of ostension of spatiotempo­
rally extended objects, and see how it differs from
what may be called the os tension of irreducible
universals such as square and triangle. In ostens­
ively explaining the Cayster, we point to a, b, and
other stages, and say each time 'This is the Cay­
ster', identity of indicated object being understood
from each occasion to the next. In ostensively
explaining 'square', on the other hand, we point
to various particulars and say each time 'This is
square' without imputing identity of indicated
object from one occasion to the next. These various
latter pointings give our listener the basis for a
reasonable induction as to what we might in general
be willing to point out as square, just as our various
former pointings gave him the basis for a reason­
able induction as to what we might willingly point
to as the Cayster. The difference in the two cases is
merely that in the one case an identical indicated
object is supposed, and in the other case not. In the
second case what is supposed to be identical from
pointing to pointing is not the indicated object,
but, at best, an attribute squareness which is shared
by the indicated objects.
Actually there is no need, up to this point, to
suppose such entities as attributes at all in our
ostensive clarification of 'square'. We are clarify­
ing, by our various pointings, our use of the words
'is square'; but neither is an object squareness
supposed as object pointed to, nor need it be sup­
posed available as reference of the word 'square'.
No more need be demanded, in explication of 'is
square' or any other phrase, than that our listener
learn when to expect us to apply it to an object and
when not; there is no need for the phrase itself to be
a name in turn of a separate object of any kind.
These contrasts, then, have emerged between
general terms and singular terms. First, the osten­
sions which introduce a general term differ from
those which introduce a singular term in that the
former do not impute identity of indicated object
between occasions of pointing. Second, the general
term does not, or need not, purport to be a name in
turn of a separate entity of any sort, whereas the
singular term does.
These two observations are not independent of
each other. The accessibility of a term to identity
contexts was urged by Frege as the standard by
which to judge whether that term is being used as a
name. 2 Whether or not a term is being used as \nnaming an entity is to be decided, in any given
context, by whether or not the term is viewed as
subject in that context to the algorithm of identity:
the law of putting equals for equals.
It is not to be supposed that this doctrine of
Frege's is connected with a repudiation of abstract
entities. On the contrary, we remain free to admit
names of abstract entities; and, according to Fre­
ge's criterion, such admission will consist precisely
in admitting abstract terms to identity contexts
subject to the regular laws of identity. Frege him­
self, incidentally, was rather a Platonist in his own
philosophy.
It is clearest, I think, to view this step of hypos­
tasis of abstract entities as an additional step which
follows after the introduction of the corresponding
general terms. First we may suppose the idiom
'This is square', or 'x is square', introduced -
perhaps by ostension as previously considered, or
perhaps by other channels, such as the usual geo­
metrical definition in terms of prior general terms.
Then as a separate step we derive the attribute
squareness, or, what comes to much the same
thing, the class of squares. A new fundamental
operator 'class or, or '-ness', is appealed to in this
step.
I attach much importance to the traditional dis­
tinction between general terms and abstract singu­
lar terms, 'square' versus 'squareness', because of
the ontological point: use of the general term does
not of itself commit us to the admission of a corres­
ponding abstract entity into our ontology; on the
other hand, the use of an abstract singular term,
subject to the standard behavior of singular terms
such as the law of putting equals for equals, flatly
commits us to an abstract entity named by the
term.
It is readily conceivable that it was precisely
because of failure to observe this distinction that
abstract entities gained their hold upon our ima­
ginations in the first place. Ostensive explanation
of general terms such as 'square' is, we have seen,
much like that of concrete singular terms such as
'Cayster', and indeed there are cases such as 'red'
where no difference need be made at all. Hence the
natural tendency not only to introduce general
terms along with singular ones, but to treat them
on a par as names each of a single entity. This
tendency is no doubt encouraged by the fact that
it is often convenient for purely syntactical reasons,
reasons, for example, of word order or cross­
reference, to handle a general term like a proper
name.
Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis
v
The conceptual scheme in which we grew up is an
eclectic heritage, and the forces which conditioned
its evolution from the days ofJava man onward are a
matter of conjecture. 3 Expressions for physical
objects must have occupied a focal position from
the earliest linguistic periods, because such objects
provided relatively fixed points of reference for
language as a social development. General terms
also must have appeared at an early stage, because
similar stimuli tend psychologically to induce sim­
ilar responses; similar objects tend to be called by
the same word. We have seen, indeed, that the
ostensive acquisition of a concrete general term
proceeds in much the same way as that of a concrete
singular term. The adoption of abstract singular
terms, carrying with it the positing of abstract enti­
ties, is a further step and a philosophically revolu­
tionary one; yet we have seen how this step in turn
could have been made without conscious invention.
There is every reason to rejoice that general
terms are with us, whatever the cause. Clearly
language would be impossible without them, and
thought would come to very little. On the admis­
sion of abstract entities, however, as named by
abstract singular terms, there is room for divergent
value judgements. For clarity it is important in any
case to recognize in their introduction an additional
operator, 'class or or '-ness'. Perhaps, as just now
suggested, it was failure to appreciate the intrusion
of such an additional unexplained operator that
engendered belief in abstract entities. But this
genetic point is independent of the question
whether abstract entities, once with us, are not a
good thing from the point of view of conceptual
convenience after all-happy accident though their
adoption may have been.
Anyway, once abstract entities are admitted, our
conceptual mechanism goes on and generates an
unending hierarchy of further abstractions as a
matter of course. For, it must be noted to begin
with that the ostensive processes which we have
been studying are not the only way of introducing
terms, singular or general. Most of us will agree
that such introduction is fundamental; but once a
fund of ostensively acquired terms is at hand, there
is no difficulty in explaining additional terms dis­
cursively, through paraphrase into complexes of
the terms already at hand. Now discursive explana­
tion, unlike ostension, is just as available for defin­
ing new general terms applicable to abstract
entities, for example, 'shape' or 'zoological species', \nW. V. Quine
as for defining general terms applicable to concrete
entities. Applying then the operator '-ness' or 'class
of' to such abstract general terms, we get second­
level abstract singular terms, purporting to name
such entities as the attribute of being a shape or
zoological species, or the class of all shapes
or zoological species. The same procedure can be
repeated for the next level, and so on, theoretically
without end. It is in these higher levels that math­
ematical entities such as numbers, functions of
numbers, etc. find their place, according to the
analyses of the foundations of mathematics which
have been usual from Frege onward through
Whitehead and Russell.
The fundamental-seeming philosophical ques­
tion, How much of our science is merely contrib­
uted by language and how much is a genuine
reflection of reality? is perhaps a spurious question
which itself arises wholly from a certain particular
type oflanguage. Certainly we are in a predicament
if we try to answer the question; for to answer the
question, we must talk about the world as well as
about language, and to talk about the world we
must already impose upon the world some concep­
tual scheme peculiar to our own special language.
Yet we must not leap to the fatalistic conclusion
that we are stuck with the conceptual scheme that
we grew up in. We can change it bit by bit, plank by
plank, though meanwhile there is nothing to carry
us along but the evolving conceptual scheme itself.
The philosopher's task was well compared by
Neurath to that of a mariner who must rebuild
his ship on the open sea.
Notes
Nelson Goodman, The Structure oj Appearance (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1951), pp.
46--51.
2 Gottlob Frege, 'On sense and nominatum', in H. Feig1. and W. Sellars (eds), Readings in Philosophical Analysis
(New York: App1eton-Century-Crofts, 1949).
3 The unrefined and sluggish mind
Of Homo javanensis
We can improve our conceptual scheme, our
philosophy, bit by bit while continuing to depend
on it for support; but we cannot detach ourselves
from it and compare it objectively with an uncon­
ceptualized reality. Hence it is meaningless, I sug­
gest, to inquire into the absolute correctness of a
conceptual scheme as a mirror of reality. Our stan­
dard for appraising basic changes of conceptual
scheme must be, not a realistic standard of corres­
pondence to reality, but a pragmatic standard. 4
Concepts are language, and the purpose of con­
cepts and oflanguage is efficacy in communication
and in prediction. Such is the ultimate duty of
language, science, and philosophy, and it is in
relation to that duty that a conceptual scheme has
finally to be appraised.
Elegance, conceptual economy, also enters as an
objective. But this virtue, engaging though it is, is
secondary - sometimes in one way and sometimes
in another. Elegance can make the difference
between a psychologically manageable conceptual
scheme and one that is too unwieldy for our poor
minds to cope with effectively. Where this hap­
pens, elegance is simply a means to the end of a
pragmatically acceptable conceptual scheme. But
elegance also enters as an end in itself - and quite
properly so as long as it remains secondary in
another respect; namely, as long as it is appealed
to only in choices where the pragmatic standard
prescribes no contrary decision. Where elegance
doesn't matter, we may and shall, as poets, pursue
elegance for elegance's sake.
Could only treat of things concrete
And present to the senses.
4 On this theme see Pierre Duhem, La Theorie physique:
son object et sa structure (Paris, 1906), pp. 34, 280, 347;
or Armand Lowinger, The Methodology oj Pierre Duhem
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1941), pp. 41,
121, 145. \n23
Richard Cartwright
According to Hobbes, "a body is that, which hav­
ing no dependence on our thought, is coincident or
coextended with some part of space. ") Bodies in
Hobbes's sense are material objects in ours; so at
any rate I shall assume. And I shall assume also that
his definition is correct at least in its implication
that coincidence with some part of space is
required of anything that is to count as a material
object. But what is to count as a part of space?
By a region of space, or simply a region, let us
agree to understand any set of points of space. And
by a receptacle let us understand a region of space
with which it is possible some material object
should be, in Hobbes's phrase, coincident or co­
extended. Plainly, not every region is a receptacle.
The null region is not; neither is any region that
consists of a single point or, for that matter, of any
finite number of points. Nor are higher cardinal­
ities by themselves sufficient: no region exceeds
a straight line in sheer number of members; 2
yet straight lines, along with curves and surfaces,
are not receptacles. How, then, are receptacles to be
characterized?
Let p be any point of space. By an open sphere
about p is meant a region the members of which are
all and only those points that are less than some
fixed distance from p. In other words, a region A is
an open sphere about the point p if and only if there
Originally published in Keith Lehrer (ed. ), Analysis and
Metaphysics (Dordrecht: Reidel. 1975). pp. 153-71.
Reprinted by permission of Kluwer Academic Pub­
lishers.
is a positive real number r such that A is the set of
all those points whose distance from p is less than r.
A region that is an open sphere about some point or
other is called simply an open sphere.
Every open sphere is, I suggest, a receptacle.
There are of course neither minimal nor maximal
open spheres: given any open sphere, no matter
how large or small, there is a larger and a smaller.
My suggestion will thus disturb those for whom
material objects are "moderate-sized specimens of
dry goods. ") But surely not all material objects are
moderate-sized. Heavenly bodies are bodies, some
of them very large; and antibodies are bodies,
extremely small ones. Given these actualities, why
impose bounds on the possibilities?
Others will be disturbed because they think of
receptacles as closed. Let me explain. A point p is
said to be a boundary point of a region A if and only
if every open sphere about p has a non-null inter­
section with both A and the complement of A
(where the complement of a region is the set of
points of space not in the region). Otherwise put,
p is a boundary point of A just in case every open
sphere about p has in it points of A and points of
the complement of A. To illustrate, let S be the
open sphere of radius r about p, and let q be a point
whose distance from p is exactly r. Then, every
open sphere about q will intersect both S and the
complement of S; and hence q is a boundary point
of S. In fact, the boundary points of S are precisely
those points that are like q in that their distance
from p is exactly r. A point whose distance from p is
less than r will be the center of an open sphere \nRichard Cartwright
included in S; and a point whose distance from p is
greater than r will be the center of an open sphere
included in the complement of S. Now, a region,
spherical or otherwise, is said to be open just in case
none of its boundary points is a member of it and
closed just in case all its boundary points are mem­
bers of it. We have just seen that an open sphere is,
appropriately enough, an open region: an open
sphere and its surface have no points in common.
And it is precisely this that will cause some to resist
the suggestion that every open sphere is a recept­
acle. Their intuitions tell them that a receptacle
should be closed. Descartes's told him otherwise.
After explaining that what he calls the "external
place" of a body is "the superficies of the sur­
rounding body, " he remarks that "by superficies
we do not here mean any portion of the surround­
ing body, but merely the extremity which is
between the surrounding body and that sur­
rounded. ,, 4 I shall follow Descartes, though I
should have no idea how to defend my choice;
indeed, the issue seems hardly worthy of serious
dispute. There is, however, a possible misconcep­
tion that needs to be cleared away, a misconception
perhaps latent in Descartes's use of 'between'. If
receptacles are open, it might seem that bodies
never touch, since something - if only a very fine
something - is always in between. But this is a
misconception. On either view body x touches
body y when and only when at least one boundary
point of the region occupied by x is also a boundary
point of the region occupied by y. The only issue is
whether such a boundary point must belong to the
regions occupied by x andy. And it is this issue that
seems hardly worthy of serious dispute.
I shall assume, then, that every receptacle is an
open region. But not every receptacle is an open
sphere; bodies do, after all, come in other shapes.
To allow for the endless possibilities, it will per­
haps be suggested that an open region be counted a
receptacle provided only that it is non-null.
Receptacles would thus come to be identified
with non-null open regions, spherical or otherwise.
A good many unwanted regions would thereby be
excluded: regions with only a finite number of
points, curves, and surfaces, for example. But the
suggestion will not do. Consider a region the mem­
bers of which are all the points of an open sphere S
save for a single pointp. Consider, that is, S - {p},
where S is an open sphere and p is a point in S. We
are reluctant, I think, to suppose this a receptacle.
Surely no material object could occupy all the
points of an open sphere save one. It is not that
objects never have holes; it is rather that holes are
never so small. Yet S - {p} is open, for it contains
none of its boundary points.
Only some, then, among open regions are
receptacles. Which ones? To investigate the ques­
tion, we shall need the notions of the interior and
the closure of a region. By the interior of a region is
meant the set of all points in the region that are not
boundary points of the region. Note that a region is
open if and only if it is identical with its interior, for
no boundary point of an open region is a member of
the region and interiors themselves are always
open. The closure of a region is the union of the
region with the set of all its boundary points. Just as
a region is open if and only if it is identical with its
interior, so a region is closed if and only if it is
identical with its closure; for a closed region
includes the set of its boundary points and closures
themselves are always closed. Now consider again
the region S - {p}. The point p is a boundary
point of the region, for every open sphere about p
intersects both S - {p} and its complement. But as
boundary points go, p is peculiarly situated, for it is
also a member of the interior of the closure of
S - {p}. Close S - {p} and you pick up p along
with the points on the surface of S; take the interior
of the resulting region and you keep p, though you
lose the points on the surface of S. In view of this
peculiarity of situation, let us say that p is an 'inner'
boundary point of S - {p}, where in general an
inner boundary point of a region is a boundary point
of the region that is also a member of the interior of
the closure of the region. It is possession of an inner
boundary point that leads us to exclude the region
S - {p} from the class of receptacles; and, accord­
ingly, I suggest that at least a necessary condition
for a non-null open region to qualify as a receptacle
is that it have no inner boundary points.
It is easily shown that open regions having no
inner boundary points are precisely those regions
that are identical with the interiors of their clo­
sures. And a region that is identical with the inter­
ior of its closure is known as an open domain. s So
the present suggestion comes to this: a region of
space is a receptacle only if it is a non-null open
domain. Another example may serve to clarify the
suggestion. Imagine an open sphere cut by a plane.
Let the open region on one side of the plane be A
and that on the other be B. Both A and B are open
domains, but their union is not; for the points on
the plane other than those on the surface of the
sphere are inner boundary points of AU B. Other­
wise put, since the points on the plane that are not \non the surface of the sphere are members of the
interior of the closure of A U B but not of A U B,
A U B is not identical with the interior of its closure
and is therefore not an open domain. 6 Thus AU B
is not a receptacle: no object can be coincident or
coextended with it. This is not to exclude the
possibility of cracks; it is simply to insist that cracks
are never so fine. Of course, the interior of the
closure of A U B is a receptacle. It is in fact the
open sphere with which we began. Thus a body can
occupy a region that includes AU B. But such a
region must include as well the set of inner bound­
ary points of A U B.
The proposition that every receptacle is a non­
null open domain is not apt to meet with serious
opposition. But what of its converse? Is every non­
null open domain a receptacle? Here there is likely
to be controversy. The issue turns on the notion of
connectedness, and we therefore need to see
exactly what this notion is.
It is customary to say that two regions are separ­
ated if and only if the intersection of either with the
closure of the other is null. Thus, in the example
just discussed, the regions A and B are separated:
take the closure of either, and you pick up no points
of the other. That is, no point or boundary point of
either is a member of the other. Obviously, if two
regions are separated, their intersection is null. But
two regions with a null intersection need not be
separated. Thus the intersection of A with the
closure of B is null; yet A and the closure of Bare
not separated, for there are boundary points of A in
the closure of B. Now, a region is said to be dis­
connected if and only if it is the union of two non­
null separated regions; and a region is connected if
and only if it is not disconnected. Thus, keeping to
the same example, A U B is disconnected. In con­
trast, the interior of the closure of A U B is con­
nected, for there do not exist two non-null
separated regions of which it is the union. It is a
connected open domain. But it is by no means the
case that all open domains are connected. Consider,
for example, two open spheres that touch at a single
point. The closure of either intersected with the
other is null, and the two are therefore separated.
Hence their union is disconnected. But it is an open
domain: none of its boundary points is inner, even
the point of contact. Or consider two open spheres
situated at some distance from each other. Their
union is evidently a disconnected open domain.
Connected open domains, as long as they are
non-null, presumably present no problems. Each
is a receptacle. But disconnected open domains are
Scattered Objects
another matter. Are they receptacles? I shall defend
the position that they are, though admittedly I have
no conclusive argument.
Let us say that a material object is scattered just in
case the region of space it occupies is disconnected.
That there are scattered material objects seems to
me beyond reasonable doubt. If natural scientists
are to be taken at their word, all the familiar objects
of everyday life are scattered. But I have in mind
nothing so esoteric. Rather, it seems to me a matter
of simple observation that among material objects
some are scattered. Consider, for example, my copy
of McTaggart's The Nature of Existence. There
surely is such a thing; and it is a material thing,
even a moderate-sized specimen of dry goods. After
all, it is made of paper and certain other materials; it
weighs roughly three and a quarter pounds; it is
bound in a hard black cover; it occupies a certain
region of space, into which it was recently moved;
and so on. But it is scattered, for volume 1 is in
Cambridge and volume 2 is in Boston. Each volume
occupies, or at least to the ordinary eye appears to
occupy, a connected open domain; but these
regions are separated, and hence their union is
disconnected. This example will bring to mind
hosts of similar ones. Let me mention two others
of a somewhat different kind. There is at the
moment a pipe on my desk. Its stem has been
removed, but it remains a pipe for all that; other­
wise no pipe could survive a thorough cleaning. So
at the moment the pipe occupies a disconnected
region of space, a region which appears to common
sense to be the disconnected open domain that is
the union of the connected open domains occupied
by the two parts. Consider, finally, some printed
inscription: the token of 'existence' on the title page
of my copy of McTaggart's The Nature of Existence,
for example. Presumably it is a material object - a
"mound of ink, " as some say. But evidently it
occupies a disconnected region of space.
If there are scattered objects, then some discon­
nected open domains are receptacles. It does not
follow that all are. Still, once some have been
admitted, it seems arbitrary to exclude any - just
as it seems arbitrary to impose limits on the size or
shape of receptacles. And it should be remembered
that to call a region a receptacle is not to say that
some object is in fact coincident or coextended with
it, but only to say that this is not impossible. All
this inclines me to identify receptacles with non­
null open domains. 7
An interesting question remains, however. To
introduce it, let me mention an objection that is apt \nRichard Cartwright
to be brought against the contention that my copy
of The Nature of Existence is a scattered material
object. Some will be inclined to say, with Leibniz,
that my copy of The Nature of Existence is a "being
by aggregation, " not a "true unity. "s Leibniz
would not himself have taken this to imply that it
is not a material object - only that it is not what he
called an "individual substance. " His notion of
individual substance aside, however, some will
still be inclined to say that my copy of The Nature
of Existence is a mere 'plurality' or 'aggregate' or
'assemblage' of material objects and not properly
speaking a single material object in its own right. It
is no more correct, they will say, to suppose there is
one thing composed or made up of my copy of
volume 1 and my copy of volume 2 than to suppose
there is one thing composed or made up of, say, the
Eiffel Tower and Old North Church. We do speak
of my copy of The Nature of Existence as if it were a
single thing, and there is no parallel to this in the
case of the Eiffel Tower and Old North Church.
But it will be claimed that this is reflective merely
of our special human interests, not of the metaphy­
sical status of the entities involved. The two
volumes are a mere assemblage, just as are the
tower and the church.
The obscurity of the objection makes a direct
response difficult. What exactly is meant by "a
mere plurality or aggregate or assemblage"? And
what sense is to be made of the claim that my copy
of The Nature of Existence - or anything else, for
that matter - is not 'one' thing? Furthermore, one
wonders how far the objection is to be carried. The
alleged defect in my copy of The Nature of Existence
is surely not simply that the region occupied by
volume I is at some distance from that occupied by
volume 2. Even were the two volumes side by side,
separated only by a plane, they would presumably
still be said not to constitute or compose a single
material object. The interior of the closure of the
union of the region occupied by the one volume
with that occupied by the other would be a recep­
tacle, but an unoccupied one. But then why not
argue, as Leibniz did, that no material thing is
properly speaking one thing? Any connected open
domain can be cut by a plane in such a way as to
leave two open domains whose union is discon­
nected. Therefore, Leibniz reasoned, every corpor­
eal object is in theory divisible, and what is in
theory divisible is only a being by aggregation. 9
In spite of its obscurity and the uncertainty of its
extent of applicability, the objection brings to the
surface a question of some interest. Is there a
material object composed of the Eiffel Tower and
Old North Church? In general, is it the case that for
each non-null set of material objects there is a
material object composed of the members of the
set? The question needs sharper formulation, and
for that some additional technical terminology is
required.
A set M of material objects will be said to cover a
region A if and only if A is included in the union of
the receptacles occupied by members of M. If A
simply is that union, then obviously M covers A.
For example, the set the members of which are the
Eiffel Tower and Old North Church covers the
region which is the union of the receptacle occu­
pied by the Eiffel Tower and the receptacle
occupied by Old North Church. In particular, if x
is any material object, the set having x as sole
member covers the region occupied by x. Clearly,
if M covers A, then M covers any region included
in A. Hence a given region may be covered by more
than one set. The region occupied by Old North
Church, for example, is covered by the set having
Old North Church as sole member and also by the
set the members of which are the Eiffel Tower and
Old North Church. If M covers A, then A is
included in the interior of the closure of the
union of the receptacles occupied by members of
M. But notice that M may cover A and yet fail to
cover the interior of the closure of A. Thus,
although a set the members of which are two
books situated side by side covers the union of the
receptacles occupied by the books, it does not cover
the interior of the closure of that union.
If and only if a set covers a region, the region
itself will be said to be covered. It should be noticed
that if each member of a collection of regions is
covered, so is the union of the collection. Indeed,
so is any region included in the union of the collec­
tion.
Given the notion of a covered region, a proposi­
tion I shall call the Covering Principle can be for­
mulated: If A is any non-null covered open region,
there exists exactly one material object x such that the
region occupied by x is the interior of the closure of A.
Our question is whether this principle, or more
especially a certain consequence of it, is true.
A preliminary word of explanation. Given a non­
null covered open region A, the Covering Principle
guarantees that A is the region occupied by a
unique material object if and only if A is the inter­
ior of its closure, that is, if and only if A is an open
domain. This accords with our requirement that
only open domains be counted receptacles. It is in \nfact easily shown that the Covering Principle runs
no risk of violating that requirement; for the inter­
ior of the closure of any set is an open domain. But
then, it may be asked, why limit the principle to
non-null covered open regions? The answer is that
otherwise there would be a conflict with the
requirement that receptacles be non-null; for the
interior of the closure of a non-open region may
well be the null set. to
Notice now the power of the principle. To use a
familiar and convenient metaphor, it provides for
the generation by composition of new objects from
old in somewhat the fashion of the Power Set
Axiom in Set Theory. Given three objects in separ­
ated receptacles A, B, and C, there will exist four
others. For if A, Band C are covered, so are each of
AU B, A U C, B U C, and A U B U C; and if A, B,
and C are separated, these unions are distinct from
one another and from each of A, B, and C. In
general, given a set M of n objects situated in
pairwise separated receptacles, there will exist
2" - (n + 1) further objects, each compounded of
members of m. A dozen dollar bills in your wallet
makes for 4, 083 additional objects in your wallet ~
none of them dollar bills, however. And this is by
no means the end. For the Covering Principle
provides for generation of objects by division as
well as by composition. Let A be a covered recept­
acle, and for purposes of simplification suppose it
connected. Then A is the interior of the closure of
the union of two connected and separated recepta­
cles Band C, so situated that B lies on one side of a
plane that intersects A while C lies on the other.
Clearly, the same is in turn true of Band C, and of
the receptacles into which they are thus divided,
and so on without end. So there corresponds to A
an infinity of connected and pairwise separated
receptacles each of which is covered. The Covering
Principle provides that each of these receptacles is
the region of space occupied by a unique material
object. Now, it is easily seen that if any region is
covered, at least one connected receptacle is cov­
ered. Hence, by the Covering Principle, if there is
one material object, there are infinitely many. ll
Our present concern is less with division than
composition. It will therefore be of use to extract
from the Covering Principle an appropriately
weaker principle, one directed squarely at the
issue of scattered objects. First a definition. A
material object x will be said to fuse a set M of
material objects just in case the receptacle occupied
by x meets two conditions: (i) it includes the
receptacles occupied by members of M, and (ii) it
Scattered Objects
is included in every receptacle that includes the
receptacles occupied by members of M. More sim­
ply, x fuses M if and only if the region occupied by
x is the smallest receptacle that includes the recept­
acles occupied by members of M. In the case of any
collection of receptacles, there is always a smallest
receptacle that includes each member of the collec­
tion ~ namely, the interior of the closure of the
union of the collection. So we might as well have
said: x fuses M if and only if the region occupied by
x is precisely the interior of the closure of the union
of the receptacles occupied by members of M. My
copy of The Nature of Existence, for example, fuses
the set whose members are my copy of volume 1
and my copy of volume 2; and the object, if such
there be, composed of the Eiffel Tower and Old
North Church fuses the set whose members are
the Eiffel Tower and Old North Church. Notice
that any material object fuses the set having that
object as sole member. And notice also a sort of
transitivity: if x fuses a set the members of which in
turn fuse other sets, x fuses the union of those other
sets.
Can distinct objects fuse the same set? Not if the
Covering Principle is true. If x and y fuse M, the
receptacle occupied by x is the very same as that
occupied by y; and the Covering Principle tells us
that no receptacle is the region occupied by more
than one object. Can there be a non-null set of
material objects which no material object fuses?
Again, not if the Covering Principle is true. For
the union of the receptacles occupied by members
of the set is a covered non-null open region the
interior of the closure of which is the smallest
receptacle that includes the receptacles occupied
by members of the set. Thus the Covering Princi­
ple entails what I shall call the Fusion Principle: If
M is any non-null set of material objects, there is
exactzy one material object x such that x fuses M.
According to this principle, each non-null set of
material objects has a unique fusion: a material
object so situated that its receptacle is the interior
of the closure of the union of the receptacles occu­
pied by members of the set. If the Fusion Principle
is true, there really is a material object ~ exactly
one, in fact ~ composed of the Eiffel Tower and
Old North Church. It is composed of them in the
sense that the region it covers is the union of the
regions they cover.
I have taken the word 'fusion' from the exposi­
tion given by Leonard and Goodman of the so­
called calculus of individualsY And it may be
instructive at this point to digress briefly from \nRichard Cartwright
our main concerns in order to make contact with
the principal ideas of that calculus.
Let E be a non-empty set, and let R be a relation
that is reflexive in E, anti symmetric in E, and
transitive in E. (We are to think of R as a part­
whole relation among elements of E, though of
course that plays no role in the abstract develop­
ment. ) Two elements of E are said to overlap just in
case they have a part in common; that is, if x and y
are in E, x overlaps y if and only if some element of
E bears R to both x and y. Now, the ordered pair
(R, E) is a mereology just in case two further con­
ditions are satisfied: (i) if x andy are members of E
such that every member of E that overlaps x also
overlaps y, then x is part of y; (ii) there exists a
function f from the collection of non-empty sub­
sets of E into E such that, for each non-empty
subset A of E, a member of E overlaps f(A) if
and only if it overlaps some member of A. 13 As
thus defined, mereologies are natural models of the
Leonard-Goodman calculus.
Examples of mereologies are readily available. In
fact, if B is the set of non-zero elements of a
complete Boolean algebra and R is the inclusion
relation among elements of B, (B, R) is a mereo­
logy in which the Boolean join plays the part of the
mereological functionf14 More pertinent examples
are provided by the following small theorem:
Let N be a non-empty family of non-empty
open domains of a topological space. And sup­
pose N is such that (i) the interior of the closure
of the union of each non-empty subset of N is
itself in N; (ii) if A and B are members of N
such that A - B is non-empty, then the interior
ofthe closure of A - B is in N. Then (N, C; ;) is
a mereology with respect to which the mereo­
logical function f is the function that assigns
to each non-empty subset of N the interior of
the closure of its union.
Notice that the theorem holds for any topological
space - that is, for any space defined simply via a
specification of the subsets that are to count as
open, where the notion of an open set is subject
only to the usual condition that among the open
sets are to be found all unions of collections of open
sets and all intersections of finite collections of
open sets. Of greater interest for our purposes is
the following corollary. Assume the Covering Prin­
ciple; and assume that each material object occu­
pies a unique receptacle, where receptacles are
non-empty open domains of a topological space.
Let M be a non-empty set of material objects that
satisfies two closure conditions: (i) the fusion of
each non-empty subset of M is itself in M; (ii) if x
and yare elements of M such that the receptacle of
x minus the receptacle ofy is non- empty, then the
material object that occupies the interior of the
closure of the receptacle of x minus the receptacle
of y is in M. (Note that the existence of this object
is a consequence of the Covering Principle. ) Then,
if P is the relation that an element x of M bears
to an elementy of M just in case the receptacle of x
is included in the receptacle of y, (M, P) is a
mereology with respect to which the mereological
function f is the function that assigns to each
non-empty subset of M its fusion.
So much for connections with the calculus of
individuals. Let us return to our main themes.
As already noticed, every material object is the
fusion of at least one set: namely, the set having that
object as sole member. Commonly, an object will be
the fusion of others sets as well. A scattered object,
for example, will be the fusion of the set having
itself as sole member; but it will also be the fusion of
the set of those objects that occupy maximal con­
nected receptacles included in the receptacle of the
scattered object. Indeed, if the Covering Principle
is true, every object will be the fusion of endlessly
many sets. The Covering Principle provides for
fission as well as fusion, and what is obtained at
any stage by fission is a set of which the original
object is the fusion. Any given object occupies a
receptacle; and covered receptacles are, as we have
seen, endlessly divisible into further covered recep­
tacles. The given object will be the fusion of the set
of objects occupying the subreceptacles obtained at
any stage of the division - provided, of course, the
division is exhaustive, in the sense that the recep­
tacle occupied by the object is the interior of the
closure of the union of those subreceptacles. To
think of an object in this way will seem more or less
natural depending on our willingness to count as
genuine the alleged occupants of the various sub­
receptacles. Two halves of an intact baseball will
perhaps seem material objects only in some con­
trived sense, and the baseball itself will then not
naturally be thought of as the fusion of a set the
members of which are the two halves. Similarly
with bottles, doughnuts, and sheets of paper. But
it is otherwise with automobiles, books of matches,
and salami sandwiches. In these cases we take
rather easily to the idea that the object is the fusion
of a set of other objects - not just any set of alleged
objects yielded by the Covering Principle, of \ncourse, but a set conslstmg of what are in the
natural way thought of as parts of the object.
To become quite specific, consider some parti­
cular book of matches, and for ease of reference call
it 'Charlie'. It is altogether natural to think of
Charlie as consisting of twenty matches, a paper
base to which they are attached, a surrounding
paper cover, and an appropriately placed metal
staple. That is to say, Charlie is quite naturally
thought of as the fusion of the set that has these
various objects as members. Thus, calling the set in
question 'A', we are inclined to assert
(1) Charlie = the fusion of A.
Of course, we are not prepared to regard every set
the members of which are twenty matches, a paper
cover, and so on as having a book of matches as its
fusion. The objects in the set must be properly put
together. But the objects in A are properly put
together. And the region of space Charlie occupies
is the interior of the closure of the union of the
receptacles occupied by members of A.
But now let us remove a single match from
Charlie and place it some distance from him,
while putting him back where he was - that is,
putting him in a receptacle properly included in
the receptacle he earlier occupied. Charlie, we
should all agree, has undergone a change. He has
lost a part, as material objects often do. He now
consists of the various objects he consisted of
before, save for the removed match. The receptacle
he now occupies is the interior of the closure of the
union of the receptacles occupied by members of
A - {z}, where z is the match that has been
removed. Just as we were earlier inclined to assert
(l), so we are now inclined to assert
(2) Charlie = the fusion of (A - {z} ).
But we can hardly deny
(3) The fusion of A # the fusion of (A - {z}).
And so we seem to be in violation of the principle
that no one thing is identical with diverse things.
It will no doubt be suggested at once that the
appearance of paradox is removed once time is
properly taken into account. Charlie was identical
with the fusion of A but is now identical with the
fusion of (A - {z}); or, avoiding tensed verbs:
(4) At t, Charlie = the fusion of A,
Scattered Objects
whereas
(5) At t', Charlie = the fusion of (A - {z}),
where it is to be understood that t' is appropriately
later than t. Ifit is pointed out that (3), (4), and (5)
together entail
(6) At t', Charlie # the fusion of A,
the response will be that this is no cause for alarm,
since (4) and (6) are perfectly compatible.
But is it really possible for both (4) and (6) to be
true? Their conjunction appears to imply that there
is a certain object - namely, the fusion of A - with
which Charlie is identical at t but not at t'. And this
surely is impossible. It is impossible for Charlie to
have been identical with one object, the fusion of A,
and then to have become identical with another
object, the fusion of (A - {z} ). No object can be
identical with something for a while and then
become identical with something else. Once ident­
ical with one thing, never identical with another. IS
It will be pointed out that the conjunction of
(4) and (6) does not imply that there is an object
with which Charlie is identical at t but not at t'.
According to (4), Charlie has at t the property of
being sole fuser of A; and according to (6), he lacks
that property at t'. But this no more requires
Charlie to have been temporarily identical with
the fusion of A than the fact that Lyndon Johnson
had and then lost the property of being president
of the United States requires him to have been
temporarily identical with a certain object with
which Richard Nixon became identical. Thus (4)
amounts to
(7) (x)(x fuses A at t iff x = Charlie),
(5) amounts to
(8) (x)(x fuses (A - {z}) att' iff x = Charlie),
and (6) amounts to
(9) ~ (x)(x fuses A at t' iff x = Charlie).
And it is evidently quite possible that all these
should be true.
There is reason to doubt, however, whether this
ends the matter. If the Fusion Principle is true,
some object is the fusion of A at t', a certain
scattered object we may call 'Harry'. Now why \nRichard Cartwright
should we not say that Harry fused A at t? We have
treated Charlie as a continuant, an object that
endures for a period of time during which it under­
goes change. It would seem only fair to treat Harry
in the same way. Like Charlie, Harry underwent a
certain change. He occupied a connected receptacle
at t and a disconnected one at t'. Harry became a
scattered object.
It would appear, then, that Harry has as good a
claim to having been sole fuser of A at t as does
Charlie. If (7) is true, so, it would appear, is
(10) (x)(x fuses A at t iff x = Harry).
Now, from (7) and (10) it presumably follows that
at t Charlie and Harry were identical. But they are
not identical now. And so once more we seem to
have on our hands a temporary identity.
And another is in the offing. For consider Sam,
the object which at t occupied the receptacle now
occupied by Charlie. Sam is right where he was at t.
He has of course undergone a change: at t he and z
were in contact, the boundaries of their receptacles
intersected; and this is no longer the case. But his
position has not changed. The receptacle he now
occupies is the one he occupied at t - namely, the
interior of the closure of the union of the recept­
acles occupied by members of A - {z}. In short,
Sam is at t' the fusion of (A - {z}). Or, to adopt
the preferred form,
(11) (x)(x fuses (A - {z}) at t' iff x = Sam).
But from (8) and (II) it presumably follows that at
t' Charlie and Sam are identical, which they cer­
tainly were not at t. Though now identical, Charlie
and Sam were once diverse. Or so it seems.
How are these temporary identities to be
avoided? Perhaps some will say that there really is
no such object as Harry: Charlie exists and so does
the removed match, but those two objects do not
compose or make up a single scattered object. But if
there are scattered objects at all - and I have urged
that there are -why object to Harry? There would
appear to be no difference in principle between
Harry, on the one hand, and my copy of The Nature
of Existence, on the other. It has to be conceded that
there is no readily available response to a request to
say what sort or kind of object Harry is. But it is not
clear to me that this is indicative of anything more
than a paucity of readily available schemes of clas­
sification, a paucity resulting from quite parochial
concerns of human beings. It is not out of the
question that objects composed in the way Harry
is should come to be of some interest; we should
not then be at a loss to find an appropriate kind or
sort.
Short of denying outright the existence of
Harry, it might be contended that he begins to
exist only at t', that he starts his career with Char­
lie's loss of z. This suggestion does have the merit
of preserving the Fusion Principle while removing
the necessity to puzzle over the apparent temporary
identity of Charlie with Harry. But I see nothing
else to be said for it. Bodies do from time to time
become scattered. What reason is there to suppose
this is not the situation with Harry? And in any
case, what is to be done about Sam? There is no
plausibility at all in an outright denial of his exist­
ence, and it seems obvious enough that his duration
coincides with Charlie's. To deny the existence of
Harry or to claim that he begins to exist only upon
z's removal from Charlie simply leaves the problem
of Sam untouched.
An alternative suggestion, one that not only pre­
serves the Fusion Principle but also has the
required generality, is that Charlie is really identi­
cal with Harry. On this view, Charlie fuses A at t
and also at t'. He does not lose a part; he becomes
scattered. As for Sam, well, once Charlie is thought
of as scattered at t', we are free to think of Sam as
fusing A - {z} at t' without thereby implying a
temporary identity of Sam with Charlie. There is
simply no time at which Charlie and Sam occupy
the same receptacle.
In spite of its neatness, I think this view will
seem less than wholly satisfactory. We are all, I
believe, inclined to think that after the removal of
z Charlie survives as a non scattered object. If asked
to give his present location, we should indicate a
certain connected receptacle, the one occupied by
Sam. Perhaps our stake in Charlie's nonscattered
persistence is not especially great, but it is there all
the same; and certainly in other, analogous cases
the view under discussion would seem quite unac­
ceptable. If a branch falls from a tree, the tree does
not thereby become scattered; and a human body
does not become scattered upon loss of a bit of
fingernail.
At this point some will despair of preserving the
Fusion Principle. They will see no alternative to
saying that Charlie and Harry, though distinct,
nevertheless occupy the same receptacle at t and
that Charlie and Sam, though again distinct
objects, share a receptacle at t'. To take this posi­
tion is to sacrifice the Fusion Principle by denying \nthat exactly one thing fuses a given non-empty set
of material objects. Both Charlie and Harry,
according to this view, fuse A at t; neither has the
property of being sole fuser of A at t. Similarly,
neither Charlie nor Sam is sole fuser of A - {z} at
t'; for at t' Charlie and Sam are spatially coincident.
This view seems to me to put undue strain on
one's metaphysical imagination. Locke wrote:
". .. never finding, nor conceiving it possible, that
two things of the same kind should exist in the
same place at the same time, we rightly conclude,
that, whatever exists anywhere at any time,
excludes all of the same kind, and is there itself
alone. ,, 16 Are not Charlie and Harry two things of
some one appropriate kind? Notice, furthermore,
that it is not that just two material objects will, on
this view, occupy the same receptacle at the same
time; for it takes only a little ingenuity to find
material objects other than Charlie and Harry
with an equal claim to occupancy of that receptacle
at t. To give some indication of the procedure
involved, let us remove a second match from Char­
lie, place it some distance from z and from Charlie,
and again put Charlie back where he was. Charlie
has lost another part. In thus putting Charlie back
where he was while leaving the position of z
unchanged, we have also put Harry back where he
was; he now occupies a receptacle properly
included in the receptacle he occupied at t'. Harry
too has lost a part. As a result, he has lost the
property, which he had at t', of being sole fuser of
A. But something now has that property, a certain
scattered object whose receptacle is the union of
two receptacles: the one occupied by Harry and the
one occupied by the second removed match. Let us
call that object 'Bill'. Now, there is no more reason
to suppose that Bill just now came into existence
than there is to suppose that Harry came into
existence at t'. Indeed, there is no reason to deny
that there is a material object which occupied a
connected receptacle at t, became somewhat scat­
tered at t', and has just now had its degree of scatter
Notes
I Thomas Hobbes, De corpore, 2. 8. I.
2 Georg Cantor, "Ein Beitrag zur Mannigfaltigkeit­
slehre, " Journalfur die reine und angewandte Mathem­
atik 84 (1878), pp. 242-58.
3 The phrase, though not the view, is]. L. Austin's. See
Sense and Sensibilia (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1962),
p. 8.
Scattered Objects
increased. Bill has as good a claim to occupancy of
Charlie's receptacle at t as do Charlie and Harry.
So, if Charlie and Harry shared a receptacle at t,
they shared it with Bill.
If the Fusion Principle is to be retained, is there
an alternative to acquiescence in the view that
Charlie fails to survive in nonscattered form? I
think there is. The view I have in mind involves
recourse to what are sometimes called 'temporal
parts' or 'stages' of objects. In the case at hand
the suggestion would be that although Charlie
and Harry are distinct objects, as is revealed by
their divergent careers, a certain temporal part of
Charlie is identical with a certain temporal part
of Harry: Charlie's t-stage, as we might call it, is
identical with Harry's t-stage. Similarly, although
Charlie and Sam are distinct objects, Charlie's t'­
stage is identical with Sam's t'-stage. No stage of
Sam is identical with any stage of Harry, though it
happens that each stage of Harry has some stage of
Sam as a spatial part. What was loosely spoken of
earlier as the fusion of A at t is now to be thought of
as the fusion of the set of t-stages of members of A;
and this object is simply Charlie's t-stage - that is,
Harry's t-stage. Similarly, Harry's t'-stage is the
fusion of the set of ('-stages of members of A; and
Sam's ('-stage - that is, Charlie's t'-stage - is the
fusion of the set of t'-stages of members of
A - {z}. Charlie, Harry, and Sam thus come to
be conceived as distinct four-dimensional objects,
which happen on occasion to share a common
temporal part.
Philosophers as divergent in their outlooks as
McTaggart and Quine have found the doctrine of
temporal parts congenial or even obviously true. 17
But there are others who exhibit something less
than overwhelming enthusiasm for it. 18 To these
latter I can say only that if they are drawn to the
Fusion Principle and are at the same time reluctant
to think that Charlie fails to survive in nonscattered
form, they had better learn to live with temporal
parts.
4 Rene Descartes, Principles of Philosophy, pt 2,
principle IS; trans. Elizabeth S. Haldane and
G. R. T. Ross (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1967).
5 K. Kuratowski, Topology, vol. I (New York: Aca­
demic Press, 1966), p. 75. A common alternative is
'regular open set'. \nRichard Cartwright
6 Compare Paul R. Halmos, Lectures on Boolean Alge­
bras (Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand, 1963), p. 14.
7 The identification of receptacles with non-null open
domains was suggested to me by remarks made by
Alfred Tarski in "Foundations of the geometry of
solids, " included in his Logic, Semantics, and Meta­
mathematics (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1956), pp.
24-9.
8 See, e. g. , his letter to Arnauld, 30 Apr. 1687, in
George R. Montgomery (trans) Leibniz: Discourse
on Metaphysics, Correspondence with Arnauld, and
Monadology (La Salle, Ill. : Open Court, 1945), esp.
pp. 189-91.
9 "Every extended mass may be considered as a com­
posite of two or of a thousand others, and the only
extension there is, is that by contact. Consequently,
we shall never find a body of which we can say that
it is really one substance; it will always be an
aggregate of several" (Leibniz, draft of the letter of
28 Nov. -8 Dec. 1686 to Arnauld, in Montgomery,
Leibniz, pp. 149-57; the quotation is from pp.
154-5).
10 For instance, the interior of the closure of a region
containing a single point. Any set the interior of the
closure of which is null is called nowhere dense.
II "The least corpuscle is actually subdivided in infini­
tum and contains a world of other creatures which
would be wanting in the universe if that corpuscle
was an atom, that is, a body of one entire piece without
subdivision" (Leibniz, fourth letter to Clarke, in
Leroy E. Loemaker (trans. and ed), Leibniz:
Philosophical Papers and Letters, 2nd edn (Dordrecht:
Reidel, 1970), pp. 687--91; the quotation IS trom
p. 691).
12 Henry S. Leonard and Nelson Goodman, "The cal­
culus of individuals and its uses, " Journal o/5)mbolic
Logic 5 (1940), pp. 45-55. I have not had access to the
earlier expositions given by Lesniewski, for references
to which see the bibliography in Eugene C. Luschei,
The Logical Systems 0/ Lesniewski (Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1962).
13 More economical characterizations are known. See,
for instance, Tarski's "Foundations of the geometry
of solids. "
14 See Tarski, Logic, Semantics, and Metamathematics,
p. 333n.
IS Compare David Wiggins, Identizy and Spatio­
Temporal Continuity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), p. 68.
16 John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
bk 2, ch. 27, sect. 1. And compare Aquinas: "nec est
possibile, secundum naturam, duo corpora esse simul
in eodem loco, qualiacumque corpora sint" (Summa
theologiae, I, q. 67, a. 2, in corpore. ) See also Aristotle,
Physics, 209a6.
17 SeeJ. M. E. McTaggart, The Nature o/ExLltence, vol.
I (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1921), p.
176; W. V. Quine, From a Logical Point 0/ View, 2nd
edn, rev. (New York: Harper and Row, 1963), pp.
65-79.
18 Thus C. D. Broad: "It is plainly contrary to common
sense to say that the phases in the history of a thing are
parts of the thing" (Examination 0/ McTaggart's Phi­
losopky, vol. I (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1933), pp. 349-50). \nJudith Jarvis Thomson
Temporal parts have come in handy in a number of
areas in philosophy. 1 Let us take a close look at one
use to which some may be inclined to want to put
them.
I
Suppose I own some Tinkertoys. I make a house
out of them, finishing the task at 1: 00. I put the
house, which I shall call "H, " on an otherwise
empty shelf. Since H is the only Tinkertoy house
now on the shelf, and since also the time now is
1: 15, we may truly say
(I) H = the Tinkertoy house on the shelf at 1: IS.
A Tinkertoy house is made of Tinkertoys. And
surely a Tinkertoy house is made only of Tinker­
toys: surely it has no additional ingredients, over
and above the Tinkertoys it is made of. (Perhaps
there is such an entity as "house-shape. " Even if
there is, it certainly is not literally part of any
Tinkertoy house. )
It is an attractive idea that the logic of parthood
is the Leonard-Goodman Calculus ofIndividuals, z
which takes "x D y" (read: x is discrete from y) as
primitive, defines "x < y" (read: x is part ofy) and
"x 0 y" (read: x overlaps y) as follows:
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 80
(1983), pp. 201-20. Copyright CO by Journal of Philo­
sophy, Inc. Reprinted by permission of Columbia Uni­
versity.
x <y = df (z)(zDy: :) zDx)
x Oy = df (: Jz)(z < x & z <y)
and contains the following distinctive axioms:
(Cld (x = y) == (x < y &y < x) identity axiom
(Clz) (x 0 y) == -(x D y) overlap axiom
(CI3)(: JX)(x E S): :) (: Jy)(yFuS) fusion axiom
where "x Fu S" (read: x fuses, S, or the Ss, or the
members of S) is defined as follows:
x Fu S = df (y)[yDx == (z)(z E S: :) yDz)]
(Another way in which we might have defined "x
fu S" is this: x fuses S just in case a thing y is part of
x if and only if every part ofy overlaps a member
of S. )
It is worth stressing that the fusion axiom says
only that, if anything is a member of S, then there
is a thing that fuses the Ss. What I shall call the
fusion principle3 says that if anything is a member of
S, then there is a unique thing that fuses the Ss.
(: Jx)(x E S): :) (E! y)(yFuS) fusion principle
Or, as we may put it: if anything is a member of S,
then there is such a thing as the fusion of the Ss. The
fusion principle is provable in the Calculus ofIndi­
viduals.
I said it is an attractive idea that the logic of
parthood is the Leonard-Goodman Calculus of \nJudith Jarvis Thomson
Individuals. If the axioms are true under their
intended interpretation, then so is the fusion prin­
ciple. There are Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: IS; so
the fusion principle tells us that there is such a
thing as the fusion of the Tinkertoys on the shelf
at 1: 15. I shall call it "W"; so we can say
(2) W = the fusion of the Tinkertoys on the shelf
at 1: 15.
Surely a Tinkertoy house is made only of Tin­
kertoys. The Tinkertoys H is made of are the
Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15. So it very naturally
suggests itself that we should say
(3) H = W.
So far so good; no problem yet.
II
But we should take note of the fact that that fusion
axiom makes some people feel nervous. Few, I
think, feel nervous about the definitions or about
the identity and overlap axioms, but many object to
the idea that there is something that fuses (as it
might be) the set whose members are all giraffes
and all apples. They think the fusion axiom grossly
overstrong.
But why? The fusion axiom does commit us to
the existence of some pretty odd things, but, so far
as I can see, their oddity is no objection to them.
Never mind: the problem I want to set before
you arises even if we reject the fusion axiom.
For suppose you have some bits of wood in your
hand now; doesn't it follow that there is such a
thing as the wood in your hand now?
There are some Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15,
and, since Tinkertoys are bits of wood, it seems
right to say there therefore is such a thing as the
wood on the shelf at 1: 15. Let us call it "W'''; so we
can say
(2') W' = the wood on the shelf at 1: 15.
Surely a Tinkertoy house is made only of Tin­
kertoys. The Tinkertoys H is made of are the
Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15. The Tinkertoys
on the shelf at I: IS are themselves bits of wood. So
it very naturally suggests itself that we should say
(3') H = W'.
If the fusion principle is true, then there is such a
thing as the fusion of the Tinkertoys on the shelf at
1: 15. I gave that thing the name "W". If there is
such a thing as W, it seems plausible to suppose
that Wi is identical with it; i. e. , it seems plausible to
suppose that the wood on the shelf at I: 15 is the
fusion of the Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15.
Even if the fusion principle is not true - in that
the fusion axiom is overstrong - it seems plausible
to suppose that there is such a thing as W, and that
W' is identical with it; i. e. , even if the fusion
principle is not (in general) true, it seems plausible
to suppose that there is such a thing as the fusion of
the Tinkertoys on the shelf at I: IS, and that the
wood on the shelf at 1: 15 is identical with it.
But whether or not there is such a thing as W, it
really does seem plausible to suppose that there is
such a thing as W', the wood on the shelf at 1: 15.
And that the Tinkertoy house H is identical with it.
That will suffice for generating the problem I want
to set before you.
III
For let us give the name "alpha" to one of the sticks
that help attach the roof of the house to its front
wall. At 1: 30, I remove alpha; I then replace alpha
with a new stick, beta, and I throw alpha on the
floor. Shortly thereafter, the time is I: 45. Is H still
on the shelf at I: 45? That is, can we truly say
(4) H is on the shelf at 1: 45?
Most of us are, I think, inclined to think we can:
most of us are inclined to think that H survives
replacement of alpha by beta and is still on the shelf
at 1: 45.
Now there is trouble. For the conjunction of(3')
and (4) entails
(5') W' is on the shelf at 1: 45,
which is not true, for W' is only partly on the shelf
at 1: 45 - the wood on the shelf at 1: 15 is partly on
the floor at I: 45, since alpha is on the floor at 1: 45.
So also of course the conjunction of (3) and (4)
entails
(5) W is on the shelf at 1: 45,
which is also not true, even if there is such a thing
as W. For Wis only partly on the shelf at 1: 45 - the \nfusion of the Tinkertoys on the shelf at I: 15 is
partly on the floor at 1: 45, since alpha is on the
floor at 1: 45.
What to do? Something has to give.
Well, we really must retain (4). Surely that is
H on the shelf at 1: 45. (This is the typewriter I
bought five years ago, though I've had a key
replaced. )
So it is the identity sentences (3) and (3') which
have to go. But it seemed intuitively right to say
that a Tinkertoy house is made only of Tinkertoys.
It was that intuition which led us to identify H first
with Wand then, anyway, with W'. There has got
to be something right in that intuition; but what is
the something right in it, if (3) and (3') are not true?
How is H related to W' - and to W, if there is such a
thing as W?
David Wiggins, 4 I think, would say that W, or
anyway W', constitutes Hat 1: 15, and that that is
the most that can be retained of the intuition that a
Tinkertoy house is made only of Tinkertoys. He
may be right. But we cannot tell until we are made
clearer than Wiggins makes us about just what it is
for a thing x to constitute a thing y at a time t.
Richard CartwrightS draws attention to a solu­
tion that appeals to temporal parts. By hypothesis,
H came into existence at 1: 00, and alpha was
removed from H at 1: 30. H was in existence
throughout that time; and suppose we allow our­
selves to say that H therefore had a temporal part
that came into existence at 1: 00 and went out of
existence at 1: 30. If you like the fusion principle,
you will think there is such a thing as W. It too was
in existence throughout that time; and suppose we
allow ourselves to conclude that it too had a tem­
poral part that came into existence at 1: 00 and went
out of existence at 1: 30. Let us call these entities,
respectively, "H-from-I: 00-to-I: 30" and "W­
from-I: OO-to-I: 30. " Friends of temporal parts
take it that the temporal parts of a thing are,
literally, parts of it; so we should say
H-from-I: 00-to-I: 30 is part of H
and
W-from-I: 00-to-I: 30 is part of W.
A Tinkertoy house is made only of Tinkertoys.
Throughout 1: 00 to 1: 30, H was made of the Tin­
kertoys that W fuses; so shouldn't we say
H-from-I: 00-to-I: 30 = W-from-I: OO- to-I: 30,
Parthood and Identity Across Time
and thus that Hand W share a part - that they
literally overlap? Tinkertoy houses may be made of
different Tinkertoys at different times, however; so
don't we preserve as much as anyone could want of
the spirit of "A Tinkertoy house is made only of
Tinkertoys" if we say, quite generally, that, for
every temporal part x of a Tinkertoy house, there
is a Tinkertoy fusiony such that x is identical with,
or at least overlaps, some temporal part of y?
Of course you may not think there is any such
thing as W. Then you are cordially invited to
rewrite the preceding paragraph, replacing "W"
by " W''', and making the necessary changes else­
where in it.
But what exactly are these putative entities
H-from-I: OO-to-I: 30 and W-from-I: OO-to-I: 30?
Friends of "temporal parts" do seem to be just a
bit casual about the manner in which they explain
their use of that term; and a number of people have,
rightly, complained that we are owed something
more careful in the way of an account of them than
we are commonly given.
IV
There are a number of different ways of defining
the expression "temporal part". I shall try to define
it in such a way as to lend the greatest possible
plausibility to the metaphysical theses commonly
asserted by use of it.
What we are interested in here is physical objects
and their parts. Could I have said, more briefly,
that what we are interested in here is physical
objects? That is, is not every part of a physical
object itself a physical object? I should think so.
But let us not assume this. (I shall come back to it
below. ) Let us take the variables "x", "y", etc. to
range over physical objects and their parts. Then
the first of the metaphysical theses that must be
accommodated is this:
(M I) If x is a temporal part ofy, then x is part
ofy.
As I said, friends of temporal parts take it that the
temporal parts of a thing are literally part of it.
Or at least I think they do. For all I know, there
may be those who think that the temporal parts of a
thing are not parts of it, but only parts of something
else, perhaps of the thing's history. I shall ignore
that idea. (In any case, it is not clear exactly how
appeal to temporal parts is to help anyone see how \nJudith Jarvis Thomson
H is related to Wand W' if their temporal parts are
not among their parts. )
I should think that MJ rules out taking the tem­
poral parts of a physical object to be sets. Thus the
temporal parts of my chair, for example, cannot be
identified (as it might be) with the sets whose
members are the chair and a time-point or time­
stretch at or through which the chair exists, for I
should think that no set is literally part of my chair.
What I suggest we do is attend to places as well
as times. We have the idea that no two things can
occupy the same place at the same time. Well, I
hope that on reflection we shall conclude that that
idea is false. But if two things occupy the same
place at the same time, then don't they at least
overlap? Don't they literally share a part? That at
any rate is the root idea that generates the defini­
tions I shall give.
It will be simplest if we can make a certain
assumption: viz. , that every physical object, and
every part of every physical object, exactly occupies
exactly one place at every time-point at which it
exists. I mean to include among "places, " of course,
discontinuous places, since there are physical
objects that occupy such places now - for example,
my suit now occupies a discontinuous place, the
jacket being on one hanger and the skirt on another.
On one way of construing "places", that is a
strong, and presumably false, assumption. Suppose
we take places to have "sharp boundaries. "
(Because they are sets of space-points? Because
they are fusions of sets of space-points? No matter. )
Common-or-garden physical objects presumably
do not have sharp spatial boundaries. (What exactly
are the spatial boundaries of my chair now? ) But let
us simply ignore the questions raised here. Let us
take places to have sharp boundaries, and ignore
the fact that making the assumption therefore
involves spatial idealizing.
We are letting "x", "y", etc. range over physical
objects and their parts. Let "P" range over places.
Let t range over time-points, and "T' over times.
I include time-stretches among the times. I also
include time-points among the times, since many
(most? all? ) friends of temporal parts take it that
physical objects have temporal parts that exist only
at a time-point - i. e. , that physical objects have
temporal "slices" as well as temporal "chunks. "
(So the rangeof"t" is included in the range of" T". )
We go in two steps. Let us say, first,
x is a cross-sectional temporal part ofy = df
(: 3 T) [y and x exist through T & no part of x
exists outside T & (t) (t is in T: :: ) (P) (y
exactly occupies P at t: :: ) x exactly occupies P
at t»].
Consider again the Tinkertoy house H. It
existed through the time-stretch I: 00 to I: 30. If
there is an x such that x exists through that time­
stretch and such that no part of x exists outside that
time-stretch and such that, for all time-points in
that time-stretch, if H exactly occupies a place,
then x exactly occupies it too - if there is such an
x, then this definition tells us that x is a cross­
sectional temporal part of H. The definition does
not tell us that there is such an x. The friends of
temporal parts, of course, think there is; but telling
us there is is the job, not of any definition, but of a
second metaphysical thesis: viz. ,
(M z) (1) [y exists through T: :: ) (: 3x) (x exists
through T & no part of x exists outside T & (t)
(t is in T: :: ) (P) (y exactly occupies P at t: :: ) x
exactly occupies Pat t»].
Consider again alpha, the stick that was in H
until I removed it at 1: 30. Mz tells us that alpha had
a cross-sectional temporal part that existed only
from I: 00 to I: 30. Shouldn't all cross-sectional
temporal parts of alpha which existed only during
that time be temporal parts not merely of alpha, but
also of H itself? Presumably they should; so let us
say
x is a temporal part of y = df
(: 3 T) [y and x exist through T& no part of x
exists outside T& (t) (t is in T: :: ) (P) (yexactly
occupies P at t: :: ) x exactly occupies P, or a
place in P, at t»].
This definition tells us that cross-sectional
temporal parts of alpha which cxist only during
1: 00 to 1: 30 are temporal parts of alpha - and
ofH.
Nothing so far said ensures uniqueness. For
example, nothing so far said ensures that, if H
exists through 1: 00 to I: 30, then there is exactly
one x such that x exists through that time-stretch
and such that no part of x exists outside that time­
stretch and such that, for all time-points in that
time-stretch, if H exactly occupies a place, then x
exactly occupies it too. But shouldn't uniqueness
be ensured? I think that friends of temporal parts
would like it ensured; indeed, I think they accept a
third metaphysical thesis: viz. , \n(M3) If x is part of y andy is part of x, then x is
identical withy. "
Between them, M I and M3 ensure the desired
uniqueness. For suppose, for example, that x and
x' both have that rather complicated relation to H
which I just drew attention to. Then x and x' have
it to each other. Then x and x' are cross-sectional
temporal parts of each other and, hence, temporal
parts of each other and, hence, by M I, parts of each
other. It follows, by M3 that x is identical with x'.
M3 is obviously a consequence of the identity
aXIOm
(x = y) '= (x < y) & (y < x)
of the Calculus of Individuals under its intended
interpretation. Friends of temporal parts need not
assent to all the axioms of that calculus: for all I
know, some of them reject the fusion axiom as too
strong. (So far as I can see, there is nothing in the
metaphysic of temporal parts which commits its
adherents to the existence of a thing that fuses the
set whose members are all giraffes and all apples. )
But I think they are all of them happy to assent to
the identity axiom.
Mz tells us that there is an x that is a cross­
sectional temporal part of alpha lasting only from
1: 00 to I: 05 and that there is a y that is a cross­
sectional temporal part of H lasting only from 1: 10
to 1: 15; and the definition of "temporal part" tells
us that both x and yare temporal parts of H. Does
it follow that there is an entity that fuses x and y?
I think that even those friends of temporal parts
who think that the fusion axiom is not (in general)
true would assent to
If x is a temporal part of z and y is a temporal
part of z, then there is a Zl that fuses the set
whose members are x andy.
If this is true, then (in light of what precedes) they
can say that there is exactly one such z· and that it
is, itself, a temporal part of z. But I do not give this
further metaphysical thesis a name, since I suppose
it is just barely possible that some friend of tem­
poral parts thinks that even this "fusion thesis" is
too strong.
I have obviously been so using the expression "is
part of" to stand for a reflexive relation: I have been
throughout using it in such a way as to make it true
to say that everything is part of itself. I think all
friends of temporal parts use the expression "is a
Parthood and Identity Across Time
temporal part of' in that way too - i. e. , in such a
way as to make their fourth and final metaphysical
thesis
(M4) x is a temporal part of x
true.
That looks at first glance like an uninteresting
metaphysical thesis; so it pays us to take note of the
fact that it is very strong indeed.
In the first place, with M4 in hand we can now
easily deduce that every physical object, and every
part of every physical object, is the fusion of its
temporal parts. But after all, that consequence is
presumably just as it should be - the friends of
temporal parts would welcome it.
In the second place, we should ask: do "times"
have "sharp boundaries"? If so, something that is
presumably false now follows. Consider a com­
mon-or-garden physical object - my chair, for
example. M4 tells us it is a temporal part of itself.
The definition of "temporal part" tells us that this
means there is a time T such that my chair exists
through T and such that no part of my chair
exists outside T, and so, in particular, such that
my chair itself does not exist outside T. But is
there? Is there a time-point t such that my chair
was in existence at t and at no time before t? Or a
time-point t such that my chair was not in existence
at or before t, but was in existence at times as close
after t as you like? I should think not: I should think
there is no such thing as the exact temporal bound­
ary of a chair.
Well, temporal idealizing is presumably no
worse than spatial idealizing, and those who are
still reading are already engaging in the latter activ­
ity - see p. 304 above.
The third consequence is far more serious. M4
tells us that my chair is a temporal part of itself, and
this means there is a time T such that my chair
exists through T and such that no part of my
chair exists outside T, and so, in particular, such
that my chair exists through and only through T
and no part of it exists before T. Now my chair was
made out of wood: four wooden legs, a wooden
seat, and a wooden back were screwed together to
make that chair. So the legs, seat, and back existed
before the chair existed; so neither the legs, seat,
nor back of the chair are parts of the chair. What an
absurd result to have arrived at!
"No doubt it sounds odd, " says the friend of
temporal parts with a sigh. "But it can be lived
with. For keep this in mind: if the legs, seat, and \nJudith Jarvis Thomson
back of the chair are not themselves parts of the
chair, they do at all events overlap the chair ~ since
they have temporal parts that are temporal parts of
the chair. "
And perhaps the friend of temporal parts doesn't
even sigh. A Tinkertoy house is made only of
Tinkertoys; and isn't a chair made only of bits of
wood, metal, cloth, etc. ? And how is this intuition
to be more tidily accommodated than by saying
that every temporal part of a chair overlaps a tem­
poral part of one or other of the bits of wood, metal,
cloth, etc. of which it is made ~ and that the chair
itself just is the fusion of its temporal parts?
More precisely: by saying that every temporal
part of a chair overlaps a temporal part of one or
other of the bits of wood, etc. , of which the chair is
at some time or other made. A Tinkertoy house is
made only of Tinkertoys, but it may be made of
different Tinkertoys at different times ~ remember
the replacement of beta for alpha in H. Similarly, a
chair may be made of different bits of wood, etc. at
different times. How better to capture what goes on
when a chair or house is made or when a bit of stuff
is replaced in a chair or house, than by adoption of
the metaphysic of temporal parts?
v
It seems to me a crazy metaphysic ~ obviously false.
But it seems to me also that there is no such thing
as a proof that it is false. 7
Some people have the idea that it follows from
this metaphysic that the world is static, that noth­
ing changes, and that, that being false, the meta­
physic must be false. But why should we think that
this does follow? A thing changes if and only if it
has a feature at an earlier time which it lacks at a
later dme. And a friend of temporal parts says that
changes take place all the time, but that a thing does
have a feature at an earlier time which it lacks at a
later time if and only if earlier cross-sectional tem­
poral parts of the thing have it and later cross­
sectional temporal parts of the thing lack it.
Again, some people object to the fact that this
metaphysic yields that more than one thing can
occupy a given place at a given time ~ e. g. , the
cross-sectional temporal part of H which exists
only from 1: 00 to 1: 30 occupies the very same
place at I: 15 as H itself occupies at 1: 15. But should
we take this seriously? On reflection, it does not
appear to be a conclusive objection. For after all,
the metaphysic also yields that those two things,
though not identical, are not discrete ~ it yields that
the former is part of the latter.
I have deliberately refrained from including
among the metaphysical theses anything that says
that the temporal parts of a thing are ontologically
or epistemologically "prior" to it. These are dark
notions; but I think we have some grip on what they
are, enough perhaps to be able to construct a (more
or less messy) argument to the effect that the tem­
poral parts of a physical object are not ontologically
or epistemologically prior to it. No matter. What
concerns me now is not their priority, but their
very existence.
Why should we accept this metaphysic? I am
inclined to think that the friends of temporal
parts are largely motivated by two things: one, the
fact that so many problems in philosophy having to
do with identity across time can be so tidily solved
by appeal to them, and, two, what might be called
"the spatial analogy. " I shall come back to the first
later; let us attend now to the second.
Suppose I have a piece of chalk in my hands
now, one end in my right hand, the other in my
left. It is a plausible idea that there is such a thing as
the "right-hand half' of the bit of chalk. (No part
of it is in my left hand. ) If there is such a thing, we
might as well call it "Alfred. "
Friends of temporal parts say that, analogously,
there is such a thing as the "later half' of the bit of
chalk. (No part of it existed when the chalk first
came into existence. ) If there is such a thing, we
might as well call it "Bert. "
I think it is not merely plausible to think that
there is such a thing as Alfred, but that we are
under considerable pressure to say that there is.
For I can break the bit of chalk in half. (Actually, it
isn't easy to break a bit of chalk exactly in half, but I
might be lucky. ) If I do, I will have something in
my right hand which is white, roughly cylindrical
in shape, dusty, etc. ; and it could hardly be said
that that thing will come into existence at breaking­
time ~ surely the thing does exist before I break it
(note that "it") off. And surely the thing does exist
now, even if! never break it off.
There is no analogous pressure to say that there
is such a thing as Bert. (Homework: try breaking a
bit of chalk into its two temporal halves. )
Friends of temporal parts are quite unmoved by
this difference. They say: No doubt there are
differences, but why shouldn't we take lasting
through time to be analogous with extending
through space? Why shouldn't we say that, just as
there is Alfred, so also there is Bert? \nLet us look at the consequences for Bert of the
idea that Bert is to be Alfred's temporal analogue.
Is Alfred a physical object? It would presumably
be wrong to say that Alfred is a bit or piece or
chunk of chalk. If I break Alfred off, Alfred will
become a bit of chalk; but I have not in fact broken
Alfred off. It is an interesting and not easily
answerable question why Alfred is not now a bit
of chalk. The point isn't that Alfred isn't independ­
ently movable, for you can glue two bits of wood
together, which are then two bits of wood that are
not independently movable. (Of course you could
break off one of the bits of wood; but so could you
break Alfred off. ) And I think the point isn't that
Alfred is continuous with more chalk; for if Alfred
had been broken off and were now being held care­
fully in place again, it is arguable that Alfred would
have been a bit of chalk continuous with another bit
of chalk. No matter: as things stand, Alfred is not a
bit or piece or chunk of chalk.
Something similar should presumably be said of
Bert, viz. , that it too is not a bit or piece or chunk of
chalk. (For temporal parts come and go during a
time in which I have only one bit of chalk in my
hand. )
Now perhaps it may be thought that a thing is
not a physical object unless it is a bit or piece or
chunk of stuff of some kind. It would be no surprise
if one who took this view thought that neither
Alfred nor Bert is a physical object. It was to
allow for the possibility that someone might take
this view that I said we should take "x", "y", etc. to
range not merely over physical objects, but also
over anything that is part of a physical object.
What are Alfred and Bert then? Well, perhaps it
will be said that they are quantities8 of chalk. Or
portions9 of chalk. Which leaves it open for them to
be perfectly respectable entities, with any number
of ordinary physical properties. Thus Alfred pre­
sumably is white, roughly cylindrical in shape, and
dusty; if the bit of chalk now weighs three ounces,
then Alfred presumably now weighs an ounce and a
half; and so on. And shouldn't we say, analogously,
that Bert is white, roughly cylindrical in shape, and
dusty? Perhaps by the time Bert comes into exist­
ence, the bit of chalk will weigh less than three
ounces; but surely Bert will have some weight or
other at every time at which it exists - just as Alfred
does. If Alfred and Bert are not bits of chalk, and
therefore not physical objects, they are anyway,
both of them, surely chalk.
If Bert has not got these properties, then it is
very obscure what Bert is, and hard to see why
Parthood and Identity Across Time
drawing our attention to Alfred should incline us
to think there is such a thing as Bert.
I said this seems to me a crazy metaphysic. It
seems to me that its full craziness comes out only
when we take the spatial analogy seriously. The
metaphysic yields that if I have had exactly one
bit of chalk in my hand for the last hour, then there
is something in my hand which is white, roughly
cylindrical in shape, and dusty, something which
also has a weight, something which is chalk, which
was not in my hand three minutes ago, and indeed,
such that no part of it was in my hand three
minutes ago. As I hold the bit of chalk in my
hand, new stuff, new chalk keeps constantly com­
ing into existence ex nihilo. That strikes me as
obviously false.
At a minimum, we ought to see whether there
isn't some less extravagant way of solving the prob­
lem with which we began.
VI
What exactly is the problem? Whether or not there
is such a thing as W (the fusion of the Tinkertoys
on the shelf at 1: 15), there is such a thing as W' (the
wood on the shelf at 1: 15). A Tinkertoy house is
made only of Tinkertoys; that is an intuition we
should like to preserve. Tinkertoys are bits of
wood. So it seems right to say that the Tinkertoy
house H is identical with W'. But at 1: 30, I remove
alpha from H, and then replace it with beta. H is on
the shelf at 1: 45, but W' is not then on the shelf, for
alpha is on the floor at 1: 45. So how is H related to
W'?
I spoke earlier of alpha's having been "in H"
until 1: 30, when I removed it from H and replaced
it with beta. I have been trying throughout (not
without difficulty) to avoid speaking as common
sense speaks. Common sense says: alpha was part of
H, and then ceased to be; beta was not part of H,
but became part of H.
It really is the most obvious common sense that a
physical object can acquire and lose parts. Parthood
surely is a three-place relation, among a pair of
objects and a time. If you want to construe part­
hood as a two-place relation, you really will have to
indulge in temporal parts to accommodate what
common sense calls acquisition and loss of parts.
But why should anyone want to?
If parthood is a three-place relation, then it is not
possible to read the expression "x < y" of the
Calculus of Individuals as: x is part of y. And it \nJudith Jarvis Thomson
cannot be said that the logic of parthood is the
Calculus of Individuals.
But we can easily construct a Cross-temporal
Calculus of Individuals, by emending the Leo­
nard-Goodman definitions and axioms. I think it
pays us to do so.
Let us take as primitive "x D y @ t", and read it
as: x is discrete fromy at t. \U
But we cannot move on just yet. For the intended
interpretation of "x Dy@t"to be fixed, it has to be
fixed for all threesomes of a pair of objects and a
time-point which make" x D y @ t" true and which
make it false. There is no difficulty if both objects
exist at the time-point: your nose is now discrete
from my nose, your nose is not now discrete from
your face, and so on. But what if one or more of the
objects does not exist at the time-point? Is Caesar's
nose now discrete from your nose?
Looking ahead, we know that the intended inter­
pretation of "x D y @ t" is to be such as to link it
with parthood-at-a-time. For example, the three­
some containing A, B, and 9 p. m. should make
"x D y@ t" true if and only if A and B have no
part in common at 9 p. m. More precisely; if and
only if there is no z such that z is part of A at 9 p. m.
and z is part of Bat 9 p. m. Well, is there a z such
that z is now part of Caesar's nose? After all, Cae­
sar's nose does not exist now. I think it will seem
right to say: if x does not exist at t, then there is no z
such that z is part of x at t. (If my car goes out of
existence at midnight tonight, nothing will be
part of it tomorrow. ) If we do adopt this view, we
are committed to saying that there is no z that is
now part of Caesar's nose and, therefore, no z that
is now part of both Caesar's nose and your nose
and, thus, that Caesar's nose is now discrete from
your nose. More generally, adopting this view is
adopting an existence principle expressible as
follows:
But this has its own unhappy consequence: viz. ,
that a thing is atomic at all times at which it does
not exist; and choosing it would impose complica­
tions elsewhere. So I suggest we accept the
unhappy consequences of what I called the "first
existence principle, " and take it to control the
intended interpretation of" x D y @ t".
We should surely say also that, if everything is
now discrete from a thing, then that thing does not
now exist - more generally, that
(y)(xDy@t) => x does not exist at t
second existence principle
The conjunction of the first and second exist­
ence principles is
x does not exist at t == (y)(xDy@t)
or, alternatively,
x exists at t ==~ (y)(xDy@t).
So we may introduce "x E@ t" (read: x exists at t)
by definition as follows:
x E@t = df~ (y)(x Dy (QU)
"x < y @ t" (read: x is part of y at t) and "xO y @ I"
(read: x overlaps y at t) are now definable as fol­
lows:
x<y@t=MxE@t&yE@t&
(z)(zDy@t => zDx@t)
x Oy@t=df (: Jz)(z < x(CS]f & z <y@t)
The old overlap axiom is easy enough to emend:
what we want is
(CCIz) (xOy@t) ==~(xDy@t)
x does not exist at t => (y) (x D y @ t) new overlap axiom
first existence principle
I think it really does seem right to say these things­
until it strikes us that it follows that not even
Caesar's nose is now part of Caesar's nose and
that Caesar's nose is now discrete even from itself.
There is no entirely happy alternative in the offing
here. We might weaken the first existence princi­
ple; e. g. , we might choose to say, instead,
x does not exist at t => (y)(x D y@t == y # x).
The old identity axiom is not so easily emended,
however. That is, we obviously cannot replace it
with
(x =y) == (x <y@t&y <. 17@t),
for this tells us that, whatever time you choose, x is
identical withy only if x is part ofy at that time and
y is part of x at that time and, thus (by the defini­
tion of "x < y@ t"), only if x and y exist at that
time. That is far too restrictive. Caesar's nose is \nsurely identical with Caesar's nose, even if it does
not exist now.
What we want is instead this: x is identical withy
if and only if for all times t such that one or the
other of them exists at t, x is part ofy at t, and y is
part of x at t - i. e. ,
(CCII) (x=y) ==(t)[(xE(Qit V yE@t) =>
(x<y@t&y<x@t)]
new identity axiom
A great many analogues of theorems of the Cal­
culus ofIndividuals are now provable in the Cross­
temporal Calculus ofIndividuals. It is perhaps just
worth drawing attention to the fact that, although
"x < x" is provable in the Calculus ofIndividuals,
"x < x @ t" is not provable in the Cross-temporal
Calculus ofIndividuals. But it plainly ought not be;
for what it tells us is that, whatever time you
choose, x is part of itself at that time and thus (by
the definition of "x < y@t") that everything
exists all the time. What is provable in the Cross­
temporal Calculus of Individuals is, instead, this:
xE @t == x < x COi t,
which says only that, whatever time you choose, x
is part of itself at that time if and only if it exists at
that time.
The old fusion axiom presents a different kind of
problem. If things can have different parts at dif­
ferent times, then a thing can fuse one set at one
time and a different set at a different time. Indeed,
fusing has to be regarded as relativized to times,
and I suggest we redefine it as follows:
xFuS@t = Of
x E (Q) t & (y) [y D x @ t == (z) [ (z E S & z E @ t)
=> tDz@tll
One possible analogue of the old fusion axiom is,
then, this:
(CCI3)('lx)(x E S & x E @t) => ('ly)(y Fu S (g) t).
But that is only one of the possibilities. It is, after
all, rather weak. It allows us to say, for example,
that there is something that fuses Caesar's nose in
44 BC and that there is something that fuses Nix­
on's nose in 1979; but it does not allow us to
conclude that there is something that both fuses
Caesar's nose in 44 BC and fuses Nixon's nose in
Parthood and Identity Across Time
1979. Admirers of the Calculus ofIndividuals will
surely want that there be such a thing and will,
therefore, regard the axiom I set out as too weak to
be regarded as the appropriate analogue of the old
fusion axiom.
There are a number of available middle grounds,
but I suspect that the truly devoted friends of
fusions will want to go the whole distance. The
simplest way of expressing their view is to take
them to say that there is not one fusion axiom in
the Cross-temporal Calculus of Individuals, but
indefinitely many, the procedure for generating
them being this. Take any set of n sets SI. .. Sn
For n = 1, write what I earlier called (CCI3)' For
n = 2, write
[tl f= tz & ('lx)(x E SI & xE@tIl &
('ly)(y E Sz &yE@tz)] => ('lz)(zFuSI (Q)tl
& zFuSz@tz)
and so on. For my own part, I have no objection - it
seems to me that one has only to live with fusions
for a while to come to love them. But I shall not
argue for all or even any of these fusion axioms. I
do not know what an argument for them would
look like. By the same token, however, I do not
know what an argument against them would look
like, "What an odd entity! " not seeming to me to
count as an argument. So I shall leave it open which
fusion axiom or axioms should be regarded as
replacing the old fusion axiom.
More precisely, I shall leave it open which fusion
axiom or axioms should be regarded as replacing
the old fusion axiom, so long as the axiom or
axioms chosen do not guarantee the uniqueness of
fusions. For we do not want an analogue of what I
earlier called "the fusion principle" to be provable
in the Cross-temporal Calculus ofIndividuals. The
fusion principle, it will be remembered, says that, if
anything is a member of S, then there is a unique
thing that fuses the Ss. We do not want to have it
provable that if anything is a member of Sand
exists at t, then there is a unique entity that fuses
the Ss at t: we want, precisely, to leave open that
there may be more than one. My reason for saying
that issues from the use to which I would like to be
able to put these notions. Consider again the Tin­
kertoy house H. A Tinkertoy house is made only of
Tinkertoys; and H is, at 1: 15, made only of the
Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15. I would like, there­
fore, to be able to say that H fuses, at 1: 15, the
Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15. And what about \nJudith Jarvis Thomson
W', the wood on the shelf at 1: 15? I would like to
be able to say that that too fuses the Tinkertoys on
the shelf at 1: 15. But nothing can be true if it
licenses our concluding from this that H is identical
with W'.
With fusions now relativized to times, we cannot
single out a thing to call" W" as I did in section I
above:
(2) W = the fusion of the Tinkertoys on the shelf
at 1: 15
now lacks a sense, for there now is no fusing sim­
pliciter, there is only fusing-at-a-time. And, with­
out an analogue of the fusion principle, we cannot
even single out a thing to call "w" by drawing
attention to the fact that there is something that
fuses, at 1: 15, the Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15:
i. e. , we cannot replace (2) with
W = the unique thing that fuses, at 1: 15, the
Tinkertoys on the shelf at 1: 15,
for there may be more than one thing that does this.
Indeed, I suggest we agree that there are at least
two things which do this, viz. , H and W'.
Perhaps you have no taste for fusions, and regard
the new fusion axioms (like the old one) as grossly
overstrong. All the same, the difficulty we began
with can be eliminated, and without appeal to
temporal parts, if we say that parthood is a three­
place relation 11 and that the new identity axiom
(interpreted as I indicated) is true. How is H
related to W'? We can say, quite simply, that
H < W'@t& Wi < H@t
is true for all times t between 1: 00 and 1: 30 (which
was when alpha was removed from H); but that it is
not true for any other times t. Since H and W' exist
at times at which it is not true, H is not identical
with W '. 12
More generally, a Tinkertoy house is made only
of Tinker toys, and Tinkertoys are bits of wood; so,
at every time throughout its life, a Tinkertoy house
is part of, and contains as part, the wood it is made
of at that time.
VII
There is a difficulty analogous to the one we began
with, which I suggest we look at briefly.
Let us supply the Tinkertoy house H with a
different history. Suppose H came into existence
on a shelf at 1: 00 and that all the Tinkertoys it was
then made of, indeed, all the bits of wood, indeed,
all of the stuff it was then made of, came into
existence at 1: 00 along with H. Suppose that the
whole thing rested quietly on the shelf until 5: 00,
and then everything - house, bits of wood, stuff -
all went out of existence together. Let Wi be, as
before, the wood on the shelf at 1: 15. Now we can
say more than that W' is part of H from 1: 00 to
1: 30, and H part of W' from 1: 00 to 1: 30: we can
say that, for all times t such that either of them
exists at t, W' and H are parts of each other at t. It
follows, by the new identity axiom, that H is ident­
ical with W'.
Is that an acceptable conclusion? I am sure that
there are those who will say it is not. For isn't it
true of W', and false of H, that W' could have
failed to have the form of a house? Can't wood
come into existence in ship-shape as well as in
house-shape? But houses can't.
But is that a possible history? Normally, a house
that is made of Tinker toys was made of Tinker toys;
i. e. , normally, the Tinkertoys existed before the
house did, and the house was then built out of
them. Could a house, and the Tinkertoys it is
made of, come into existence together?
Again, could some wood have come into exist­
ence ex nihilo? (Compare the temporal parts of the
bit of chalk. )
Well, I was being unfair to those who think there
is a problem in the offing here. Let us suppose I
make a house, not out of Tinkertoys, but out of ice.
I do so, not by fitting bits of ice together, but by
pouring water into a house-shaped ice-tray, and
freezing it. Four hours later, I melt the whole
thing down, and throw out the water. Worries
about temporal idealizing apart, we can say that
the house and the ice it was made of came into
existence (and went out of existence) together. And
the ice didn't come into existence ex nihilo - it came
into existence ex aqua. But surely (it will be said)
the house is not identical with the ice. For the ice,
but not the house, could have failed to have the
form of a house. I could have poured that very same
water into a ship-shaped ice-tray instead.
I don't myself find it obvious that a piece of
house-shaped ice could have been a piece of ship­
shaped ice; but my informants tell me it could have
been. If they are right, we must give up the Cross­
temporal Calculus of Individuals, because we must
give up the new identity axiom. 13 \nSuppose they are right. Then we must take the
logic of parthood to be a modal logic, which might
be called the Modal Cross-temporal Calculus of
Individuals.
I shall not construct such a logic, since I think it
does not pay to rehearse the alternative possible
replacements for the fusion axiom or axioms. What
matters for present purposes, in any case, is really
only what should be said about identity. It seems to
me, however, that that is plain enough: we should
replace CCII with:
(MCCI')(x = y) =D(t)[(xE@tVyE@t): )
(x <y@t&y < x@t)]
That eliminates the difficulty. Let "House" be the
name of the house, and "Ice" be the name of the ice
Notes
I am grateful to George Boolos, Paul Horwich, Fred Katz,
and Sydney Shoemaker for comments on an earlier draft.
It is familiar enough that they have been used by those
interested in the metaphysics of matter. But so also
have they been used by those interested in philosophy
of mind (cf. , e. g. , David Lewis, "Survival and iden­
tity, " repr. in A. O. Rorty (ed. ), The Identities of
Persons (Berkeley: University of California Press,
1976)), and even by moral philosophers (cf. , e. g. ,
Allan Gibbard, "Natural property rights, " Nous 10/
1 (Mar. 1976), pp. 77-88, and the views of Jonathan
Edwards on moral responsibility, described by Roder­
ick Chisholm in Appendix A of his Person and Object
(London: Allen & Unwin, 1976)).
2 Henry S. Leonard and Nelson Goodman, "The
calculus of individuals and its uses, " Journal of Sym­
bolic Logic 512 (June 1940), pp. 45-55. For perspicu­
ousness in the discussion to come, I have strengthened
their identity axiom.
3 Following Richard Cartwright, in "Scattered
objects, " this volume, ch. 23.
4 David Wiggins, Sameness and Substance (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1980), pp. 30ff.
Cartwright, "Scattered objects, " this volume, ch. 23.
6 But see section VII, n. 13 in particular.
7 But see section VII, n. 13 in particular.
S In the sense singled out by Helen Morris Cartwright,
in "Quantities, " Philosophical Review, 79/1 (Jan.
1970), pp. 25-42.
9 Following Allan Gibbard, in "Contingent Identity, "
this volume, ch. 9.
10 The variables of the Calculus of Individuals range
only over existing entities. In the same spirit, the
Parthood and Identity Across Time
it is made of. Then (if my informants are right)
there is a world, and a time t in that world, such
that
Ice E @t
IS true, and (since House does not exist In that
world)
Ice < House @ t & House < Ice @ t
is false. That being so, MCCI I tells us that House
is not identical with Ice.
But this is of interest only if my informants are
right about this case, or would be right about a
better case.
variables "x", "y", etc. of the Cross-temporal Calcu­
lus of Individuals are to range only over entities that
exist at some time or other.
11 Unlike physical objects, events really do have tem­
poral parts (though the term must be defined differ­
ently for events); hence there is no need to use tenses
in ascribing parthood relations to events. We can take
events to be a model of the Cross-temporal Calculus
of Individuals (reading x E @ t as: x is occurring at t).
But the event-identities so obtained would be the
same as those I obtained (in Acts and Other Events
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977) by
taking events to be a model of the simpler Calculus
of Individuals.
12 David Wiggins would say that Wi constitutes Hat 1: 15
- see p. 303 above. I said: fine, but what is it for a thing
x to constitute a thing y at a time t? I have no great
confidence in the likelihood of his accepting the gift,
but I offer him the following:
x constitutes y att = df x < y@ t &y < x@t.
On this account of the matter, H constitutes Wi at
1: 15 if W' constitutes Hat 1: 15; but that strikes me as
harmless.
13 If my informants are right, then the friends of tem­
poral parts must give up metaphysical thesis M j and,
therefore, the old identity axiom and, therefore, the
Calculus ofIndividuals. They can still construe part­
hood as a two-place relation; but they must take
identity to be governed, instead, by
(x =y) == D[(x <y) & (y < x)] \n25
Mark Heller
1 The General CaIllp
The ontology of physical objects I will defend in
this work is that of four-dimensional hunks of
matter. Some of these hunks are temporal parts of
others. Thus, I place myself in the same general
camp as Willard Van Orman Quine, John Perry,
and David Lewis. 1 Lewis mentions a common
objection to such an ontology, and begins to answer
it:
Some would protest that they do not know what
I mean by 'more or less momentary person­
stages, or time-slices of continuant persons, or
persons-at-times. '. .. [This] objection is easy to
answer, especially in the case where the stages
are less momentary rather than more. Let me
consider that case only, though I think that
instantaneous stages also are unproblematic; I
do not really need them. A person-stage is a
physical object, just as a person is. (If persons
had a ghostly part as well, so would person­
stages. ) It does many of the same things that a
person does: it talks and walks and thinks, it has
beliefs and desires, it has a size and shape and
location. It even has a temporal duration. But
only a brief one, for it does not last long. (We
can pass over the question how long it can last
before it is a segment rather than a stage, for
Originally published in Mark Heller, The Ontology of
Physical Objects (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1990), ch. 1. Reprinted by permission of Cam­
bridge University Press.
that question raises no objection of principle. ) It
begins to exist abruptly, and it abruptly ceases
to exist soon after. Hence a stage cannot do
everything that a person can do, for it cannot
do those things that a person does over a longish
interval. z
In spite of its insightfulness, this brief response
may not be completely satisfactory to those who do
not already understand the notion of a person­
stage. The primary goal of this chapter is to
develop a clear account of the nature of temporal
parts. (Notice that temporal parts, unlike Lewis's
stages, are not vague. ) Once this account is devel­
oped, I will attempt to answer some criticisms of an
ontology that includes temporal parts.
The confusion over the nature of temporal parts
is increased by the fact that such phrases as 'tem­
poral part', 'temporal phase', and 'temporal slice'
have been used in ways that suggest such varied
purported objects as processes, events, ways things
are, sets, and portions of careers or histories. Judith
Jarvis Thomson, not herself a friend of temporal
parts, makes a reasonable attempt to get clear about
the notion. 3 (In the following read'S' as 'is earlier
than or simultaneous with', and read '; :: ' as 'is later
than or simultaneous with'. ) Consider an object °
which exists from time to to t3. On Thomson's
account, a temporal part of 0, call it P, is an object
that comes into existence at some time t1; :: to and
goes out of existence at some time tz S t3 and takes
up some portion of the space that ° takes up for all
the time that P exists. (This might better have been
called a spatiotemporal part. ) \n2 Unpleasant Alternatives
As she begins to explain the inner workings of her
notion of a temporal part, the existence of such
objects begins to look implausible. The basic pro­
blem with Thomson's account is that it seems to be
developed against the background of an unhelpful
presupposition about the nature of physical
objects. She seems to think of physical objects as
being three-dimensional and enduring through
time. I am prepared to admit from the outset that
this is our normal philosophical way of thinking of
physical objects. 4 But it is this way of thinking that
makes temporal parts seem implausible. I see noth­
ing in favor of it other than the fact that it is our
standard view, and I put very little weight on this
advantage.
Furthermore, the three-dimensional view of
objects in general leads to having to choose between
what I take to be unpleasant alternatives. The
alternatives are:
(a) there is no such physical object as my body,
(b) there is no physical object in the space that we
would typically say is now exactly occupied
by all of me other than my left hand,
(c) no physical object can undergo a loss of
parts,
(d) there can be distinct physical objects exactly
occupying the same space at the same time,
(e) identity is not transitive.
To deny each of these alternatives and to accept
three-dimensional enduring objects would lead to a
contradiction. To show this I present a slightly
altered version of an argument of Peter van Inwa­
gen's. 5 If we deny alternative (a), then there is such
an object as my body. Call it 'Body'. If we deny
alternative (b), then there is an object that is all
of me other than my left hand. Call that object
'Body-minus'. Now consider some time t at
which my left hand is cut off. This does not affect
Body-minus, so:
(1) the thing that, before t, is Body-minus = the
thing that, after t, is Body-minus.
If we also deny alternative (c), then my losing my
hand does not end my body's existence, so:
(2) the thing that, after t, is Body = the thing
that, before t, is Body.
Further, if we deny (d), it seems to follow that:
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
(3) the thing that, after t, is Body-minus = the
thing that, after t, is Body.
If we then deny (e), by transitivity of identity it
follows that:
(4) the thing that, before t, is Body-minus = the
thing that, before t, is Body.
But since Body was bigger before t than Body­
minus was before t:
(5) the thing that, before t, is Body-minus i= the
thing that, before t, is Body,
and (5) contradicts (4).
In the end, Thomson's preferred way of avoid­
ing this contradiction is to accept (d). 6 In contrast,
van Inwagen avoids the contradiction by accepting
(b). 7 Roderick Chisholm instead accepts (C). 8 And
Peter Geach seems to accept (e), or at least some­
thing that will have the same effect for this argu­
ment as accepting (e). 9 My way of avoiding the
contradiction is to claim that (3) does not follow
from the denial of (d) unless we accept the addi­
tional thesis that physical objects are three-dimen­
sional and endure through time. I will deny this
additional thesis. Doing so will allow me to claim
that Body and Body-minus are distinct objects
that, even after t, do not occupy the same space at
the same time. It is incumbent upon me, then, to
offer a reasonable alternative to the three-dimen­
sional view of physical objects.
3 Four-Dimensional Objects
I propose that a physical object is not an enduring
spatial hunk of matter, but is, rather, a spatiotem­
poral hunk of matter. Instead of thinking of matter
as filling up regions of space, we should think of
matter as filling up regions of space-time. A phy­
sical object is the material content of a region of
space-time.
Just as such an object has spatial extent, it also
has temporal extent - it extends along four dimen­
sions, not just three. To see the contrast clearly,
consider an object that is created at noon and
destroyed at one. If we think of the object as
three-dimensional and enduring through time, it
would be appropriate to say that the object exists at
different times; the same object exists at noon and
at one. Such an object has boundaries along only \nMark Heller
three dimensions. The whole object is that hunk of
matter that entirely fills up those boundaries. The
whole object, therefore, exists at noon and still
exists at one.
A four-dimensional object, on the other hand,
has boundaries along an additional dimension. The
whole object must fill up all of its boundaries and,
therefore, does not exist at a single moment. If we
accept that physical objects are four-dimensional,
the appropriate thing to say about the object under
consideration is that it takes up more than an
instantaneous region of time. It does not exist at
noon and at one; rather, it exists from noon until
one. Thinking of it as an enduring three-dimen­
sional object, we might still say that it exists from
noon until one, but only because we would say that
it exists at every time between noon and one.
Instead of thinking of an object as existing at vari­
ous times, we should, adopting the four-dimen­
sional stance, think of it as existing within regions
of time.
Insofar as time is just one more dimension,
roughly alike in kind to the three spatial dimen­
sions, we should expect that our claims about an
object's spatial characteristics have analogues with
respect to its temporal characteristics. For
instance, just as we might talk about the distance
between two points along a line in space, we can
also talk about the distance between two points in
time. This allows us to understand the notion of
temporal boundaries as analogous to that of spatial
boundaries. Furthermore, there is an analogy with
respect to the part/whole relationship. Just as a
spatial part fills up a subregion of the space occu­
pied by the whole, a temporal part fills up a sub­
region of the time occupied by the whole.
Another important analogy is that, for both spa­
tial and temporal parts, we can point at or perceive
or name a whole by pointing at, perceiving, or
indicating a part. When naming a person at birth,
I might place my finger on that person's chest and
say, "Let us call this Kaitlin" or "This is Kaitlin. "
In doing so, I did not name the piece of skin
directly beneath my finger, nor did I name the
chest, nor the surface of the baby. I named the
whole person. It is an interesting question as to
how this is done, but it is not one that must be
taken up here. The point is that on the four-dimen­
sional view there is an analogy. 'Kaitlin' does not
name a temporally tiny four-dimensional object
that exists for just the amount of time that I am
pointing or for just as long as it takes for me to utter
my naming sentence. I named the whole person.
It should be noted that an object's temporal
characteristics are not completely analogous to its
spatial characteristics. This is because time is not
completely alike in kind to the three spatial dimen­
sions. Time, for instance, seems to have a direction
to it. Also, our perception along the temporal
dimension is only one-directional (memory) and
is discontinuous (I can remember things that hap­
pened on my third and fourth birthdays without
remembering anything that happened between
them). Furthermore, temporal units of measure­
ment are not of the same kind as spatial units of
measurement. These disanalogies will not have any
significance for the present work.
One question about four-dimensional objects is
whether it is possible to have zero extent along the
temporal dimension - Can there be instantaneous
objects? I do not have a strong opinion about this
one way or the other. What should be noted is that
this is no more an issue with respect to the tem­
poral dimension than with any of the spatial
dimensions - again we have an analogy. Could
there be a physical object such as the surface of a
cube? Thinking according to our standard three­
dimensional picture, such an object would have
zero extent along one of the spatial dimensions. It
could, therefore, be called a two-dimensional
object. According to our new four-dimensional
picture, such an object would still have zero extent
along one of the spatial dimensions. It could, there­
fore, be called a three-dimensional object, one of
the three being the temporal dimension. I empha­
size that, because a thing's parts are no more onto­
logically fundamental than the thing itself,
existence of four-dimensional objects in no way
depends upon their being built up out of instant­
aneous objects.
4 Refinements
I do not pretend to be in a position to evaluate
scientific theses. The ontology I present should
end up being consistent with any plausible story
that the scientist might tell us about the inner
workings of the world. If it turns out that matter
just is space-time (perhaps any bit of space-time is
matter, or perhaps only bits with a certain shape),
then physical objects just are pieces of space-time.
(I am prepared to set aside the question of how
much the scientific proclamation is really based
upon controversial philosophy. ) Along these same
lines, though for simplicity's sake I assume \nthroughout this book that all nonrelational proper­
ties of an object are a function of the configuration
of that object's parts, I am prepared to revise my
claims if scientists should determine that there
really are irreducible properties (for instance, the
flavor of a quark may be such a property).
In saying that a physical object is the material
content of a region of space-time, I do not mean to
suppose that there are any empty regions. Nor do I
mean to suppose the opposite. My point is simply
that if there are any regions that do not contain
matter, then they do not contain any physical
objects. What of a region that is empty in parts
and full in other parts? Such a region can be
divided into two subregions (perhaps they are scat­
tered subregions), the one that is full and the one
that is empty. If the full one is the right shape
(perhaps every shape is right, perhaps not), then
it contains an object, and, therefore, so does the
original region that is partly full. The empty sub­
region does not contain an object nor any part of an
object. So, for instance, if there really is empty
space between the parts of an atom, then atoms
are really scattered objects, since the region of
space that an atom exactly fills at any given time
is not connected. Similarly, those everyday objects
around us that are composed of atoms are also, on
the present hypothesis, scattered objects; the re­
gion that a given object exactly fills (the region that
contains that object, no other matter, and no empty
space) is really a lot smaller than we had thought.
It is not part of my account of the nature of four­
dimensional objects to suppose that such an object
must stand out from its surroundings in some sig­
nificant way. Nor is it part of my account to sup­
pose the opposite. The notion of four-dimensional
objects can be understood without answering the
question of which filled regions of space-time con­
tain such objects. In particular, we do not have to
answer such questions as whether a statue can exist
inside a boulder, just waiting to be carved out. I
would in fact argue that for every filled region there
is one object that exactly fills it. 1O But this should
not be built into the very concept of a four-dimen­
sional object.
The claim that every filled region of spacetime is
exactly filled by a physical object presupposes a
clear distinction between those regions that are
full and those that are not. However, contemporary
physics raises a problem for that supposition.
Quantum mechanics seems to tell us that when
we get down to a small enough level, there just is
no fact of the matter as to where a given particle is,
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
and therefore, it would seem, no fact of the matter
as to whether a certain region is full. (Again, I am
prepared to set aside the question of how much of
this scientific proclamation is really based upon
controversial philosophy. ) I am prepared to accept
this little bit of imprecision into my ontology. I
accept this imprecision, not because it is so small,
but because it is the right thing to do. If there is real
indeterminacy in the world, if there really is no fact
of the matter as to whether a given region of space­
time is full, then the world is really imprecise, and
that must be reflected in the true ontology. This is
a very different sort of imprecision from that which
is involved in the vagueness of our everyday objects
(as I will argue later); the imprecision here arises
from the structure of the world, not just from our
way of conceptualizing the world.
But there are other ways to raise doubts about
my assumption that for every region there is a
determinate fact as to whether that region is exactly
filled. If matter is just space-time of a certain shape,
so that not all space-time counts as matter, then
'filled' is, in effect, a shape predicate. As such, it
may very well be vague. There may be no precise
line between those shapes that count as a region's
being full and those that count as the region's not
being full. It could be that certain regions are
shaped in such a way that they neither count as
full nor count as not full.
This proposal has the presupposition that matter
is space-time. Thus, given what I have said above,
the physical objects proposed by my theory are
themselves regions of space-time. If it should turn
out that 'filled' is a vague shape predicate, then I
should revise my ontology by allowing every region
of space-time to be a physical object, not just the
filled regions. Perhaps I could not continue to call
these objects physical, since some of the space-time
regions included are clearly empty (they are not
among the borderline cases of being empty), and it
seems inappropriate to say that an empty region of
space-time contains a physical object. (For a region
of space-time to contain a physical object, on the
present proposal, is just for it to be a physical
object. ) Instead I would be offering an ontology of
spatiotemporal objects, to be distinguished, per­
haps, from such purported nonspatiotemporal
objects as mental entities and abstract entities.
But suppose that it turns out that 'filled' is a
vague predicate even without equating matter with
space-time. That is, suppose that it turns out that
matter is distinct from the spatiotemporal regions
that it fills, that it does not fill all regions, and that \nMark Heller
there are some regions for which, for reasons hav­
ing nothing to do with quantum mechanics, there is
no fact of the matter as to whether those regions are
full or not. In this case expanding my ontology to
include objects that are in clearly empty regions
would seem very odd. Even an empty region would
contain an object, and here "contains" is not just
another word for "be". I could avoid the apparent
oddness by simply stipulating that "contains" is
another word for "be" in this context, stipulating
that matter is space-time. But that is not the sort of
thing that should be built into an ontology by
stipulation. That is the sort of thing we should
wait for science to rule upon.
I do not think I need to be forced into such a
strange-sounding position. For a spatiotemporal
region to be full, in the sense in which I am using
that term, is just for it to contain no empty sub­
regions. Because what it is for one spatiotemporal
region to contain another is not in any way vague,
'full' is only as vague as 'empty'. And 'empty'
seems to be a paradigm non-vague term. If a region
can possibly contain less than it does in fact con­
tain, then it is not empty. Thus the only way for
'empty' to be vague is for there to be cases in which
it is indeterminate whether a given region can
possibly contain less than it does. And it seems
unlikely that there will be any way for this to be
indeterminate other than the two that I have
already discussed, or relatives of those two: the
first being real physical indeterminacy as posited
by quantum mechanics and the second being an in­
determinacy due to the fact that the supposed filler
(i. e. , matter) is just space-time of a certain sort.
It should be noted that while I talk of matter as
the ultimate filler, I would be prepared to accept
that matter is itself composed of particles. The
question of which is more basic (in the sense of
which is composed of which), stuff or things, is one
to be answered by scientists, not philosophers.
Perhaps matter is composed of particles that are
themselves composed of matter that is itself com­
posed of smaller particles, and on and on. Regard­
less of which proves to be the basic one, and even if
the series continues ad infinitum, there should still
be a determinate fact for any specified region
whether that region could have less in it than it
does (barring the two options for letting in inde­
terminacy that I discuss above).
It could turn out that every particle is itself
composed of particles that are spread out in
space-time. If this is the case, then any continuous
region that is extended along all four dimens: ons
will contain some empty space-time, and hence,
there will be no full extended regions. The terms
'empty' and 'full' do not seem to be applicable to
nonextended regions, but the supposition that all
particles are composed of separated particles does
seem to require a distinction between two kinds of
points, a distinction that is analogous to that
between 'full' and 'empty'. Using the terms in an
expanded sense, then, we could say that some
points are full, and, further, that some discontin­
uous regions of space-time are full. In the kind of
world now being considered, four-dimensional
physical objects turn out to be scattered in the
extreme. The region exactly containing a physical
object will be a collection of discrete points.
It is crucial for my overall project that the object
of my ontology have precise boundaries; for any of
the objects in my proposed ontology there is a
unique and determinate region that that object
exactly fills. Given my characterization of a four­
dimensional object as the material content of a
filled region of space-time, and given that there is
a determinate fact as to which regions are full and
which are not, four-dimensional objects can have
the precision that I require. I do not deny, however,
that there could be other ways of characterizing
four-dimensional objects that do not imply their
having precise boundaries. In principle, precise
boundaries need be no more a part of the concept
of a four-dimensional object than it is part of the
concept of a three-dimensional object. However, I
will build this precision into my concept of a four­
dimensional object. 11
Given the precision of four-dimensional objects
and the apparent imprecision of the objects of our
standard ontology, there are serious questions
about the relationship between the two kinds of
objects. For the remainder of this essay I will set
aside any further discussion of imprecision and will
pretend that either the boundaries of our standard
objects are as precise as those of my four-dimen­
sional objects or the boundaries of the four­
dimensional objects are as imprecise as those of
our standard objects.
5 Parts
A four-dimensional object is the material content
of a filled region of space-time. A spatiotemporal
part of such an object is the material content of a
subregion of the space-time occupied by the whole.
For instance, consider a particular object 0 and the \nregion R of space-time that 0 fills. A spatiotem­
poral part of 0 is the material content of a sub­
region of R. A spatiotemporal part, as long as it has
greater than zero extent along every dimension, is
itself a four-dimensional physical object. A spatio­
temporal part is not a set or a process or a way
something is at a place and time. It, like the object it
is part of, is a hunk of matter.
If Heller is a physical object, then so is Heller's­
left-hand-from-(1: 00 p. m, 3 January, 1990)-to­
(1: 01 p. m. 3 January, 1990). This spatiotemporal
part of me could have, between 1: 00 p. m. and 1: 01
p. m. on 3 January, 1990, been felt, seen, heard,
smelled, and, if need be, tasted. It had weight and
volume. Thinking of spatiotemporal parts as phy­
sical objects corresponds to the way we ordinarily
think of parts on our old three-dimensional pic­
ture. When not being swayed by specific philoso­
phical arguments, we have no doubt that my hand
is a physical object. Accepting the account of four­
dimensional objects presented here, we may con­
tinue to hold the general principle that a part of a
physical object is itself a physical object.
The fact that any part of 0 is the material con­
tent of a subregion of R does not entail that every
filled subregion of R contains a part of O. This
point directly parallels the fact that it is not part of
the concept of a four-dimensional object that every
filled region contains such an object. One could
consistently accept all three of the following:
(i) there are four-dimensional objects and spa­
tiotemporal parts of such objects,
(ii) not every filled region of space-time contains
a physical object,
(iii) even for a region of space-time that does con­
tain a physical object, not every subregion
contains a spatiotemporal part of that object.
take it that typically someone who accepts all
three of these would be accepting (iii) for the
same reasons that he accepts (ii). Someone might
accept (ii) if he thought that there is good reason to
reject scattered objects. Or (ii) might be accepted if
independent grounds could be found for some
claim like 'every object must contain its principle
of unity within itself' (whatever that might mean).
My immediate goal is not to supply a means for
answering every question of the form 'Is there a
spatiotemporal part here? ', but rather to make clear
the concept of spatiotemporal parthood.
It is now easy to understand the notion of a
temporal part. Any proper part of a four-dimen­
sional object is smaller than the whole object along
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
at least one dimension. A proper temporal part is
smaller along just one dimension, the temporal
dimension. A temporal part of 0 is a spatiotem­
poral part that is the same spatial size as 0 for as
long as that part exists, though it may be a smaller
temporal size. Let us suppose that object 0 exactly
fills the temporal region from to to t. l. That is, the
region of space-time filled by 0, namely region R,
has the temporal boundaries to and t. l. Now con­
sider a certain subregion of R the temporal bound­
aries of which are tl 2 to and t2: :; t. l and the spatial
boundaries of which are just the spatial boundaries
of R from tl to t2 Call this subregion S. If the
material content of S is an object, then it is a
temporal part of O. In general, using the single
letters as variables rather than names, a temporal
part of 0 is the material content of a temporal
subregion of R. 'Temporal subregion of R' means
spatiotemporal subregion that shares all of R's spa­
tial boundaries within that subregion's temporal
boundaries. A temporal part of me which exists
from my fifth birthday to my sixth is the same
spatial size that I am from age five to age six.
6 Strictly Speaking
One matter of detail that is particularly important
for temporal parts specifically and four-dimen­
sional objects in general is how to understand
such phrases as '-exists in region-' or '-exists
at time -'. Physical objects are four-dimensional
hunks of matter. They therefore have precise spa­
tiotemporal boundaries. Consider a particular phy­
sical object, this piece of paper (assuming that this
piece of paper does have precise boundaries). Call
this object 'Whitey'. Whitey has certain spatiotem­
poral boundaries - there is a region that it exactly
occupies. But we also think it is true to say that
Whitey now exists. This way of talking may be
misleading. If Whitey exists now and existed a
minute ago, then it is the same object that exists
at both times. But this suggests the old three­
dimensional picture that we have been denying.
This confusion is easily avoided. When we say
that Whitey exists now, this should be taken as a
loose way of saying that part of Whitey exists now.
If we meant strictly that Whitey exists now, we
would be saying something false. Whitey names
the whole piece of paper, and that object does
not exist now. Strictly speaking, Whitey is tempo­
rally too large to exist now. 12 Here, then, is the
major difference between the three-dimensional \nMark Heller
and four-dimensional viewpoints. On the three­
dimensional picture, if we said that Whitey exists
now and really meant it, we would be saying some­
thing true. It is Whitey that exists at different
times. On the other hand, on the four-dimensional
picture Whitey does not, strictly speaking, exist at
different times. Whitey's parts exist at different
times (different parts at different times), and in
virtue of this fact, we say, in our loose way of
speaking, that Whitey exists at those times.
This can be made clearer by considering a spatial
analogy. Put Whitey mostly in a drawer, but leave a
small corner sticking out. Now if asked where
Whitey is, you will answer that it is in the drawer.
Strictly speaking, however, your answer would be
false. Even on the three-dimensional picture, part
of Whitey is not in the drawer. But 'Whitey' names
the whole piece of paper, so if it is not the whole
piece in the drawer, then it is not Whitey in the
drawer. We say that Whitey is in the drawer
because a part of Whitey is in there. Notice also
that with some rewording it can be seen that how
large a portion of the paper is in the drawer is not
crucial. If only a corner of the paper were inside, we
would be less likely to say that Whitey is in the
drawer when asked where Whitey is. But if asked
'Does Whitey exist inside that drawer? ' I think that
we would all say 'yes'.
Recognizing that we have this loose way of
speaking even when using our three-dimensional
picture, it is not surprising that we also have this
loose way of speaking when using the four-dimen­
sional picture. Recognizing that such a phrase as
'Whitey exists now' is just loose speaking, we see
that, strictly speaking, Whitey only exists within
the spatiotemporal region that it exactly fills and
regions of which that one is a subregion. To loosely
say that Whitey exists now is to strictly say that the
present time is within Whitey's temporal bound­
aries. If there are instantaneous temporal parts,
then this is equivalent to saying that Whitey has a
temporal part that exists now.
7 Coincidence
One nice consequence of these considerations is
that an object and a proper temporal part of that
object do not, strictly speaking, exist in the same
space at the same time. An object should not be
coincident with any of its proper parts. Intuitively,
the problem with coincident entities is that of over­
crowding. There just is not enough room for them.
On the account provided above, an object and a
proper spatiotemporal part of that object do not
compete for room. There is a certain spatiotem­
poral region exactly occupied by the part; the
whole object is not in that region. There is only as
much of the object there as will fit - namely, the
part. This intuitive understanding of the relation­
ship between part and whole is what I intended to
capture with my discussion of our loose way of
speaking. When we say that Whitey is in the
drawer, that is just a loose way of saying that part
of Whitey is there. When we say that Whitey exists
now, we are only saying that a part of Whitey
exists now. Keeping this in mind allows us to
avoid being committed to coincident entities.
Let us consider a spatial case. Even adopting a
three-dimensional picture, we are not tempted to
say that Heller and Heller's left hand are coincident
entities. These are not two distinct entities in one
place at one time. Strictly speaking, there is only
one object in that hand-shaped region of space -
my hand. Whatever truth there is in saying that I
am in that region can be wholly captured by saying
that a part of me is there. The relation between my
hand and me is not that of coincidence, but, rather,
that of part to whole. Similar points are relevant to
cases of spatial overlap. My living room and my
dining room share a common wall. But this does
not entail that there is a wall-shaped region of space
occupied by both my living room and my dining
room. That region is occupied by the wall, and that
wall happens to be part of both rooms.
If we adopt the four-dimensional view of physi­
cal objects, then similar remarks can be made about
the relation between an object and its temporal
parts. Heller is not coincident with Heller-during-
1983. The only truth there is in saying that I occupy
that year-long region of time is that I have a part
that occupies that region. Strictly speaking, there is
only one entity in the relevant spatiotemporal
region - my 1983 part. Also, analogous to the case
of spatial overlap, there may be cases of temporal
overlap. IfI were to undergo fission next year, that
should not tempt us to say that prior to 1984 there
were two objects in the same space at the same
time. 13 Rather, we should say that two four-dimen­
sional objects overlapped prior to 1984 - they
shared a common temporal part.
Perhaps a less controversial case would be a hunk
of gold that is shaped into a ring. The ring then
undergoes a gradual replacement of matter until it
is entirely composed of silver. Many would be
tempted to say that the ring and the hunk of gold \nwere, for a period of time, coincident entities.
However, adopting the four-dimensional view, we
can say that the gold and the ring temporally over­
lap. The gold has a ring-shaped temporal part, the
ring has a golden temporal part, and the gold's part
is identical with the ring's part. The relationship
between the part of the one and the part of the
other is identity, not coincidence. The relationship
between the gold and the ring is that they share a
common part; they overlap. 14 Similar considera­
tions would allow an ontology of four-dimensional
objects to avoid an attack based on the Ship of
Theseus paradoxY
In contrast, trying to make sense of temporal
parts without shifting to a four-dimensional pic­
ture would require a commitment to objectionable
coincident entities. On Thomson's account, Heller
and Heller-now are, in the strictest and most pro­
blematic sense, two distinct entities occupying the
same space at the same time. 16 Heller is, at any
given time between his birth and his death, com­
plete. My existing now is not merely my having a
part that exists now. Right now I exactly fill all of
my three-dimensional boundaries. But that sup­
posed temporal part of me, Heller-now, also
exactly fills those same boundaries. Yet the two
entities are distinct because I have a much longer
career than Heller-now. Thomson cannot claim
that strictly speaking I am temporally too big to
be coincident with my instantaneous temporal part,
because she avails herself of only three dimensions
along which to measure. Along those dimensions
I am now exactly the same size as Heller-now.
8 A Crazy Metaphysic
In fact, Thomson's problem of coincident entities
is a symptom of a much deeper problem with trying
to explain temporal parts without rejecting the old
three-dimensional picture. Let us return to
Whitey, the piece of paper. Even given my meaning
hypothesis (according to which it is strictly false
that Whitey is in the drawer), the old picture has
the consequence that it is strictly true that Whitey
exists now (because Whitey now fills the relevant
boundaries along all three of the available dimen­
sions). Since 'Whitey' names the whole piece of
paper, we get the consequence that it is strictly true
that the whole piece of paper exists now. If all of
Whitey exists now, then Whitey has no parts that
do not exist now. Even though Whitey will con­
tinue to exist for the next several hours, 'Whitey-
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
from-(now + one hour)-to-(now + two hours)'
does not designate a part of Whitey unless that
part exists now. But if there were such a temporal
part, it would not yet have come into existence. So
Whitey has no temporal parts other than the one
that exists now. Indeed, it does not even have that
temporal part, since Whitey - all of it - existed an
hour ago, and the temporal part that supposedly
exists now did not exist then. If one holds the
three-dimensional view of physical objects, it is
perfectly reasonable to think of an ontology includ­
ing temporal parts as a 'crazy metaphysic. '17
Of course, this is not Thomson's reason for call­
ing it a crazy metaphysic. She does not draw atten­
tion to the three-dimensional! four-dimensional
distinction at all. Thomson writes:
I said this seems to me a crazy metaphysic. It
seems to me that its full craziness only comes
out when we take the spatial analogy seriously.
The metaphysic yields that ifI have had exactly
one bit of chalk in my hand for the last hour,
then there is something in my hand which is
white, roughly cylindrical in shape, and dusty,
something which also has a weight, something
which is chalk, which was not in my hand three
minutes ago, and indeed, such that no part of it
was in my hand three minutes ago. As I hold the
bit of chalk in my hand, new stuff, new chalk
keeps constantly coming into existence ex
nihilo. That strikes me as obviously false. 18
I suggest that this attack on temporal parts depends
on accepting the thesis that physical objects are
three-dimensional.
Why does Thomson think that temporal parts
would come into existence ex nihilo? It is obviously
not because nothing exists before the temporal
part. It is not even because everything that exists
before the temporal part continues to exist, for
there are prior temporal parts that go out of exist­
ence at just the moment that the part in question
comes into existence. It may simply be that none of
the temporal part's parts exist before the temporal
part does, but if that is all, then there is still the
question of why this should be objectionable. I
suggest that Thomson's objection is founded on
the belief that there is no significant material
change occurring at the time that the temporal
part is supposed to be coming into existence. The
piece of chalk does not undergo any alteration. No
molecules need be altering their internal structure
or their relationship to other molecules. No matter \nMark Heller
from outside the chalk is added, nor is any matter
that was part of chalk released into the surrounding
atmosphere. In short, nothing has occurred that
would be enough to bring an object into existence.
The temporal part just seems to pop into existence
without any sufficient cause.
But this argument reflects an unwarranted pre­
judice in favor of the three-dimensional picture
over the four-dimensional picture. If we accept a
four-dimensional view of physical objects, then all
it is for an object to come into existence at to is for it
to have to as its lower temporal boundary. The
question of what caused it to come into existence
at to is just the question of what causes it to have the
lower temporal boundary that it does, and this
question is no more or less answerable than the
question of what causes a certain object to have
the spatial boundaries it does. There seem to be
only two reasonable interpretations of such a ques­
tion: 'What causes those particular boundaries to
be the boundaries of an object? ' and 'What causes
those boundaries to be filled? ' Each of these ques­
tions is as answerable for temporal parts as for
spatial parts.
Recall that it is not built into the concept of a
temporal part that every region should contain such
a part. Hence, there may be some explanation for
why a given part comes into existence at the parti­
cular time that it does, an explanation for what
causes those particular boundaries to be the bound­
aries of an object. For instance, we might think of a
person as being one object from birth to death. Still
there seems a natural division between the person's
prepubescent part and postpubescent part. We can
explain why the change from prepubescence to
post pubescence should mark the beginning of a
new object, because that change will have signi­
ficant ramifications. The boundaries around the
person's postpubescent part seem hardly less sig­
nificant than the boundaries around the person's
heart. Accepting the existence of these temporal
parts does not commit us to the existence of a part
for every subregion of the region the person exactly
fills. A separate argument is required in order to get
this rather more cluttered view of what parts there
are. Such an argument would also provide an expla­
nation for why the boundaries of each of the objects
should be the boundaries of an object.
I suspect that much of the initial impression that
temporal parts would have to come into existence
ex nihilo is based on a picture of these physical
objects popping into existence merely because of
the passage of time. The phrase' ex nihilo' suggests
a complete independence from previous events.
The objects that I am defending do not just pop
into existence. It is not as if there is empty space
and then, poof, the space is filled. It is the causal
mechanisms together with the material configura­
tion of matter at any given time that affect which
parts will exist at the next moment. (Whether this
is a deterministic relationship is an independent
question. ) So, for any particular temporal part
there is an answer to the question 'What causes
its boundaries to be filled? ', or at least as much of
an answer as there is for spatial parts. The structure
of the world at one moment does affect the struc­
ture of the world at the next moment.
9 In Favor of Temporal Parts
To support temporal parts and the four-dimen­
sional view of physical objects, recall that earlier
in this chapter I argued that thinking of objects as
three-dimensional and enduring would commit us
to one of the following five unpleasant alternatives:
(a) there is no such physical object as my body,
(b) there is no physical object in the space that we
would typically say is now exactly occupied
by all of me other than my left hand,
(c) no physical object can undergo a loss of parts,
(d) there can be distinct physical objects exactly
occupying the same space at the same time,
(e) identity is not transitive.
We are now in a position to see how viewing objects
as four-dimensional allows us to avoid all of these
alternatives. Once we adopt the four-dimensional
picture, we can deny all five alternatives without
having to be committed to:
(3) the thing that, after t, is Body-minus = the
thing that, after t, is Body.
The objects claimed to be identical in (3) are dis­
tinct and do not, except in a loose sense, occupy the
same space at the same time.
Body and Body-minus are distinct four-dimen­
sional objects, since they have different spatial
shapes before t. But then, it might be objected,
they seem to be distinct but coincident entities -
co-occupying a single spatiotemporal region R that
begins at t. The response is that, strictly speaking,
neither of them is in R. They are both temporally
too big. They each take up a spatiotemporal region
that is temporally larger than R, because their \nregions begin before t. Of course, each has a tem­
poral part that is in R, but that does not entail that
either Body or Body-minus is in that region. They
overlap in R, but neither one exactly fills R. 19
Perhaps there may be another way of generating
the coincident entity problem. Instead of compar­
ing Body with Body-minus, let us compare that
part of Body which does exactly fill R with
that part of Body-minus which also exactly fills
R. It might be claimed that here we have an exam­
ple of two distinct objects in the same space at the
same time. But this again would be a mistake.
These temporal parts are not two distinct objects,
but, rather, one object under two descriptions.
Body and Body-minus have a common temporal
part, just as my living room and my dining room
have a common spatial part. 20
The thesis that there are temporal parts allows
us to avoid an otherwise troublesome metaphysical
puzzle. Moreover, the existence of such objects
seems entirely plausible once we are prepared to
think of objects as four-dimensional rather than
three-dimensional and enduring. However, not
everyone agrees about the plausibility of these enti­
ties. Their existence becomes especially dubious to
some philosophers when considering the case of
people. No matter what other objects are like, it
might be claimed, we can at least be sure that
people do not have temporal parts.
10 Unity of Consciousness
One thing that makes people special as objects is
that we are conscious. We can have experiences and
we can be aware of ourselves having experiences.
Furthermore, there is a unity to our consciousness.
The independent experiences of hearing 'the',
'cat', 'is', and 'spotted' can sometimes go together
to form a more elaborate experience. It is this unity
of consciousness that suggests to Chisholm that
people do not have temporal parts. 21 He thinks
that in order to have the more elaborate experience
of hearing 'the cat is spotted', it must be the self­
same thing having each of the parts of the experi­
ence. We could not account for the unity of
consciousness if the object hearing 'the' were dis­
tinct from the one hearing 'cat', or if the one hear­
ing 'th' were distinct from the one hearing 'e', and
the one hearing' c' were distinct from both the one
hearing 'a' and the one hearing 't'. (I ask the reader
to allow me the convenience ofletting letters repre­
sent sounds. ) The only way to account for the
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
several short experiences going together to form
the longer experience of hearing 'the cat is spotted',
it seems, is to suppose that there is a single entity
that is having all of the shorter experiences.
Chisholm draws his concept of a temporal
part from the writings of Jonathan Edwards. 22
Edwards's notion develops out of his religious the­
ory that God creates the world and all its objects at
every moment ex nihilo. It is real ex nihilo creation
that is intended here: The Heller that exists now is a
new creation of God's and exists independently of
anything (other than God) that existed at any earlier
time. Heller-at-time-fl is distinct from Heller-at­
time-tz for the one only exists at fJ, and the other
only exists at fz. Heller, the object that began to
exist in 1957 and still exists now, exists merely by
divine convention. God treats a certain collection of
momentary objects as if they add up (over time) to a
single persisting thing. This conception of tem­
poral part can be divorced from its dependence on
God. Edwards's religious beliefs are his motivation
for adopting his thesis of temporal parts, but they
need not be built into the concept. All that is essen­
tial to Chisholm's conception of a temporal part is
that the momentary objects be ontologically basic,
and that longer-lasting objects be 'built up' out of
the momentary ones by convention. It may be
human convention, rather than divine convention.
Given a concept of temporal part that is com­
mitted to purportedly long-lasting entities being
conventional constructions out of more basic
momentary objects, Chisholm argues that there
are no temporal parts. He argues that an ontology
that includes such temporal parts must conflict
with our experience. Chisholm uses the example
of an individual experiencing the bird call 'bob­
white'. When someone has such an experience, he
also has the second-order experience of 'bob' and
'white' being part of a single experience. He is
experiencing the unity of the 'bobwhite' experi­
ence. It seems to be clearly a single object that is
experience both 'bob' and 'white'. But an ontology
of temporal parts would be committed to one entity
experiencing 'bob' and a different entity, a differ­
ent temporal part of the hearer, experiencing
'white'. Since on the Edwardsian conception of a
temporal part the connection between the two
experiencing objects would be merely conven­
tional, the two experiences could not be connected
in any way that would allow them to form a single
experience. He concludes that an ontology of tem­
poral parts must conflict with our experience of a
diachronic unity of consciousness. \nMark Heller
11 The Fourth Dilllension
This argument requires at least that temporal parts
be ontologically more basic than the whole that
they compose. It is only by convention that the
whole exists at all. Our conventions allow us to
act as if there are enduring wholes; they allow us
to treat certain momentary objects as if they com­
pose an enduring whole, but the world itself does
not contain any enduring objects. This is the sort of
view that would be expected from an account of
temporal parts that is formed against a background
supposition of three-dimensionality. Someone
might believe that no object can really exist for
more than a moment. If one of these instantaneous
objects could exist for longer, it would be a three­
dimensional enduring object. But there are no such
enduring objects. Instead there are collections of
these instantaneous objects added together (by
convention) to form the objects that we typically
talk about. Someone holding such a view would be
reasonable to accept the Edwardsian conception of
temporal parts. But I do not accept the background
supposition of three-dimensionality. On my
account, temporal parts and the wholes that they
compose are ontologically on a par. I do not need to
appeal to conventions, either divine or earthly, as
the glue that holds my temporally extended objects
together.
It might still be metaphysically interesting to ask
how it is that temporal parts go together to com­
pose a whole, but there will be similar interesting
questions for any ontology. For instance, an onto­
logy of three-dimensional enduring objects that
does not allow for temporal parts must be prepared
to explain how it is that I am identical with the
person who was called 'Heller' yesterday. Any
explanation that might be offered can easily be
adapted to serve as an explanation of the corres­
ponding phenomenon on the ontology of four­
dimensional objects. For instance, if the professed
identity is founded upon some sort of causal flow,
then that same causal flow could serve as the glue
for my temporal parts. If the supposed identity is
founded on the continuity of consciousness, then
such a continuity could also explain the unity of my
four-dimensional people. Even if identity is held to
be an unexplainable, brute property, the four­
dimensionalist can equally well hold that the rela­
tion between temporal parts that makes them parts
of a single person is brute. And if it turns out that a
person's identity is claimed to be a matter of con­
vention after all, then I can claim the same for
people on my ontology of four-dimensional
objects.
What I will in fact claim is that every filled
region of space-time contains a physical object,
and which of these objects we count as people is a
matter of convention. This claim is based on inde­
pendent arguments, 23 and is not part of my con­
ception of temporal parts or of four-dimensional
objects. Though the parts of a person may hold
together in a special way, that special way is not
privileged when it comes to existence. So, even
though my conception of a temporal part is differ­
ent from the Edwardsian conception in such a way
as to make it invulnerable to Chisholm's attack, my
overall ontology will share the Edwardsian thesis
that what makes a certain collection of temporal
parts a person is a matter of convention. So it seems
that my ontology stands or falls with the Edward­
sian conception of temporal parts after all. Some­
one could, using my understanding of a temporal
part, accept that there were temporal parts and still
accept that Chisholm's argument shows that there
are no Edwardsian temporal parts. But it would be
inconsistent to adopt my whole ontology and to still
put stock in Chisholm's argument.
12 A Sketch of an Explanation
Chisholm does not himself explain how it is that we
experience a unity of consciousness. Consider the
following sketch of one plausible explanation. The
experience of 'bobwhite' has two smaller experi­
ences as parts, that of 'bob' and that of 'white'.
But a 'white' experience that is immediately pre­
ceded by a 'bob' experience is significantly different
from a 'white' experience that has no lead-in. Let us
call the first of these a white-l experience and the
second a white-2 experience. By focusing just on
that feature of these experiences that is most salient,
namely the sound 'white', we might fail to notice
the dissimilarities. It is those dissimilarities that we
should attend to when trying to explain our appar­
ent experience of a unity of consciousness. Perhaps
the white-l experience carries with it a memory
trace of the 'bob' experience. Since the white-2
experience does not follow a 'bob' experience, it
does not carry such a memory trace. This is why
the white-l experience is itself experienced as the
conclusion of a 'bobwhite' experience, whereas the
white-2 experience is not perceived in this way.
If this is accurate (as a sketch), then what would
happen if someone had a white-l experience with-\nout its being preceded by a 'bob' experience
(assuming that this is possible)? It seems that he
would still perceive his white-l experience as the
conclusion of a 'bobwhite' experience. He would
have a second-order experience of a unity of con­
sciousness even when there really was no such
unity. God could create someone ex nihilo (truly
ex nihilo, so that his coming into existence is totally
independent of any natural occurence), and create
him having a white-l experience. His experience
will include memory traces of a 'bob' experience,
even though he was not around to have had the
'bob' experience. The 'white' experience and the
memory traces together are enough to make this
newly created person perceive himself as having
had a unified 'bobwhite' experience. So it seems
that the experience of a unity of consciousness does
not require that a single object have both a 'bob'
experience and a 'white' experience.
Let us turn to a possible sketch of an explanation
of how the white-l and the white-2 experience
might get to have different memory traces in typi­
cal situations. If someone is having a 'bobwhite'
experience, his brain is in a certain state at the
beginning of the experience and is in a different
state at the end of the experience. The transition
from one brain state to the other will correspond to
the having of the 'bobwhite' experience. The state
that the person is in when he has the 'white'
experience will be affected by the fact that he has
just had the 'bob' experience. Someone who is
having a 'white' experience that is not preceded
by a 'bob' experience will have a different brain
state corresponding to his 'white' experience.
These differences in brain states correspond to
differences in memory traces that are included in
the experiences. The white-l brain state will differ
from the white-2 brain state in just the way that is
relevant for the experiencer's perceiving the white­
I experience as the conclusion of a 'bobwhite'
experience. Anyone who is in a white-l brain
state will perceive himself as having the conclusion
of a unitary 'bobwhite' experience, even if he did
not get in that state by normal means - even if his
'white' experience was not actually preceded by a
'bob' experience.
13 Causal Connections
Even if we deny the existence of temporal parts, the
explanation of how someone typically gets into a
white-l brain state will be in terms of the causal
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
connections between the environment and the
brain. The sound waves of the 'bob' sound cause
(through a complex process) the brain to be in a
certain state. The brain in that state is then affected
by the sound waves of the 'white' sound, and there­
fore goes into a white-l state. If it had not been in
the state that it was in, the 'white' sound would not
have put it into a white-l state. This whole story
could be put in terms of the configuration of matter
at various times and the forces acting on that mat­
ter. We do not need to appeal to enduring brains or
persisting people. So long as the relevant process
occurs, the object that experiences 'white' will be in
the white-l brain state. So long as it is in that brain
state, it will have the experience of having had a
unified 'bobwhite' experience. It does not matter if
the object in question is identical with the one that
was in the 'bob' brain state.
This is why it is crucial that temporal parts as I
understand them do not truly come into existence
ex nihilo. The state of a brain-at-t2 (a temporal part
of a brain) is affected by the state of the relevant
brain-at-t[. My assertion of the conventionality of
people does not commit me to denying that matter
is sometimes configured in the relevant way or that
the forces in question sometimes act upon matter
configured in that way. I do claim that the connec­
tion between two consecutive temporal parts of a
single person does not count any more toward
identity than does the connection between Heller­
during-1968 and Nixon-during-1974. But this
claim is consistent with the claim that there is a
much stronger connection between the first pair
than there is between the second pair. This differ­
ence in causal connection results in a difference of
unity of consciousness.
It is just a matter of contingent fact that that
causal connectedness does lead to a person's
experiencing a unity of consciousness. It is that
causal connectedness which happens to be respons­
ible for getting the 'bobwhite' hearer into a white-l
brain state. My hearing 'bob' at t[ would have no
effect on your brain state, so your hearing 'white' at
t2 would not be a 'white-I' experience. Hence,
there is no unity of consciousness for an object
composed of me-at-t[ and you-at-t2. But if we
had been hard-wired differently, if the relevant
causal connections had been different, then the
thing composed of me-at-t[ and you-at-t2 might
have had a unity of consciousness. It might have
been that my hearing 'bob' at t[ would have made
your hearing 'white' at t2 put you into a white-l
state at t2. In such a case the thing that would have \nMark Heller
a unity of consciousness would not be what we
would typically call a person (though, depending
upon your theory of personhood, you might start
calling it a person).
My response to Chisholm is that if an indivi­
dual's experiencing a unity of consciousness or an
individual's actually having a unity of conscious­
ness can be explained on an ontology that does not
allow for temporal parts, then they can also be
explained on an ontology that does allow for tem­
poral parts - even an ontology that holds that what
makes any particular collection of temporal parts
add up to a person is mere convention. As an
example I sketched one possible explanation for
an ontology not including temporal parts, and
then showed how that same explanation was avail­
able to someone holding my ontology. I do not
want to argue that this is the correct explanation
of why each of us experiences a unity of conscious­
ness. But it is (at least the beginnings of) a plaus­
ible explanation. In order for Chisholm's argument
to really be successful, he must be prepared to offer
an explanation of the phenomenon in question that
cannot be adapted by someone who holds my
ontology. I do not think this can be done. If it
seems to you that it can, then I suggest that you
are assuming that my ontology rules out more than
it does. 24
14 Modal Properties
Peter van Inwagen presents a different sort of argu­
ment against the thesis that people have temporal
parts. 25 His argument does not explicitly depend
on any claims about consciousness. The key pre­
mise to van Inwagen's argument is that a person
could have existed for less time than he does in fact
exist. Insofar as such a premise could be general­
ized to objects other than people, the thesis that
those objects have temporal parts would be equally
vulnerable to arguments of this type. Actually, van
Inwagen's is an argument against the thesis that
people have arbitrary temporal parts. Van Inwagen
suggests that if there are any nonarbitrary temporal
parts, they are momentary slices. Personally, I am
more certain of the existence of temporally
Notes
For instance: Quine, "Identity, ostension, and hypos­
tasis, " this volume, ch. 22; John Perry, "Can the self
extended temporal parts than I am of momentary
ones. The objects that van Inwagen is arguing
against are precisely the ones that I include in my
ontology. His argument is fairly simple once we
grant him his key premise about an individual's
modal properties.
Van Inwagen argues by indirect proof. Assume
that Descartes has temporal parts. Then there is
some thing that begins to exist when Descartes
begins to exist and ceases existing exactly one
year before Descartes ceases to exist and is exactly
the same spatial size that Descartes is for as long as
that part exists. Call that object 'Descartes-minus'.
Given the premise that Descartes could have lived
for a year less than he did, Descartes could have
been the same size that Descartes-minus in fact is.
If we also accept that Descartes-minus would have
been the same size that it is even if Descartes had
not existed beyond the time that Descartes-minus
in fact exists, then it follows that Descartes and
Descartes-minus could have occupied exactly the
same spatiotemporal region. But no distinct objects
can occupy exactly the same region. So we must
deny our assumption that there is such a thing as
Descartes-minus.
This argument depends upon the following pre­
mises. First, that Descartes could have lived for a
year less than he in fact did. Second, that Des­
cartes-minus would have been the same spatiotem­
poral shape that it in fact is even if Descartes had
lived for a year less than he in fact did. And third,
that coincident entities are impossible. I accept the
last two of these premises. In fact, I would argue for
both of them. 26 But I reject the first of his pre­
mises. I grant that most of us believe that it is true,
but I deny that we are right in our belief or that we
even have any very good reason for it. I might reject
this premise on the following grounds: It, together
with other premises that I accept, has the conse­
quence that there are no temporal parts; but I am
more convinced of the existence of temporal parts
than I am of the truth of the premise in question;
therefore, I conclude that the premise in question is
false. I might reject the premise on these grounds,
but I do not. I hope that I can present more per­
suasive grounds.
divide? " Journal or Philosophy 69 (Sept. 1972), pp.
463-88; David Lewis, "Survival and identity, " in \nPhilosophlral Papers, \01. I (New York: Oxford Uni­
versity Press, 1983).
2 Lewis, "Survival and identity, " p. 76.
3 JudithJarvis Thomson, "Parthood and identity across
time, " this volume, ch. 24.
4 In conversation Jim Hudson and Michael Tye have
each expressed doubts about whether they even
understand the three-dimensional view, and they
claim that the four-dimensional view is in fact the
standard view. I am not much concerned about what
the standard view really is, but I do think that our
standard use of language does reflect at least a tend­
ency to treat time as importantly disanalogous with
the three spatial dimensions. Q! !ine puts the point this
way: "Our ordinary language shows a tiresome bias in
its treatment of time" (Word and Object (Cambridge,
Mass. : MIT Press, 1960), p. 170). Also, I suspect that
many philosophical difficulties would never have
arisen if it were not for some tendency toward a
three-dimensional view.
Peter van Inwagen, "The doctrine of arbitrary unde­
tached parts, " Pacific Philosophical f2Jtarterly 62 (Apr.
1981), pp. 123·-37.
6 Thomson, "Parthood and identity across time. "
7 Van Inwagen, "Doctrine of arbitrary undetached
parts. "
8 Roderick Chisholm, 'Parts as essential to their
wholes, ' Review of Metaphysics 26 (1973), pp. 581-
60l
9 Peter Geach, "Identity, " Review or Metaphysics 21
(1967-8), pp. 3-12.
10 See Mark Heller, The Ontology or Physical Objects
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990),
ch. 2, sect. 9.
11 See Heller, Ontology of Physical Objects, chs 2 and 3.
12 Notice that my claims do not presuppose a description
theory of names. I am not merely supposing that
'Whitey' means the whole piece of paper. On a causal
theory of names 'Whitey' refers to the whole piece of
paper if and only if it was the whole piece that was
originally indicated when the reference of 'Whitey'
was fixed.
13 Compare this to David Lewis's discussion, "Survival
and identity. "
14 Compare this to John Perry's discussion in "The same
F, " this volume, ch. 8, esp. pp. 97-8.
15 See my "The best candidate approach to diachronic
identity, " Australasian Journal of Philosopky 65 (Dec.
1987), pp. 434--51. On my "strictly speaking" ploy
many of our ordinary utterances end up being false
unless they are treated as loose speaking. It is strictly
false that Whitey is in the drawer and that Whitey
exists now. What is strictly true is that part of Whitey
is in the drawer and part of Whitey exists now. One
might prefer to hold that it is strictly true that Whitey
is in the drawer, but that this just means that part of
Whitey is in the drawer. Similarly, it is strictly true
that Whitey exists now, and this just means that part
---------------------------------
Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects
of Whitey exists now. (Actually, if now is supposed to
be an instant, and if there are no instantaneous
objects, then the strict truth is that now is within
Whitey's temporal boundaries. ) This suggestion
agrees with my earlier claims concerning the nonlin­
guistic facts, but disagrees about the strict/loose dis­
tinction. Perhaps the claim that part of Whitey is in
the drawer is in fact the strictest interpretation of
'Whitey is in the drawer'. Someone who adopts the
present suggestion will be forced to say that my hand
and I do occupy the same space at the same time, but
he can still accept that we do not have to compete for
the space, since my occupying that space just is my
having a part (my hand) that occupies it. The sort of
coincidence just described is not an objectionable sort
of coincidence. It is not the sort of coincidence dis­
cussed in the next paragraph of the text.
16 Thomson, "Parthood and identity across time, " this
volume, p. 306.
17 Thomson calls it "a crazy metaphysic" on pp. 306 and
307.
18 Ibid. , p. 307.
19 Jan Cover has suggested to me that on the four­
dimensional view both halves of the identity claim in
(3) are nonreferring: There is no thing that, after t, is
Body-minus. But this is to forget that we can refer to a
whole object without having the whole object present.
Body-minus (the whole four-dimensional object that
begins to exist long before t) is Body-minus at all
times during its existence, including the after-t times.
20 It may appear that in order to get this benefit from
temporal parts we will have to accept that every
moment within Body's existence is the beginning of
a new temporal part (since t was arbitrarily selected).
I do in fact accept this, but all we really need in the
present case is that Body and Body-minus be too big
to fit in region R. We do not need to claim that there is
anything that does exactly fill R.
21 Chisholm, "Problems of identity, " in Milton K.
Munitz (ed. ), Identity and Individuation (New York:
New York University Press, 1971), pp. 3-30.
22 Jonathan Edwards, Doctrine of Original Sin Defended
(1758), cited in Chisholm, "Problems of identity, "
p. 12.
23 For these arguments see Heller, Ontology of Physical
Objects.
24 Just as we can divide up a person's experience and
attribute different parts of the experience to different
temporal parts of the object, we can do the same for
beliefs, desires, actions, etc. It may be that there are
temporal parts that are too small to have beliefs.
There are certainly temporal parts that are too small
to utter sentences. But these parts can have parts of
beliefs and can utter parts of sentences. On the other
hand, many temporal parts are certainly big enough to
utter sentences. Suppose that there is just one person
in a room and he is talking to a tape recorder. Am I
committed to saying that there are actually lots of \nMark Heller
talkers in the room? This is just the 'coincident
entities' objection back in a new guise. It does not
demand a new answer. Strictly speaking, the thing
that is uttering a given sentence is just the person's
temporal part that has the same temporal boundaries
as the act of sentence production. (Actually, it is
probably more exact to say that it is some spatial
part of that temporal part. )
25 Van Inwagen, "Doctrine of arbitrary undetached
parts, " pp. 132-5.
26 For the author's argument see Heller, Ontology of
Physical Objects, ch. 2. \n\n\nIntroduction
Whatever our philosophical views may be about the
persistence of material things, we seem to have a
strong, perhaps biologically based, feeling that we
are continuants, fully present as persons at each
moment of our existence, and that we are not
"logical constructions" out of some more basic
entities, temporal person-stages. This is Roderick
Chisholm's view of the persistence of the self, and
he argues for it in his "The Persistence of Persons"
(chapter 26). According to Chisholm, there is a fact
of the matter as to whether we persist from one
time to another, and this is not a matter that can be
settled by adopting a convention about what to
count as a single continuing person.
But what makes a person existing at one time the
same person as the person existing at another? Or
what makes two person-stages stages of the same
person? There are two main groups of theories
about this question, memory theories and bodily
continuity theories, although hybrid theories are
also possible. Roughly, memory theories say that
the later person must be connected with the earlier
person by a chain of remembered experiences.
Similarly, the bodily continuity theories say that
the later person's body (perhaps her brain) must be
continuous with the earlier person's body.
Whether or not the continuity of memory alone is
sufficient for personal identity, there seems no
question that memory is of great importance for
personal identity - at least as evidence for identity.
In "Persons and their Pasts", (chapter 27), Sydney
Shoemaker investigates the conceptual connection
between personal identity and memory, defending
the view that persons have special epistemic access
to their own pasts.
In "The Self and the Future" (chapter 28),
Bernard Williams constructs thought-experiments
that appear to show that our intuitive judgments
about personal identity ("Will he be me? ") can
conflict with each other. On the one hand, we
seem to be able to imagine cases in which the
continuity of memory supersedes bodily continu-
Further reading
Lewis, David, "Survival and identity, " repro in Philoso­
phical Papers, vol. I (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1983).
Lowe, E. J. , "Real selves: persons and a substantial kind, "
in David Cockburn (ed. ) Human Beings (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1991).
Introduction
ity. On the other, we can construct stories in which
memory seems not really relevant (if you are told
that you will be tortured at midnight tonight but
that your memory will be cleanly and entirely
erased just before the torture, would that make a
difference to you? ). William explores the assump­
tions underlying our reactions to such imagined
cases, and, like Chisholm, rejects conventionalism
as a solution to the puzzles.
In "Personal Identity" (chapter 29), Derek Par­
fit brings new perspectives on personal identity.
First, he challenges the idea that personal identity
is a determinate matter, that it is an all-or-nothing
affair. Second, he distinguishes personal identity
from survival, arguing that it is possible to survive
without identity (e. g. , by multiplying). Parfit
develops the concepts of psychological continuity
and connectedness, and argues that survival is a
matter of degree. Finally, he explores the conse­
quences of his views for certain ethical issues, such
as egoism and our interest in our futures.
Richard Swinburne believes that all "empiricist
theories" of the persistence of persons, including
memory theories and bodily continuity theories,
are fundamentally inadequate. To give a correct
theory, we must turn away, he argues, from a
materialist view of persons. In "Personal Identity:
The Dualist Theory" (chapter 30), he develops an
account according to which sameness of the soul is
the essential element in the persisting person.
In "Human Beings" (chapter 31), Mark John­
ston examines some important methodological
issues involved in philosophical discussions of per­
sonal identity, surveying representative modern
approaches to personal identity in this context
(including those of Williams, Parfit, and Shoe­
maker). On his view, the familiar concepts used in
discussions of personal identity, such as mental and
physical continuity, are properly regarded as evid­
ence of personal identity, not constitutive of it. He
argues that any acceptable account of personal
identity must do justice to our usual, reliable
and unproblematic, practice of identifying and re­
identifying persons.
Noonan, Harold, Personal Identity (London and New
York: Routledge, 1989).
Parfit, Derek, Reasons and Persons (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1984).
Perry, John (ed. ), Personal Identity (Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1975). \nPart VI
Rorty, Amdie O. (ed. ), Identities of Persons (Berkeley and
Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1976).
Shoemaker, Sydney, and Swinburne, Richard, Personal
Identity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1984).
Sosa, Ernest, "Subject among other things, " Philosophical
Perspectives I (1987), pp. 155~89.
--'Surviving matters, ' Nous 24 (1990), pp. 305~30.
Strawson, P. F. , Individuals (London: Methuen, 1959). \n26
Roderick M. Chisholm
1 The Persistence of Persons through
Time
Am I an ens per alia or an ens per se?
Consider the simplest of Cartesian facts - say,
that I now hope for rain. Hoping for rain is one of
those properties that are rooted only in the times at
which they are had. And so ifI am an ens per alia, an
ens successivum, like our simple table or the Ship of
Theseus, then I may be said to hope for rain only in
virtue of the fact that my present stand-in hopes for
rain. I borrow the property, so to speak, from the
thing that constitutes me now.
But surely that hypothesis is not to be taken
seriously. There is no reason whatever for suppos­
ing that I hope for rain only in virtue of the fact that
some other thing hopes for rain - some stand-in
that, strictly and philosophically, is not identical
with me but happens to be doing duty for me at this
particular moment.
If there are thus two things that now hope for
rain, the one doing it on its own and the other such
that its hoping is done for it by the thing that now
happens to constitute it, then I am the former thing
and not the latter thing. But this is to say that I am
not an ens successivum. 1
But might I not be a constituent of an ens succes­
sivum?
Originally published in Person and Object (1976). pp.
104-13. 212-14. Reprinted by permission of Open
Court. a division of Carus Publishing.
If I am a constituent of an ens successivum, then
there have been other things that once constituted
the same person that I do now and presumably
there will be still others in the future. But if this
is so, then the things I think I know about my past
history may all be false (even though they may be
true ofthe person I happen now to constitute), and
I may have no grounds for making any prediction at
all about my future. Is this the sort of thing I am?
There are certain philosophical data that we
have a right to believe about ourselves - that is,
propositions that whether or not they are true are
such that they should be regarded as innocent,
epistemically, until we have positive reason for
thinking them guilty. Among these propositions
is the fact that we do undergo change and persist
through time. Each of us is justified in believing a
great variety of things about his past. We are justi­
fied in believing these things until we have found
some reason to doubt them. It is reasonable to treat
these beliefs as being innocent, epistemically, until
we have found some positive reason for thinking
them guilty.
What would such a positive reason be?
It is important to remind ourselves that we do
not find any such positive reason in the writings of
those philosophers who have professed to be skep­
tical about the persistence of persons through time.
Consider, for example, Kant's discussion of
what he calls 'the third paralogism of transcenden­
tal psychology'. For all I can know, Kant there
says, the thing that calls itself'! ' at one time may
be other than the thing that calls itself'! ' at another \nRoderick M. Chisholm
time. There might be a series of different subjects
which make up my biography, each of them passing
its thoughts and memories on to its successor -
each subject would 'retain the thought of the pre­
ceding subject and so hand it over to the sub­
sequent subject'. 2 The relation between the
successive subjects, he says, could be like that of a
set of elastic balls, one of which impinges on
another in a straight line and 'communicates to
the latter its whole motion, and therefore its
whole state (that is, if we take account only of the
positions in space)'. Kant goes on to say:
If, then, in analogy with such bodies, we pos­
tulate substances such that the one commun­
icates to the other representations together with
the consciousness of them, we can conceive a
whole series of substances of which the first
transmits its state together with its conscious­
ness to the second, the second its own state with
that of the preceding substance to the third, and
this in turn the states of all the preceding sub­
stances together with its own consciousness and
with their consciousness to another. The last
substance would then be conscious of all the
states of the previously changed substances, as
being its own states, because they would have
been transferred to it together with the con­
sciousness of them. And yet it would not have
been one and the same person in all these
states. 3
Does this give us a reason for wondering whether
we have in fact persisted through time? Surely not.
What Kant has pointed out to us, in these specula­
tions, is simply that the following is logically pos­
sible: instead of there being just one person who
makes up my biography, there was a succession of
different persons, all but the first of them being
deluded with respect to its past. It is also logically
possible, as Russell pointed out, that the universe
came into being three seconds ago with all its
ostensible traces and relics of the past. And it is
logically possible that a malicious demon is deceiv­
ing each of us with respect to what we think are the
external physical things around us. But the fact
that these are logically possible is itself no reason
for thinking that they actually occur.
'Given the transitory nature of the ultimate par­
ticles that make up the physical universe, isn't it
reasonable to suppose that, if I do persist through
time, then my consciousness may be transferred, as
John Locke seemed to suggest, from one substance
or individual thing to another? And if my con­
sciousness is thus transferred, wouldn't I, too, be
transferred from one substance to another? '
The supposition, I am certain, is not only unten­
able, but also incoherent. Philosophers have taken
it seriously, however, and so we should consider it
briefly.
Is it possible to transfer my consciousness from
one substance to another with the result that,
whereas the former substance but not the latter
was I, the latter substance but not the former is
now I? In such a case, I could truly say: 'This is
other than that, but once I was that and now I'm
this. '
Locke said that, 'it being the same consciousness
that makes a man be himself to himself, personal
identity depends on that only, whether it be
annexed solely to one individual substance, or can
be continued in a succession of several sub­
stances, .4 The same consciousness, he said, could
be thus continued in a succession of several sub­
stances, if it were 'transferred from one thinking
substance to another', and if this does happen, then
the different 'thinking substances may make but
one person, .5 And these different thinking sub­
stances will all be 'the same self. 6 (In fairness to
Locke, we should note that he does not quite bring
himself to say that I might now be identical with
this but not with that and then later identical with
that but not with this. Although he suggests that it
is possible to transfer my consciousness from one
substance to another, he does not explicitly say that,
whereas the former substance was I, the latter sub­
stance is now I. It may very well be that, like many
other philosophers, he was playing loose with 'is, .7
A part of a thing or an appendage to a thing may
be transferred to another thing, as an organ may be
transplanted from one body to another. The con­
tents of a thing may be transferred to another thing,
as apples may be moved from one bag to another.
Speaking somewhat more metaphorically, we
might also say that the properties of one thing may
be transferred to another thing. If you are infected
by my contagious disease and ifI then recover, one
could say that my sickness, including my aches and
pains, has been transferred from me to you. But the
disease or sickness will not be transferred in the
literal sense in which, say, its carriers might be
transferred.
My personality traits could be said to be trans­
ferred to you if you acquire the kind of complexes
and dispositions that are characteristic of me. My
beliefs could be said to be transferred to you, if you \nbegin to believe the same things I do. And my
memories could even be said to be transferred
from me to you, if you remember, or think you
remember, the same things I do. (But if I remem­
ber or think I remember my doing the deed, the
content of that memory could not be transferred to
you. x) By thus acquiring my properties - or, more
accurately, by thus instantiating some of the prop­
erties that I do - you may become so much like me
that others will have difficulty in telling us apart -
in that they are unable to decide, with respect to
certain things that have happened, whether they
belong to your biography or to mine. Perhaps the
courts will have to make a decree. Perhaps it will
even be reasonable for them to decide, with respect
to some of the things that only I did in the past, that
you and not I are responsible for them, and then
they might decide, with respect to the name I
formerly had, that you should be the one who
bears it.
But none of these possibilities, perplexing as
they may be, justifies us in saying that there could
be two different substances which are such that I
am transferred from one to the other. 9
There is still another type of transfer which is
quite naturally described in the way in which
Locke described 'transfer of self. This is illus­
trated in the transfer of a shadow ('the shadow of
his hand moved from the wall to the table and
became larger but more faint in the process'). But
a shadow is an ens per alio; it borrows its properties
from other things (most notably from shadowed
objects). The kind of transfer that is involved in
the passage of a shadow from one object to another,
to the extent that it differs from the types of trans­
fer we distinguished above, is typical of entia per
alio. But persons, we have seen, are entia per se.
What could it mean, after all, to say that I might
be 'annexed to' or 'placed in' a thinking thing or
individual substance?
Whatever it might mean, either I am identical
with the thinking substance in which I am thus
placed or I am not identical with it.
If I am identical with the thinking substance in
which I am thus placed, then I cannot be trans­
ferred. from that substance to another thinking sub­
stance.
But if! am placed in a certain thinking substance
and am not identical with that thinking substance,
then there are two different things - the thinking
substance and I. But if there are two things, which
of us does the thinking? There are exactly four
possibilities.
The Persistence of Persons
(1) Neither of us does the thinking - that is to
say, neither of us thinks. But this we know is false.
(2) I think but the thinking substance does not
think. Why call the latter a 'thinking' substance,
then? (It would be like calling an elevator a thinking
substance because it contains someone who thinks. )
And what relation do I bear to this thinking sub­
stance? I'm not a property of it, since properties do
not think. Am I a proper part, then, of the thinking
substance? But proper parts of substances are
themselves substances. And so if I am myself a
thinking substance, what is the point of saying
there is another thinking substance in which I am
'placed' or to which I am 'annexed'?
(3) The thinking substance thinks, but I do not.
But isn't this absurd? 'It's not really I who think; ' it
is some other thing that thinks in me - some other
thing that does what I mistakenly take to be my
thinking. ' (Or should the latter clause have been:
'some other thing that does what it mistakenly takes
to be my thinking'? )
(4) Both the thinking substance and I think.
Isn't this multiplying thinkers beyond necessity?
If I want my dinner, does it follow that two of
us want my dinner? Or does the thinking substance
want its dinner and not mine?
I think we may reasonably conclude that there is
no significant sense in which we may speak of the
transfer of a self from one substance or individual
thing to another.
2 'Will I Be He? ': Truth-conditions and
Criteria
Suppose that there is a person x who happens to
know, with respect to a certain set of properties,
that there is or will be a certain person y who will
have those properties at some future time, and x
asks himself: 'Will I be he? ' Either x is identical
withy, or x is diverse fromy.
We cannot find the answer to the question, 'Is x
identical withy? ', merely by deciding what would
be practically convenient. To be sure, if we lack
sufficient evidence for making a decision, it may
yet be necessary for the courts to rule that x is the
same person as y, or that he is not. Perhaps the
ruling will have to be based upon practical consid­
erations, and conceivably such considerations may
lead the court later to 'defeat' its ruling. But one
may always ask of any such ruling 'But is it correct,
or true? ' For a ruling to the effect that x is the same \nRoderick M. Chisholm
person as y will be correct, or true, only if x is
identical withy.
We should remind ourselves, however, that the
expression 'x is the same person asy' also has a use
which is not this strict and philosophical one. Thus
there are circumstances in which one might say:
'Mr Jones is not at all the same person he used to
be. You will be disappointed. He is not the person
that you remember. ' We would not say this sort of
thing if Mr Jones had changed only slightly. We
would say it only ifhe had undergone changes that
were quite basic and thoroughgoing - the kind of
changes that might be produced by psychoanalysis,
or by a lobotomy, or by a series of personal traged­
ies. But just how basic and thoroughgoing must
these changes be if we are to say of Mr Jones that
he is a different person? The proper answer would
seem to be: 'As basic and thoroughgoing as you
would like. It's just a matter of convention. It all
depends upon how widely it is convenient for you
to construe the expression "He's the same person
he used to be". Insofar as the rules oflanguage are
in your own hands, you may have it any way you
would like. '10 (Compare 'Jones is not himself
today' or 'Jones was not himself when he said
that'. )
This, however, is only playing loose with 'same'
- or, more accurately, it is playing loose with 'not
the same'. When we say, in the above sense, 'Jones
is no longer the person he used to be', we do not
mean that there is, or was, a certain entity such that
Jones was formerly identical with that entity and is
no longer so. What we are saying does not imply
that there are (or have been) certain entities, x and
y, such that at one time x is, or was, identical with
y, and at another time x is not identical withy. For
this is incoherent, but 'Jones is no longer the per­
son he used to be' is not.
Nor do we mean, when we say 'Jones is no longer
the person he used to be', that there was a certain
entity, the old Jones, which no longer exists, and
that there is a certain different entity, the new Jones,
which somehow has taken his place. We are not
describing the kind of change that takes place when
one President succeeds another. In the latter case,
there is a clear answer to the question 'What hap­
pened to the old one? ' But when we decide to call
Jones a new person, we are not confronted with
such questions as: 'What happened, then, to the old
Jones? Did he die, or was he annihilated, or disas­
sembled, or did he retire to some other place? '
The old Jones did not die; he was not annihilated
or disassembled; and he did not retire to any other
place. He became the new Jones. And to say that he
'became' the new Jones is not to say that he 'became
identical' with something he hadn't been identical
with before. For it is only when a thing comes into
being that it may be said to become identical with
something it hadn't been identical with before. To
say that our man 'became the new Jones' is to say
that he, Jones, altered in a significant way, taking on
certain interesting properties he had not had
before. (Hence we should contrast the 'became' of
'Jones then became a married man', said when
Jones ceased to be a bachelor, with that of 'The
President then became a Republican', said when
President Johnson retired. ) When we say of a thing
that it has properties that it did not have before, we
are saying that there is an x such that x formerly
had such-and-such properties and x presently has
such-and-such other properties.
It will be instructive, I think, to consider two
somewhat different examples.
The first is suggested by C. S. Peirce. I I Elabor­
ating upon his suggestion, let us assume that you
are about to undergo an operation and that you still
have a decision to make. The utilities involved are,
first, financial - you wish to avoid any needless
expense - and, secondly, the avoidance of pain,
the avoidance, however, just of your pain, for pain
that is other than yours, let us assume, is of no
concern whatever to you. The doctor proposes two
operating procedures - one a very expensive pro­
cedure in which you will be subjected to total
anaesthesia and no pain will be felt at all, and the
other of a rather different sort. The second opera­
tion will be very inexpensive indeed; there will be
no anaesthesia at all, and therefore there will
be excruciating pain. But the doctor will give you
two drugs: first, a drug just before the operation
which will induce complete amnesia, so that while
you are on the table you will have no memory
whatever of your present life; and, secondly, just
after the agony is over, a drug that will make you
completely forget everything that happened on the
table. The question is: given the utilities involved,
namely, the avoidance of needless expense and the
avoidance of pain that you will feel, other pains not
mattering, is it reasonable for you to opt for the less
expensive operation?
My own conviction is that it would not be rea­
sonable, even if you could be completely certain
that both amnesia injections would be successful.
You are the one who would undergo that pain, even
though you, Jones, would not know at the time that
it is Jones who is undergoing it, and even though \nyou would never remember it. Consider after all,
the hypothesis that it would not be you. What
would be your status, in such a case, during the
time of the operation? Would you have passed
away? That is to say, would you have ceased to be,
but with the guarantee that you - you, yourself -
would come into being once again when the agony
was over? 12 And what about the person who would
be feeling the pain? Who would he be?
It may well be that these things would not be
obvious to you if in fact you had to make such a
decision. But there is one point, I think, that ought
to be obvious.
Suppose that others come to you - friends, relat­
ives, judges, clergymen - and they offer the fol­
lowing advice and assurance. 'Have no fear, ' they
will say. 'Take the cheaper operation and we will
take care of everything. We will lay down the con­
vention that the man on the table is not you, Jones,
but is Smith. ' What ought to be obvious to you, it
seems to me, is that the laying down of this con­
vention should have no effect at all upon your
decision. For you may still ask, 'But won't that
person be I? ' and, it seems to me, the question
has an answer.
I now turn to the second example. Suppose you
knew that your body, like that of an amoeba, would
one day undergo fission and that you would go off,
so to speak, in two different directions. Suppose
you also knew, somehow, that the one who went off
to the left would experience the most wretched of
lives and that the one who went off to the right
would experience a life of great happiness and
value. If I am right in saying that one's question
'Will that person be I? ' or 'Will I be he? ' always
has a definite answer, then, I think, we may draw
these conclusions. There is no possibility whatever
that you would be both the the person on the right
and the person on the left. Moreover, there is a
possibility that you would be one or the other of
those two persons. And, finally, you could be one
of those persons and yet have no memory at all of
your present existence. In this case, there may well
be no criterion by means of which you or anyone
else could decide which of the two halves was in
fact yourself. Yet it would be reasonable of you,
if you were concerned with your future pleasures
and pains, to hope that you would be the one on
the right and not the one on the left. It would
also be reasonable of you, given such self-concern,
to have this hope even if you knew that the one on
the right would have no memory of your present
existence. Indeed, it would be reasonable of you to
The Persistence of Persons
have it even if you knew that the one on the left
thought he remembered the facts of your present
existence. And it seems to me to be absolutely
certain that no fears that you might have about
being the half on the left could reasonably be
allayed by the adoption of a convention, even if
our procedure were endorsed by the highest
authorities. 13
In trying to decide which one of the two persons,
if either, you will be, you will, of course, make use
of such criteria that you have and are able to apply.
As we all know, there are intriguing philosophical
questions about the criteria of the identity of per­
sons through time. ('How are we to make sure, or
make a reasonable guess, that that person at that
time is the same as that person at the other time? ' 14)
What are we to do, for example, when bodily
criteria and psychological criteria conflict? Sup­
pose we know that the person on the left will have
certain bodily characteristics that we have always
taken to be typical only of you - and that the person
on the right will have certain psychological charac­
teristics that we have always taken to be typical
only of you. In such a case there may be no suffi­
cient reason at all for deciding that you are or that
you are not one or the other of the two different
persons. But from this it does not follow that you
will not in fact be one or the other of the two
persons.
We should remind ourselves of a very simple and
obvious point. When you ask yourself, 'Will I be
the person on the right? ' your question is not 'Will
the person on the right satisfy such criteria as I
have, or such criteria as someone or other has, for
deciding whether or not a given person is I? ' To be
sure, the best you can do, by way of answering the
first question, is to try to answer the second. But
the answers to the two questions are logically inde­
pendent of each other.
What is a criterion of personal identity? It is a
statement telling what constitutes evidence of per­
sonal identity - what constitutes a good reason for
saying of a person x that he is, or that he is not,
identical with a person y. Now there is, after all, a
fundamental distinction between the truth-condi­
tions of a proposition and the evidence we can have
for deciding whether or not the proposition is true.
The truth-conditions for the proposition that Caesar
crossed the Rubicon consist of the fact, if it is a fact,
that Caesar did cross the Rubicon. The only evid­
ence you and I can have of this fact will consist of
certain other propositions - propositions about
records, memories, and traces. It is only in the \nRoderick M. Chisholm
case of what is self-presenting (that I hope for rain
or that I seem to me to have a headache) that the
evidence for a proposition coincides with its truth­
conditions. In all other cases, the two are logically
independent; the one could be true while the other
is false. IS
The question 'Was it Caesar? ' is not the same as
the question: 'Do we have good evidence for think­
ing it was Caesar? ' (or 'Have the criteria for saying
that it was Caesar been fulfilled? '). This is true
despite the fact that the most reasonable way of
trying to find the answer to the first question is to
try to answer the second.
And analogously for 'Will I be he? '
What I have said may recall this observation
made by Leibniz: 'Suppose that some individual
could suddenly become King of China on condi­
tion, however, of forgetting what he had been, as
though being born again, would it not amount to
the same practically, or as far as the effects could be
perceived, as if the individual were annihilated, and
a King of China were at the same instant created in
his place? The individual would have no reason to
desire this. ' 16
If I am being asked to consider the possibility
that there is an ens successivum of which I happen to
be the present constituent and which will subse­
quently be constituted by someone who will then
be a King of China, then the fate of the later
Notes
And so if we say that men are mere entia per alio and
that God is the only ens per se, it will follow that I am
God and not a man. Compare Bayle's refutation of
Spinoza's doctrine according to which men are mod­
ifications of God: '. .. when we say that a man denies,
affirms, gets angry, caresses, praises, and the like, we
ascribe all these attributes to the substance of his soul
itself, and not to his thoughts as they are either accid­
ents or modifications. If it were true then, as Spinoza
claims, that men are modalities of God, one would
speak falsely when one said, 'Peter denies this, he
wants that, he affirms such and such a thing'; for
actually, according to this theory, it is God who
denies, wants, affirms; and consequently all the
denominations that result from the thoughts of all
men are properly and physically to be ascribed to
God. From which it follows that God hates and
loves, denies and affirms the same things at the same
time. .. .' from note N of the article 'Spinoza'; the
passage may be found in R. H. Popkin (ed. ), Pierre
Bayle, Historical and Critical Dictionary: Selections
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965) pp. 309-10.
constituent may well be no special concern of
mine. But what if Leibniz were not thus playing
loose with 'is'?
In such a case, the proper reply to his question is
suggested by the following observation in Bayle's
Dictionary:
The same atoms which compose water are in
ice, in vapours, in clouds, in hail and snow;
those which compose wheat are in the meal, in
the bread, the blood, the flesh, the bones, etc.
Were they unhappy under the figure or form of
water, and under that of ice, it would be the
same numerical substance that would be
unhappy in these two conditions; and conse­
quently all the calamities which are to be
dreaded, under the form of meal, concern the
atoms which form corn; and nothing ought to
concern itself so much about the state or lot of
the meal, as the atoms which form the wheat,
though they are not to suffer these calamities,
under the form of wheat.
Bayle concludes that 'there are but two methods a
man can employ to calm, in a rational manner, the
fears of another life. One is, to promise himself the
felicities of Paradise; the other, to be firmly per­
suaded that he shall be deprived of sensations of
every kind. '17
2 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, Kemp­
Smith edn, p. 342. The passage is from p. 363 of the
first edition of the Kritik.
3 Ibid. , Kemp-Smith edn p. 342; 1st edn, pp. 363-
4.
4 John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
II, ch. 23 ('Our complex ideas of substance'); A. C.
Fraser edn, p. 451.
5 Ibid. , p. 454.
6 Ibid. , p. 458.
7 For Chrisholm's notion of playing loose with 'is', see
this volume, ch. 21.
8 The defence of this observation may be found in my
Person and Object (LaSalle, III. : Open Court, 1976),
ch. I, sect. 4.
9 Kant at least was clear about this point. When he
states that the 'consciousness' of one substance may
be transferred to another, as the motion of one ball
may be transferred to another, and notes that the last
of a series of such substances might be conscious of all
the states of the previous substances, he adds that 'it
would not have been one and the same person in all \nthese states' (Critique of Pure Reason, Kemp-Smith
edn, p. 342; I edn of Kritik, p. 364).
10 Compare Bernard Williams, Problems of the Self
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), pp.
2ff.
II '''If the power to remember dies with the material
body, has the question of any single person's future
life after death any particular interest for him? " As
you put the question, it is not whether the matter
ought rationally to have an interest but whether as a
fact it has; and perhaps this is the proper question,
trusting as it seems to do, rather to instinct than to
reason. Now if we had a drug which would abolish
memory for a while, and you were going to be cut for
the stone, suppose the surgeon were to say, "You will
suffer damnably, but I will administer this drug so
that you will during that suffering lose all memory of
your previous life. Now you have, of course, no parti­
cular interest in your suffering as long as you will not
remember your present and past life, you know, have
you? '" (Collected Papers, vol. 5 (Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press, 1935), p. 355).
12 See Locke's Essay, II, ch. 27, sect. I: 'One thing
cannot have two beginnings of existence. ' Compare
Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man,
essay III, ch. 4, in Sir William Hamilton (ed. ), The
Works of Thomas Reid, D. D. (Edinburgh: Maclachlan
& Stewart, 1854), p. 346.
13 Some philosophers who have considered this type of
situation have not presupposed, as I have, that per­
sons are entia per se. Thus Derek Parfit has suggested
it is a mistake to believe that in such cases the question
'Will I be he? ' has a true answer. He writes: 'If we give
up this belief, as I think we should, these problems
disappear. We shall then regard the case as like many
others in which, for quite unpuzzling reasons, there is
no answer to a question about identity. (Consider
"Was England the same nation after 1066? "), (Derek
Parfit, 'Personal identity', this volume, ch. 29; the
quotation is on p. 367. P. F. Strawson has expressed
The Persistence of Persons
a similar scepticism: 'Perhaps I should say, not that I
do not understand Professor Chisholm's notion of
strict personal identity, but rather that I understand
it well enough to think there can be no such thing' (P.
F. Strawson, 'Chisholm on identity through time', in
H. E. Kiefer and M. K. Munitz (eds), Language,
Belief, and Metaphysics (Albany: State University of
New York Press, 1970), pp. 183--6; the quotation is on
p. 186. I think that the conception of persons set forth
in Strawson's Individuals (London: Methuen, 1957)
coheres more readily with the view that persons are
entia per se than with the view that they are ontological
parasites or entia per alio.
14 Compare Godfrey Vesey, Personal Identity (London:
Macmillan, 1974), pp. 8ff, 80ff; Williams, Problems of
the Self, pp. 8ff, 15ff; and Anthony Quinton, 'The
Soul', Journal of Philosophy 59 (1962), pp. 393-409,
and idem, The Nature of Things (London and Boston:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1973); and Richard Taylor,
With Heart and Mind (New York: St Martin's Press,
1973), pp. 122-33.
15 I have attempted to throw light upon these distinc­
tions in ch. 4 (, The Problem of the Criterion') of
Theory of Knowledge (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pre­
ntice-Hall, 1966). Compare the discussion of criteria
of self-identity in Sydney Shoemaker, Self-Knowledge
and Self-Identity (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1963), pp. 35-8, 211-12, 255-60.
16 G. W. Leibniz, Discourse on Metaphysics, sect. 34 Open
Court edn, p. 58. Sydney Shoemaker cited this pas­
sage in criticizing an earlier formulation of my views.
This earlier formulation, Shoemaker's criticism, and
my rejoinder may be found in Norman S. Care and
Robert H. Grimm (eds), Perception and Personal Iden­
ti~y (Cleveland: Case Western Reserve Press, 1969),
pp. 82-139.
17 Pierre Bayle, article 'Lucretius', note Q, in A General
Dictionary, Historical and Critical, trans. Rev. J. P.
Bernard, Rev. Thomas Birch, John Lockeman, et al.
(10 vols, London: James Bettenham, 1734-41). \n27
Sydney Shoemaker
Persons have, in memory, a special access to facts
about their own past histories and their own iden­
tities, a kind of access they do not have to the
histories and identities of other persons and other
things. John Locke thought this special access
important enough to warrant a special mention in
his definition of "person, " viz. , "a thinking, intel­
ligent Being, that has reason and reflection, and can
consider it self as it self, the same thinking thing, in
different times and places. .. " 1 In this essay I shall
attempt to explain the nature and status of this
special access and to defend Locke's view of its
conceptual importance. I shall also attempt to cor­
rect what now seem to me to be errors and over­
sights in my own previous writings on this topic.
I
As a first approximation, the claim that persons
have in memory a special access to their own past
histories can be expressed in two related claims,
both of which will be considerably qualified in the
course of this essay. The first is that it is a necessary
condition of its being true that a person remembers
a given past event that he, that same person, should
have observed or experienced the event, or known
of it in some other direct way, at the time of its
occurrence. I shall refer to this as the "previous
awareness condition" for remembering. 2
Originally published in American Philosophical Quar­
terly 7 (1970).
The second claim is that an important class of
first-person memory claims are in a certain respect
immune to what I shall call "error through mis­
identification. " Consider a case in which I say, on
the basis of my memory of a past incident, "I
shouted that Johnson should be impeached, " and
compare this with a case in which I say, again on
the basis of my memory of a past incident, "John
shouted that Johnson should be impeached. " In the
latter case it could turn out that I do remember
someone who looked and sounded just like John
shouting that Johnson should be impeached, but
that the man who shouted this was nevertheless not
John - it may be that I misidentified the person as
John at the time I observed the incident, and that I
have preserved this misidentification in memory,
or it may be that I subsequently misidentified him
as John on the basis of what I (correctly) remem­
bered about him. Here my statement would be
false, but its falsity would not be due to a mistake
or fault of my memory; my memory could be as
accurate and complete as any memory could be
without precluding this sort of error. But this sort
of misidentification is not possible in the former
case. My memory report could of course be mis­
taken, for one can misremember such incidents,
but it could not be the case that I have a full and
accurate memory of the past incident but am mis­
taken in thinking that the person I remember
shouting was myself. I shall speak of such memory
judgments as being immune to error through mis­
identification with respect to the first-person pro­
nouns, or other "self-referring" expreSSIOns,
contained in them. 3 \nI do not contend that all memory claims are
immune to error through misidentification with
respect to the first-person pronouns contained in
them. If I say "I blushed when Jones made that
remark" because I remember seeing in a mirror
someone, whom I took (or now take) to be myself,
blushing, it could turn out that my statement is
false, not because my memory is in any way incom­
plete or inaccurate, but because the person I saw in
the mirror was my identical twin or double. 4 In
general, if at some past time I could have known of
someone that he was 'P, and could at the same time
have been mistaken in taking that person to be
myself, then the subsequent memory claims I
make about the past occasion will be subject to
error through misidentification with respect to
the first-person pronouns. But if, as is frequently
the case, I could not have been mistaken in this way
in the past in asserting what I then knew by saying
"I am 'P, " then my subsequent memory claim "I
was 'P" will be immune to error through misiden­
tification relative to "I"; that is, it is impossible in
such cases that I should accurately remember
someone being 'P but mistakenly take that person
to be myself. We might express this by saying that
where the present-tense version of a judgment is
immune to error through misidentification relative
to the first-person pronouns contained in it, this
immunity is preserved in memory. 5 Thus if I claim
on the strength of memory that I saw John yester­
day, and have a full and accurate memory of the
incident, it cannot be the case that I remember
someone seeing John but have misidentified that
person as myself; my memory claim "I saw John" is
subject to error through misidentification with
respect to the term "John" (for it could have been
John's twin or double that I saw), but not with
respect to "I. "
II
In his early paper, "Personal identity, " H. P. Grice
held that the proposition "One can only remember
one's own past experiences" is analytic, but
pointed out that this would be analytic in only a
trivial way "if 'memory' were to be defined in
terms of 'having knowledge of one's own past
experiences. '" He says that "even if we were to
define 'memory' in this sort of way, we should still
be left with a question about the proposition, 'one
can only have knowledge of one's own past experi­
ences, ' which seems to me a necessary proposi-
Persons and their Pasts
tion. ,, 6 Now I doubt very much if Grice, or any
other philosopher, would now want to hold that it
is necessarily true, or that it is true at all, that one's
own past experiences are the only past experiences
of which one can have knowledge. But one does not
have to hold this to hold, with Grice, that it is not
just a trivial analytic truth that one's own experi­
ences are the only ones that one can remember, i. e. ,
that it is not the case that the necessity of this truth
derives merely from the fact that we refuse to call
someone's having knowledge of a past experience a
case of his remembering it unless the past experi­
ence belonged to the rememberer himself.
Grice's remarks are explicitly about memory of
past experiences, but they raise an important ques­
tion about all sorts of "event memory. " Supposing
it to be a necessary truth that the previous witnes­
sing condition must be satisfied in any genuine case
of remembering, is this necessarily true because we
would refuse to count knowing about a past event as
remembering it if the previous awareness condition
were not satisfied, or is it necessary for some deeper
reason? I think that many philosophers would hold
that if this is a necessary truth at all, it is so only in
the former way, i. e. , in such a way as to make its
necessity trivial and uninteresting. Thus G. C.
Nerlich, in a footnote to his paper "On evidence
for identity, " says that it is true only of our world,
not of all possible worlds, that only by being ident­
ical with a witness to past events can one have the
sort of knowledge of them one has in memory. 7 On
this view it is logically possible that we should have
knowledge of past events which we did not our­
selves witness, of experiences we did not ourselves
have, and of actions we did not ourselves perform,
that is in all important respects like the knowledge
we have of past events, experiences, and actions in
remembering them. If one takes this view, it will
seem a matter of small importance, if indeed it is
true, that the having of such knowledge could not
be called "remembering. "
It is of course not absolutely clear just what it
means to speak of knowledge as being "in all
important respects like" memory knowledge, if
this is not intended to imply that the knowledge is
memory knowledge. Presumably, knowledge of
past events that is "just like" memory knowledge
must not be inferred from present data (diaries,
photographs, rock strata, etc. ) on the basis of
empirical laws and generalizations. But while this
is necessary, it is not sufficient. When a person
remembers a past event, there is a correspondence
between his present cognitive state and some past \nSydney Shoemaker
cognitive and sensory state of his that existed at the
time of the remembered event and consisted in his
experiencing the event or otherwise being aware of
its occurrence. 8 I shall say that remembering a past
event involves there being a correspondence
between the rememberer's present cognitive state
and a past cognitive and sensory state that was "of'
the event. 9 In actual memory this past cognitive
and sensory state is always a past state of the
rememberer himself. What we need to consider is
whether there could be a kind of knowledge of past
events such that someone's having this sort of
knowledge of an event does involve there being a
correspondence between his present cognitive state
and a past cognitive and sensory state that was of
the event, but such that this correspondence,
although otherwise just like that which exists in
memory, does not necessarily involve that past
state's having been a state of the very same person
who subsequently has the knowledge. Let us speak
of such knowledge, supposing for the moment that
it is possible, as "quasi-memory knowledge, " and
let us say that a person who has this sort of knowl­
edge of a past event "quasi-remembers" that past
event. Quasi-remembering, as I shall use the term,
includes remembering as a special case. One way of
characterizing the difference between quasi­
remembering and remembering is by saying that
the former is subject to a weaker previous aware­
ness condition than the latter. Whereas someone's
claim to remember a past event implies that he
himself was aware of the event at the time of its
occurrence, the claim to quasi-remember a past
event implies only that someone or other was
aware of it. Except when I indicate otherwise, I
shall use the expression "previous awareness con­
dition" to refer to the stronger of these conditions.
Our faculty of memory constitutes our most
direct access to the past, and this means, given
the previous awareness condition, that our most
direct access to the past is in the first instance an
access to our own past histories. One of the main
questions I shall be considering in this essay is
whether it is conceivable that our most direct
access to the past should be a faculty of quasi­
remembering which is not a faculty of remember­
ing. Is it conceivable that we should have, as a
matter of course, knowledge that is related to past
experiences and actions other than our own in just
the way in which, as things are, our memory
knowledge is related to our own past experiences
and actions? In our world all quasi-remembering is
remembering; what we must consider is whether
the world could be such that most quasi-remem­
bering is not remembering.
Before going on to consider this question, I
should mention two reasons why I think it import­
ant. The first is its obvious bearing on the question
of the relationship between the concepts of
memory and personal identity. If there can be
quasi-remembering that is not remembering, and
if remembering can be defined as quasi-remember­
ing that is of events the quasi-rememberer was
aware of at the time of their occurrence (thus mak­
ing it a trivial analytic truth that one can remember
an event only if one was previously aware of it),
then it would seem that any attempt to define or
analyze the notion of personal identity in terms of
the notion of remembering will be viciously circu­
lar. I shall have more to say about this in section V.
But this question also has an important bearing on
the question of how a person's memory claims
concerning his own past are grounded. In previous
writings I have claimed, and made a great deal of
the claim, that our memory knowledge of our own
past histories, unlike our knowledge of the past
histories of other things, is not grounded on criteria
of identity. 10 Strawson makes a similar claim in The
Bounds of Sense, saying that "When a man (a sub­
ject of experience) ascribes a current or directly
remembered state of consciousness to himself, no
use whatever of any criteria of personal identity is
required to justify his use of the pronoun'! ' to refer
to the subject of that experience. " He remarks that
"it is because Kant recognized this truth that his
treatment of the subject is so greatly superior to
Hume's. "ll Now it can easily seem that this claim
follows immediately from the fact that remember­
ing necessarily involves the satisfaction of the pre­
vious awareness condition. If one remembers a past
experience, then it has to have been one's own, and
from this it may seem to follow that it makes no
sense to inquire concerning a remembered experi­
ence whether it was one's own and then to try to
answer this question on the basis of empirical cri­
teria of identity. But suppose that it were only a
trivial analytic truth that remembering involves the
satisfaction of the previous awareness condition,
and suppose that it were possible to quasi-remem­
ber experiences other than one's own. If this were
so, one might remember a past experience but not
know whether one was remembering it or only
quasi-remembering it. Here, it seems, it would be
perfectly appropriate to employ a criterion of iden­
tity to determine whether the quasi-remembered
experience was one's own, i. e. , whether one \nremembered it as opposed to merely quasi-remem­
bering it. Thus the question of whether the know­
ledge of our own identities provided us by memory
is essentially non-critical turns on the question of
whether it is possible to quasi-remember past
actions and experiences without remembering
them.
III
There is an important respect in which my char­
acterization of quasi-remembering leaves that
notion inadequately specified. Until now I have
been ignoring the fact that a claim to remember a
past event implies, not merely that the rememberer
experienced such an event, but that his present
memory is in some way due to, that it came about
because oj; a cognitive and sensory state the remem­
berer had at the time he experienced the event. I
am going to assume, although this is controversial,
that it is part of the previous awareness condition
for memory that a veridical memory must not only
correspond to, but must also stand in an appropri­
ate causal relationship to, a past cognitive and sen­
sory state of the rememberer.
12
It may seem that if
quasi-memory is to be as much like memory as
possible, we should build a similar requirement in
to the previous awareness condition for quasi­
memory, i. e. , that we should require that a veridical
quasi-memory must not only correspond to, but
must also stand in an appropriate causal relation­
ship to, a past cognitive and sensory state of some­
one or other. On the other hand, it is not
immediately obvious that building such a require­
ment into the previous awareness condition for
quasi-memory would not make it equivalent to
the previous awareness condition for memory, and
thus destroy the intended difference between mem­
ory and quasi-memory. But there is no need for us
to choose between a previous awareness condition
that includes the causal requirement and one that
does not, for it is possible and useful to consider
both. In the present section I shall assume that the
previous awareness condition for quasi-memory
does not include the causal requirement, and that
it includes nothing more than the requirement that
a quasi-memory must, to be a veridical quasi-mem­
ory of a given event, correspond in content to a past
cognitive and sensory state that was of that event.
In the sections that follow I shall consider the con­
sequences of strengthening this condition to
include the causal requirement.
Persons and their Pasts
The first thing we must consider is what
becomes of the immunity of first-person memory
claims to error through misidentification if we
imagine the faculty of memory replaced by a
faculty of quasi-memory. As things are now, there
is a difference between, on the one hand, remem­
bering an action of someone else's ~ this might
consist, for example, in having a memory of seeing
someone do the action ~ and, on the other hand,
remembering doing an action, which can be equated
with remembering oneself doing the action. In the
case of quasi-remembering, the distinction corres­
ponding to this is that between, on the one hand,
the sort of quasi-memory of a past action whose
corresponding past cognitive and sensory state
belonged to someone who was watching someone
else do the action and, on the other hand, the sort of
quasi-memory of a past action whose correspond­
ing past cognitive and sensory state belonged to the
very person who did the action. Let us call these,
respectively, quasi-memories of an action "from
the outside" and quasi-memories of an action
"from the inside. " Now whereas I can remember
an action from the inside only if it was my action, a
world in which there is quasi-remembering that is
not remembering will be one in which it is not true
that any action one quasi-remembers from the
inside is thereby an action he himself did. So ~
assuming that ours may be such a world ~ if! quasi­
remember an action from the inside, and say on this
basis that I did the action, my statement will be
subject to error through misidentification; it may
be that my quasi-memory of the action is as accu­
rate and complete as it could be, but that I am
mistaken in thinking that I am the person who
did it. There is another way in which a first-person
quasi-memory claim could be mistaken through
misidentification. If there can be quasi-remember­
ing that is not remembering, it will be possible for a
person to quasi-remember an action of his own
from the outside. That is, one might quasi-remem­
ber an action of one's own as it appeared to some­
one else who observed it; one might, as it were,
quasi-remember it through the eyes of another
person. But of course, if I were to quasi-remember
someone who looks like me doing a certain action,
and were to say on that basis that I did the action,
I might be mistaken through no fault of my quasi­
memory; it might be that the person who did the
action was my identical twin or someone disguised
to look like me.
What I have just said about the quasl­
remembering of past actions also applies to the \nSydney Shoemaker
quasi-remembering of past experiences and of
other mental phenomena. If I remember a past
pain from the inside - i. e. , remember the pain
itself, or remember having the pain, as opposed to
remembering seeing someone manifest pain beha­
vior - then the pain must have been mine. But the
fact that I quasi-remember a pain from the inside
will be no guarantee that the pain was mine. Any
quasi-memory claim to have been in pain on some
past occasion, or to have had a certain thought, or
to have made a certain decision, will be subject to
error through misidentification.
What is shown by the foregoing is that the
immunity of first-person memory claims to error
through misidentification exists only because
remembering requires the satisfaction of the pre­
vious awareness condition, and that this feature
disappears once we imagine this requirement
dropped. Quasi-memory, unlike memory, does
not preserve immunity to error through misidenti­
fication relative to the first-person pronouns. To
consider the further consequences of replacing
memory with quasi-memory, I must first say some­
thing more about memory.
To refer to an event of a certain sort as one that
one remembers does not always uniquely identify
it, since one may remember more than one event of
a given sort, but it does go some way toward iden­
tifying it. In referring to an event in this way, one to
a certain extent locates it in space and time, even if
the description of the event contains no place­
names, no names of objects by reference to which
places can be identified, and no dates or other
temporal indicators. For in saying that one re­
members the event, one locates it within a spatio­
temporal region which is defined by one's
own personal history. The spatiotemporal region
which is "rememberable" by a given person can be
charted by specifying the intervals of past time
during which the person was conscious and by
specifying the person's spatial location, and indi­
cating what portions of his environment he was in a
position to witness, at each moment during these
intervals. If someone reports that he remembers an
event of a certain kind, we know that unless his
memory is mistaken, an event of that kind occurred
within the spatiotemporal region rememberable by
him, and in principle we can chart this region by
tracing his history back to its beginning.
Ordinarily, of course, we have far more know­
ledge than this of the spatiotemporal location of a
remembered event, for usually a memory report
will fix this position by means of dates, place-
names, and other spatial and temporal indicators.
But it must be noted that memory claims are sub­
ject to error through misidentification with respect
to spatial indicators. If a man says "I remember an
explosion occurring right in front of that building, "
it is possible for this to be false even if the memory
it expresses is accurate and detailed; the remem­
bered explosion may have occurred, not in front of
the building indicated, but in front of another
building exactly like it. This remains true no matter
how elaborate and detailed we imagine the memory
claim to be. For any set of objects that has actually
existed in the world, even if this be as extensive as
the set of buildings, streets, parks, bridges, etc. that
presently make up New York City, it is logically
possible that there should somewhere exist, or that
there should somewhere and at some time have
existed, a numerically different but exactly similar
set of objects arranged in exactly the same way. So
memory claims are, in principle, subject to error
through misidentification even with respect to such
place names as "New York City. " Here I am
appealing to what Strawson has referred to as the
possibility of 'massive reduplication. '13
When a memory report attempts to fix the loca­
tion of a remembered event by reference to some
landmark, we are ordinarily justified in not regard­
ing it as a real possibility that the claim involves
error through misidentification owing to the redu­
plication of that landmark. Certainly we are so
justified if the landmark is New York City. But it
is important to see why this is so. It is not that we
have established that nowhere and at no time has
there existed another city exactly like New York; as
a self-consistent, unrestricted, negative existential
claim, this is something that it would be impossible
in principle for us to establish. 14 What we can and
do know is that New York is not reduplicated
within any spatiotemporal region of which anyone
with whom we converse can have had experience.
Whether or not New York is reduplicated in some
remote galaxy or at some remote time in the past,
we know that the man who claims to remember
doing or experiencing something in a New York­
like city cannot have been in any such duplicate.
And from this we can conclude that if he does
remember doing or experiencing something in a
New York-like city, then it was indeed in New
York, and not in any duplicate of it, that the
remembered action or event occurred. But we
can conclude this only because remembering
involves the satisfaction of the previous awareness
condition. \nEven when a landmark referred to in someone's
memory claim is reduplicated within the spatiotem­
poral region rememberable by that person, we can
often be confident that the claim does not involve
error through misidentification. Suppose that
someone locates a remembered event, sayan explo­
sion, by saying that it occurred in front of his house,
and we know that there are many houses, some of
which he has seen, that are exactly like his. If he
reported that he had simply found himself in front
of his house, with no recollection of how he had
gotten there, and that after seeing the explosion he
had passed out and awakened later in a hospital, we
would think it quite possible that he had misident­
ified the place at which the remembered explosion
occurred. But suppose instead that he reports that
he remembers walking home from work, seeing the
explosion in front of his house, and then going
inside and being greeted by his family. Here a
misidentification of the place of the explosion
would require the reduplication, not merely of his
house, but also of his family, his place of work, and
the route he follows in walking home from work.
We could know that no such reduplication exists
within the spatiotemporal region of which he has
had experience, and could conclude that his report
did not involve an error through misidentification.
But again, what would enable us to conclude this is
the fact that remembering involves the satisfaction
of the previous awareness condition.
Presumably, what justifies any of us in using
such expressions as "New York" and "my house"
in his own memory reports are considerations of
the same kind as those that justify others in ruling
out the possibility that claims containing such
expressions involve error through misidentifica­
tion. What justifies one is the knowledge that cer­
tain sorts of reduplication do not in fact occur
within the spatiotemporal regions of which any of
us have had experience. Normally no such justifi­
cation is needed for the use of "I" in memory
reports; this is what is involved in saying that
memory claims are normally immune to error
through misidentification relative to the first-per­
son pronouns. But what makes such a justification
possible in the case of "New York" is the same as
what makes it unnecessary in the case of "I":
namely, the fact that remembering involves the
satisfaction of the previous awareness condition.
So it is because of this fact that remembering can
provide us, not merely with the information that an
event of a certain sort has occurred somewhere or
other in the vicinity of persons and things satisfy-
Persons and their Pasts
ing certain general descriptions, but with the infor­
mation that such an event occurred in a certain
specified place, in a certain specifiable spatial rela­
tionship to events presently observed, and in the
vicinity of certain specified persons or things. But
this is also to say that it is this fact about remem­
bering that makes it possible for us to know that an
object or person to which one remembers some­
thing happening is, or is not, identical with an
object or person presently observed. And it will
emerge later that it is also this fact about remem­
bering that makes it possible to know that different
memories are, or are not, of events in the history of
a single object or person.
But now let us consider the consequences of
replacing the faculty of memory by a faculty of
quasi-memory. Quasi-remembering does not
necessarily involve the satisfaction of the previous
awareness condition, and first-person quasi-mem­
ory claims are, as we have seen, subject to error
through misidentification. It is a consequence of
this that even if we are given that someone's faculty
of quasi-memory is highly reliable, in the sense that
when he seems to quasi-remember an event of a
certain sort he almost always does quasi-remember
such an event, nevertheless, his quasi-memory will
provide neither him nor us with any positive
information concerning the spatial location of the
events he quasi-remembers, or with any informa­
tion concerning the identity, or concerning the
history, of any object or person to which he
quasi-remembers something happening. The fact
that he quasi-remembers an event of a certain sort
will not provide us with the information that such
an event has occurred within the spatiotemporal
region of which he has had experience. But in
consequence of this, if he attempts to locate the
quasi-remembered event by reference to some
object or place known to us, e. g. , New York or
Mt Everest, it is impossible for us to rule out on
empirical grounds the possibility that his claim
involves error through misidentification owing to
the reduplication of that object or place. To rule
this out, we would have to have adequate grounds
for asserting, not merely that there is no duplicate
of New York (say) in the spatiotemporal region of
which he has had experience, but that at no place
and time has there been a duplicate of New York.
And this we could not have. IS But this means that
in expressing his quasi-memories he could not be
justified in using such expressions as "New York"
and "Mt Everest, " or such expressions as "1, "
"this, " and "here, " to refer to the places, persons, \nSydney Shoemaker
and things in or to which he quasi-remembers
certain things happening. The most he could be
entitled to assert on the basis of his quasi-memories
would be a set of general propositions of the form
"An event of type <. p at some time occurred in the
history of an object of type A while it stood in
relations R], R z, R3. .. to objects of types B, C,
D. .. " And given only a set of propositions of this
sort, no matter how extensive, one could not even
begin to reconstruct any part of the history of the
world; one could not even have grounds for assert­
ing that an object mentioned in one proposition in
the set was one and the same as an object men­
tioned in another proposition of the set.
So far I have been ignoring the fact that the
events and actions we remember generally have
temporal duration, and the fact that we sometimes
remember connected sequences of events and
actions lasting considerable lengths of time. What
will correspond to this if remembering is replaced
with quasi-remembering? If someone says "I
remember doing X and then doing Y, " it would
make no sense to say to him, "Granted that your
memory is accurate, and that such a sequence of
actions did occur, are you sure that it was one and
the same person who did both X and Y? " But now
suppose that someone says "I quasi-remember
doing X and then doing Y, " and that the world is
such that there is quasi-remembering that is not
remembering. Here it is compatible with the accur­
acy of the man's quasi-memory that he should
be mistaken in thinking that he himself did X
and Y. And as I shall now try to show, it must
also be compatible with the accuracy of this man's
quasi-memories that he should be mistaken in
thinking even that one and the same person did
both X and Y.
Suppose that at time t] a person, call him A, does
action Y and has while doing it a quasi-memory
from the inside of the immediately previous occur­
rence of the doing of action X. A's having this
quasi-memory of the doing of X is of course com­
patible with X's having been done by someone
other than himself. At t] A's cognitive state
includes this quasi-memory from the inside of the
doing of X together with knowledge from the
inside of the doing of Y; we might say that it
includes knowledge from the inside of the action
sequence X-followed-by-Y. But now suppose that
at a later time tz someone, call him B, has a quasi­
memory corresponding to the cognitive state of A
at t]. It would seem that B's quasi-memory will be a
quasi-memory from the inside of the action
sequence X-followed-by-Y. This quasi-memory
will be veridical in the sense that it corresponds to
a past cognitive state that was itself a state of
knowledge, yet its being veridical in this way is
compatible with X and Y having been done by
different persons. If A were mistakenly to assert
at t] that X and Y were done by the same person,
his mistake would not be due to a faulty quasi­
memory. And if B's cognitive state at tz corres­
ponds to A's cognitive state at t], then if B were
mistaken at tz in thinking that X and Y were done
by the same person, this mistake would not be due
to a faulty quasi-memory.
If, as I have been arguing, someone's quasi­
remembering from the inside the action sequence
X-followed-by-Y provides no guarantee that X
and Y were done by the same person, then by the
same reasoning someone's quasi-remembering the
event sequence X-followed-by-Y provides no guar­
antee that X and Y were witnessed by the same
person, and therefore no guarantee that they
occurred in spatial proximity to one another. But
any temporally extended event can be thought of as
a succession of temporally and spatially contiguous
events; e. g. , a stone's rolling down a hill can be
thought of as consisting in its rolling half of the way
down followed by its rolling the other half of the
way. Suppose, then, that someone has a quasi­
memory of the following event sequence: stone
rolling from top of hill to middle followed by
stone rolling from middle of hill to bottom. If we
knew this to be a memory, and not just a quasi­
memory, we would know that if it is veridical, then
one and the same person observed both of these
events, one immediately after the other, and this
together with the contents of the memory could
guarantee that one and the same hill and one and
the same stone were involved in both, and that a
single stone had indeed rolled all the way down a
hill. But the veridicality of this quasi-memory qua
quasi-memory would be compatible with these
events having been observed by different persons,
and with their involving different stones and dif­
ferent hills; it would be compatible with no stone's
having rolled all of the way down any hill. And
since any temporally extended event can be
thought of as a succession of temporally and spa­
tially contiguous events, it follows that someone's
quasi-remembering what is ostensibly a temporally
extended event of a certain kind is always compat­
ible with there actually being no such event that he
quasi-remembers, for it is compatible with his
quasi-memory being, as it were, compounded out \nof quasi-memories of a number of different events
that were causally unrelated and spatiotemporally
remote from one another. The knowledge of the
past provided by such a faculty of quasi-memory
would be minimal indeed. 16
IV
But now we must consider the consequences of
strengthening the previous awareness condition
for quasi-remembering to include the requirement
that a veridical quasi-memory must not only
correspond to, but must also stand in an appropri­
ate causal relationship to, a past cognitive and
sensory state of someone or other. Clearly, much
of what I have said about quasi-remembering
ceases to hold once its previous awareness condi­
tion is strengthened in this way. If, as is commonly
supposed, causal chains must be spatiotemporally
continuous, then if quasi-memory claims implied
the satisfaction of this strengthened previous
awareness condition, they would, when true, pro­
vide some information concerning the location of
the quasi-remembered events and actions. We
would know at a minimum that the spatiotemporal
relationship between the quasi-remembered event
and the making of the quasi-memory claim is such
that it is possible for them to be linked by a spatio­
temporally continuous causal chain, and if we
could trace the causal ancestry of the quasi-mem­
ory, we could determine precisely when and where
the quasi-remembered event occurred. Thus if we
construe the previous awareness condition of
quasi-memory as including this causal require­
ment, it seems that a faculty of quasi-remembering
could enable us to identify past events and to
reidentify persons and things, and it seems at first
glance (though not, I think, on closer examination)
that it would enable us to do this without giving us
a special access to our own past histories.
It must be stressed that this strengthened pre­
vious awareness condition is an improvement on
the weaker one on~y on the assumption that causal
chains (or at any rate the causal chains that link
cognitive and sensory states with subsequent quasi­
memories) must be spatiotemporally continuous,
or at least must satisfy a condition similar to spa­
tiotemporal continuity. If the sort of causality oper­
ating here allowed for action at a spatial or temporal
distance, and if there were no limit on the size of
the spatial or temporal gaps that could exist in a
causal chain linking a cognitive and sensory state
Persons and their Pasts
with a subsequent quasi-memory, then the claim
that a quasi-memory originated in a corresponding
cognitive and sensory state would be as unfalsifi­
able, and as uninformative, as the claim that it
corresponds to a past cognitive and sensory state
of someone or other.
To consider the consequences of strengthening
the previous awareness condition for quasi­
memory in the way just suggested, I shall have to
introduce a few technical expressions. First, I
shall use the expressions "quasic-remember" and
"quasic-memory" when speaking of the sort of
quasi-remembering whose previous awareness
condition includes the causal requirement. Second,
I shall use the term "M-type causal chain" to refer
to the sort of causal chain that must link a quasic
memory with a corresponding past cognitive and
sensory state if they are to be "of' the same event,
or if the former is to be "of' the latter. Since
quasic-remembering is to be as much like remem­
bering as is compatible with the failure of the
strong previous awareness condition, M-type
causal chains should resemble as much as possible
the causal chains that are responsible for actual
remembering, i. e. , should resemble them as much
as is compatible with their sometimes linking
mental states belonging to different persons. At
any given time a person can be said to have a total
mental state which includes his memories or
quasic- memories and whatever other mental states
the person has at that time. Let us say that two total
mental states, existing at different times, are
directly M-connected if the later of them contains
a quasi, memory which is linked by an M-type
causal chain to a corresponding cognitive and
sensory state contained in the earlier. And let us
say, by way of giving a recursive definition, that
two total mental states are M-connected if either
(l) they are directly M-connected, or (2) there is
some third total mental state to which each of them
is M-connected. 17
Now there are two cases we must consider.
Either the world will be such, or it will not, that a
total mental state existing at a particular time can
be M-connected with at most one total mental state
existing at each other moment in time. Or, what
comes to the same thing, either the world will be
such, or it will not, that no two total mental states
existing at the same time can be M-connected. Let
us begin by considering the case in which the for­
mer of these alternatives holds. This is the case that
will exist if there is no "branching" of M-type
causal chains, i. e. , if it never happens that an M-\nSydney Shoemaker
type causal chain branches into two such chains
which then produce quasic-memories belonging to
different and simultaneously existing total mental
states, and if it never happens that different M­
type causal chains coalesce and produce in a single
total mental state quasi, -memories whose corre­
sponding past cognitive and sensory states
belonged to different and simultaneously existing
total mental states. This is presumably the situa­
tion that exists in the actual world. And I think that
in any world in which this situation exists, M­
connected total mental states will be, to use a
term of Bertrand Russell's, "copersonal, " i. e. ,
states of one and the same person, and quasic-
remembering will reduce to remembering. There
seems to me to be at least this much truth in the
claim that memory is constitutive of personal
identity. 18 (But more about this in section V. )
Now let us consider the case in which M-type
causal chains do sometimes branch, and in which,
as a result, it can happen that two or more
simultaneously existing total mental states are M­
connected. Here we cannot claim that if two total
mental states are M-connected, they are thereby
copersonal without committing ourselves to the
unattractive conclusion that a person can be in
two different places, and can have two different
total mental states, at one and the same time. But
it is still open to us to say that if a total mental state
existing at time tl and a total mental state existing
at time tz are M-connected, then they are coperso­
nal unless the M-type causal chain connecting them
branched at some time during the interval tl - tz.
If we can say this, as I think we can, then even in a
world in which there is branching of M-type causal
chains, the fact that a person quasi, -remembers a
past event or action would create a presumption
that he, that same person, experienced the event or
did the action, and therefore a presumption that
the quasi, -memory was actually a memory. This
presumption would stand as long as there was no
evidence that the M-type causal chain linking the
past action or experience with the subsequent
quasic-memory had branched during the interval
between them.
Worlds of the sort we are now considering, i. e. ,
worlds in which M-type causal chains sometimes
branch, could be of several kinds. Consider first a
world in which people occasionally undergo fission
or fusion; i. e. , people sometimes split, like amoe­
bas, both offshoots having quasi, -memories of the
actions done prior to the fission by the person who
underwent it, and two people sometimes coalesce
into a single person who then has quasi, -memories
of both of their past histories. Here we cannot say
that a person did whatever actions he quasi, ­
remembers from the inside without running afoul
of Leibniz' law and the principle of the transitivity
of identity. But we can say something close to this.
Suppose that someone, call him Jones, splits into
two persons, one of whom is me and the other is
someone I shall call Jones II. Both Jones II and I
have quasic-memories from the inside of Jones's
past actions, and no one else does. If anyone now
alive is identical with Jones, it is either myself or
Jones II, and any objection to saying that I am Jones
is equally an objection to saying that Jones II is
Jones. I think that we can say here that I am
identical with Jones if anyone now alive is identical
with him. Or suppose that two people, call them
Brown and Smith, coalesce, resulting in me. I have
quasic-memories from the inside of Brown's
actions and also of Smith's actions. There are seri­
ous objections to identifying me with either Brown
or Smith, but it seems clear here that if anyone now
alive is identical with either Brown or Smith, I am.
So in such a world the following principle holds: if
at time t a person A quasic-remembers a past action
X from the inside, then A is identical with the
person who did X if anyone alive at t is identical
with him. 19
But I think that we can imagine a world in which
this principle would not hold. In the case in which
two persons coalesce, the M-type causal chains
involved might be represented by a river having
two "forks" of equal width. Suppose that instead of
this we have an M-type causal chain, or a con­
nected set of such causal chains, that could be
represented by a river having several small tribut­
aries. For example, suppose, very fancifully, that
memories were stored, by some sort of chemical
coding, in the blood rather than in the brain cells,
and that as a result of being given a blood transfu­
sion, one sometimes acquired quasic-memories
"from the inside" of a few of the actions of the
blood donor. Here the blood transfusion would be a
"tributary" into what apart from its tributaries
would be the sort of M-type causal chain that
occurs in the history of a single person. Now I do
not think that we would deny that A, existing at
time tz, was the same person as B, who existed at an
earlier time tl, merely because A quasic-remembers
from the inside, as the result of a blood transfusion,
an action at tl that was not done by B. Nor would
we deny that another person C, the blood donor, is
the person who did that past action merely because \nthere is someone other than himself, namely A,
who quasic-remembers it from the inside. So here
it would not be true that if at time t a person quasic-
remembers a past action from the inside, then he is
identical with the person who did it if anyone
existing at t is identical with the person who
did it.
Yet even in such a world it seems essential that
in any total mental state the memories, i. e. , the
quasic-memories produced by the past history of
the person whose total mental state it is, should
outnumber the quasic-memories produced by any
given tributary. If the quasic-memories produced
by a given tributary outnumbered the memories,
then surely the tributary would not be a tributary at
all, but would instead be the main stream. But this
implies that if a person quasic-remembers an action
from the inside, then, in the absence of evidence to
the contrary, he is entitled to regard it as more
likely that the action was done by him than that it
was done by any other given person. And this,
taken together with my earlier point that if some­
one quasic-remembers an action from the inside,
there is a presumption that he is the person who
did it, gives us a sense in which quasic-memory can
be said to provide the quasic-rememberer with
"special access" to his own past history. This is of
course a much weaker sense of "special access"
than that explained in section I - but in this sense
it will be true in any possible world, and not merely
in ours, that people have a special access to their
own past histories.
v
In the preceding sections it was assumed that
remembering, as opposed to (mere) quasic-remem­
bering, necessarily involves the satisfaction of the
strong previous awareness condition; that is, it was
assumed that in any genuine case of event memory
the memory must correspond to a past cognitive
and sensory state of the rememberer himself. And
this is commonly supposed in discussions of mem­
ory and personal identity. But it is not really clear
that this assumption is correct. For consider again
the hypothetical case in which a man's body
"splits" like an amoeba into two physiologically
identical bodies, and in which both offshoots pro­
duce memory claims corresponding to the past life
of the original person. Or, to take a case that lies
closer to the realm of real possibility, consider the
hypothetical case in which a human brain is split,
Persons and their Pasts
its two hemispheres are transplanted into the newly
vacated skulls of different bodies, and both trans­
plant recipients survive, regain consciousness, and
begin to make memory claims that correspond to
the past history of the brain "donor. ,, 20 In neither
case can we identify both of the physiological off­
shoots of a person with the original person, unless
we are willing to take the drastic step of giving up
Leibniz' Law and the transitivity of identity. But is
it clear that it would be wrong to say that each of
the offshoots remembers the actions, experiences,
etc. of the original person? There is, to be sure, an
awkwardness about saying that each offshoot
remembers doing an action done by the original
person, for this seems to imply that an action
done by one and only one person was done by
each of the two nonidentical offshoots. But perhaps
we can say that each of the offshoots does remem­
ber the action "from the inside. " In our world,
where such bizarre cases do not occur, the only
actions anyone remembers from the inside are
those that he himself performed, so it is not sur­
prising that the only idiomatic way of reporting
that one remembers an action from the inside is
by saying that one remembers doing the action. But
this need not prevent us from describing my
hypothetical cases by saying that both offshoots
do remember the actions of the original person,
and it does not seem to me unnatural to describe
them in this way. If this is a correct way of describ­
ing them, then perhaps my second sort of quasi­
remembering, i. e. , quasic-remembering, turns out
to be just remembering, and the previous aware­
ness condition for remembering turns out to be the
causal requirement discussed in the preceding sec­
tion rather than the stronger condition I have been
assuming it to be.
If the suggestion just made about the conditions
for remembering is correct, the logical connection
between remembering and personal identity is
looser than I have been supposing it to be. Yet
adopting this suggestion does not prevent one
from defending the claim that remembering is con­
stitutive of and criterial for personal identity; on
the contrary, this makes it possible to defend the
letter of this claim, and not just its spirit, against
the very common objection that any attempt to
analyze personal identity in terms of memory will
turn out to be circular.
Bishop Butler objected against Locke's account
of personal identity that "one should really think it
self-evident, that consciousness of personal iden­
tity presupposes, and therefore cannot constitute, \nSydney Shoemaker
personal identity, any more than knowledge, in any
other case, can constitute truth, which it presup­
poses. ,, 21 More recently several writers have
argued that while "5 remembers doing A" entails
"5 did A" (and so entails "5 is identical with the
person who did A"), this is only because "5
remembers doing A" is elliptical for "5 remembers
himself doing A. ,, 22 To offer as a partial analysis of
the notion of personal identity, and as a criterion of
personal identity, the formula "If 5 remembers
(himself) doing action A, 5 is the same as the
person who did A" would be like offering as a
partial definition of the word "red, " and as a cri­
terion of redness, the formula "If 5 knows that X is
red, then X is red. " In both cases the concept
allegedly being defined is illicitly employed in the
formulation of the defining condition. Likewise, it
has been argued that while someone's remember­
ing a past event is a sufficient condition of his being
identical with a witness to the event, we cannot use
the former as a criterion for the latter, since in
order to establish that a person really does remem­
ber a given past event, we have to establish that he,
that very person, was a witness to the event. And if
this is so, the formula "If 5 remembers E, 5 is
identical with someone who witnessed E" will be
circular if offered as a partial analysis of the concept
of personal identity. 23
Such objections assume that remembering
involves the satisfaction of the strong previous
awareness condition, and they can be avoided on
the assumption that the previous awareness condi­
tion is weaker than this, e. g. , is that given for
quasic-remembering in section IV. Or, better,
they can be avoided if we explicitly use "remem­
ber" in a "weak" sense ("remember w") rather than
in a "strong" sense ("remembers"), the strength of
the sense depending on the strength of the
associated previous awareness condition. Although
there are perhaps other possibilities, let us take
"remember w " to be synonymous with "quasic-
remember. " Clearly, to establish that 5
remembers w event E (or remembers w action A
from the inside) it is not necessary to establish
that 5 himself witnessed E (or did A), for it will
be enough if 5 is the offshoot of someone who
witnessed E (did A). And while we cannot claim
that statements about what events or actions a man
remembers w logically entail statements about his
identity and past history, this does not prevent the
truth of the former from being criterial evidence
for, and from being partially constitutive of, the
truth of the latter. For we can still assert as a logical
truth that if 5 remembers w event E (or remembersw
action A from the inside), and if there has been no
branching of M-type causal chains during the rele­
vant stretch of 5's history, then 5 is one of the
witnesses of E (is the person who did A). Here we
avoid the circularity that Butler and others have
thought to be involved in any attempt to give an
account of personal identity, and of the criteria of
personal identity, in terms of memory.
In the actual world, people remember, whatever
they remember wand this makes it difficult to settle
the question of whether it is the weak or the strong
sense of "remember" that is employed in ordinary
discourse. It is possible that this question has no
answer; since branching of M-type causal chains
does not in fact occur, and is seldom envisaged,
people have had no practical motive for distin­
guishing between the strong and the weak senses
of "remember. " But I do not think that this ques­
tion is especially important. We can defend the
spirit of the claim that memory is a criterion of
personal identity without settling this question,
although in order to defend the letter of that
claim, we must maintain that in its ordinary use
"remember" means "remember w "
At this point I should say something about why
it is important to insist on the claim that there is a
causal element in the notion of memory. For this
claim has recently come under attack. 24 It has been
argued that the notion of memory should be ana­
lyzed in terms of the retention, rather than the
causation, of knowledge, and that the notion of
retention is not itself a causal notion. Now I have
no objection to saying that rememberings consists
in the retention of knowledge. But I believe that
unless we understand the notion of retention, as
well as that of memory, as involving a causal com­
ponent, we cannot account for the role played by
the notion of memory, or even the concept of
similarity, in judgements of personal identity.
Here it will be useful to consider a hypothetical
case I have discussed at some length elsewhere. 25
Let us suppose that the brain from the body of one
man, Brown, is transplanted into the body of
another man, Robinson, and that the resulting
creature - I call him "Brownson" - survives and
upon regaining consciousness begins making mem­
ory claims corresponding to the past history of
Brown rather than that of Robinson. We can also
suppose that Brownson manifests personality traits
strikingly like those previously manifested
by Brown and quite unlike those manifested by
Robinson. Although Brownson has Robinson's \n(former) body, I doubt if anyone would want to say
that Brownson is Robinson, and I think that most
people would want to say that Brownson is (is the
same person as) Brown.
But what can we offer as evidence that Brownson
is Brown? Clearly the mere correspondence of
Brownson's ostensible memories to Brown's past
history, and the similarity of Brownson's personal­
ity to Brown's, is far from being sufficient evidence.
And it is equally clear that the notion of the reten­
tion of knowledge and traits is of no use here. To be
sure, once we take ourselves to have established
that Brownson is Brown, we can say that Brownson
retains knowledge, and also personality traits,
acquired by Brownson in the past. But the latter
assertion presupposes the identity of Brownson and
Brown, and cannot without circularity be offered as
evidence for it. Indeed, the circularity is the same as
what would be involved in offering as evidence of
this identity the fact that Brownson remembers
Brown's past experiences and actions.
We do not, however, beg the question about
identity if we take Brownson's possession of what
used to be Brown's brain, together with the empiri­
cal facts about the role played by the brain in
memory, as establishing that Brown's ostensible
memories are directly M-connected with Brown's
past actions and experiences, i. e. , are causally
related to them in essentially the same ways as
people's memories are generally connected with
their own past experiences and actions. This in
turn establishes that Brownson quasic-remembers,
and so remembers w ' Brown's past experiences and
actions. And from this in turn, and from the fact
that we have good reason to suppose that no other
person's memories are M-connected with Brown's
past history in this way, i. e. , that there has been no
'branching' of M-type causal chains, we can con­
clude that Brownson is Brown? 6
We can reason in this way only if we can assert
that there is a causal connection between Brown­
son's past history and Brownson's ostensible mem­
ories. And this, it seems to me, we are clearly
entitled to do. Given that Brownson has Brown's
former brain, there is every reason to think that had
Brown's history been different in certain ways,
there would (ceteris paribus) be corresponding dif­
ferences in what Brownson ostensibly remembers.
I can see no reason for doubting that such counter­
factuals assert causal connections. Similar remarks
can be made about the similarity between Brown­
son's and Brown's personality traits. Given that
Brownson has Brown's former brain, we have rea-
Persons and their Pasts
son to think that had Brown developed a different
set of personality traits, Brownson would (ceteris
paribus) have those personality traits rather than
the ones he has. And while we cannot naturally
speak of Brown's having a certain trait at one time
as causing Brownson to have the same trait at a
subsequent time, we can speak of the former as
being an important part of a causally sufficient
condition for the latter. It is only where we suppose
that the traits of things at different times are cau­
sally related in this way that we are entitled to take
the similarity of something at one time and some­
thing at another time as evidence of identity.
VI
We are now III a positIOn to reassess the view,
mentioned in section II, that the knowledge of
our own pasts and our own identities provided us
by memory is essentially "noncriterial. " If I
remembers an action or experience from the inside,
and know that I do, it makes no sense for me to
inquire whether that action or experience was my
own. But it seems logically possible that one should
remember" an action or experience from the inside
(i. e. , quasic-remember it) without remembering, it.
So if one remembers w an action or experience from
the inside, it can make sense to inquire whether it
was one's own (whether one remembers, it), and it
would seem offhand that there is no reason why
one should not attempt to answer this question on
the basis of criteria of personal identity.
But while an action I remember" from the inside
can fail to be mine, there is only one way in which
this can happen: namely, through there having been
branching in the M-type causal chain linking it with
my present memory. So in asking whether the
action was mine, the only question I can signif­
icantly be asking is whether there was such branch­
ing. If! go on to verify that there was no branching,
I thereby establish that a sufficient criterion of
personal identity is satisfied. If instead I conclude
on inductive grounds that there was no branching,
relying on my general knowledge that M-type
causal chains seldom or never branch (or that it is
physiologically impossible for them to do so), I
thereby conclude that a sufficient criterion of
personal identity is satisfied. But an important
part of what the satisfaction of this criterion con­
sists in, namely my rememberingw the past action
from the inside, is not something I establish, and
not something I necessarily presuppose in inquiring \nSydney Shoemaker
concerning my relation to the remembered w action.
In cases where one remembers w a past action from
the inside, and knows of it only on that basis, one
cannot significantly inquire concerning it whether
one does remember w it - for as I tried to bring out in
my discussion of quasi-remembering, there is no
way of knowing the past that stands to remem­
bering. , as remembering w stands to remembering"
i. e. , is such that one can know of a past event in this
way and regard it as an open question whether in so
knowing of it one is remembering w it. So in such
cases the satisfaction of this part of the memory
criterion for personal identity is a precondition of
one's being able to raise the question of identity,
and cannot be something one establishes in
attempting to answer that question.
That one remembers w a past action is not (and
could not be) one of the things one remembers"
about it, and neither is the fact that there is no
branching in the M-type causal chain linking it
with one's memory of it. And normally there is
no set of remembered w features of an action one
remembers w from the inside, or of the person who
did the action, by which one identifies the action as
one's own and the agent as oneself. If one has not
identified a remembered person as oneself on the
basis of his remembered w features, then of course it
cannot be the case that one has misidentified him
on this basis. This is not to say that there is no basis
on which one might misidentify a remembered w
person as oneself. If there can, logically, be
remembering w that is not remembering" then
where one remembers w an action from the inside,
one's judgment that one did the action will not be
logically immune to error through misidentifica­
tion in the sense defined in section II - though
given the contingent fact that all remembering w is
remembering" such judgments can be said to have
a de facto immunity to error through misidentifica­
tion. But the sort of error through misidentification
to which a statement like "I saw a canary" is liable,
if based on a memoryw from the inside, is utterly
different from that to which a statement like "John
saw a canary" is liable when based on a memoryw of
the incident reported. If the making of the latter
statement involves an error through misidentifica­
tion, this will be because either (1) the speaker
misidentified someone as John at the time the
reported incident occurred, and retained this
misidentification in memory, or (2) at some
subsequent time, perhaps at the time of speaking,
the speaker misidentified a rememberedw person as
John on the basis of his remembered w features. But
if I remember w from the inside someone seeing a
canary, and am mistaken in thinking that person to
have been myself, it is absurd to suppose that this
mistake originated at the time at which the
remembered w seeing occurred. Nor, as I have
said, will this be a misidentification based on the
remembered w features of the person who saw the
canary. What could be the basis for a misidentifica­
tion in this case is the mistaken belief that there is
no branching in the M-type causal chain linking
one's memory with the past incident. But a mis­
identification on this basis, while logically possible,
would be radically unlike the misidentifications
that actually occur in the making of third-person
reports.
VII
Because I have taken seriously the possibility of
worlds in which M-type causal chains sometimes
branch, and thus the possibility of quasic-remem­
bering (rememberingw ) that is not remembering" I
have had to qualify and weaken my initial claims
about the "special access" people have to their own
past histories. But if our concern is with the eluci­
dation of our present concept of personal identity,
and with personal identity as something that has a
special sort of importance for us, then it is not clear
that the possibility of such worlds, and the qualifi­
cations this requires, should be taken as seriously as
I have taken them. For there is reason to think (I)
that some of our concepts, perhaps including the
concept of a person, would necessarily undergo
significant modification in their application to
such worlds, and (2) that in such worlds personal
identity would not matter to people in quite the way
it does in the actual world.
There are important connections between the
concept of personal identity and the concepts of
various "backward-looking" and "forward-look­
ing" mental states. Thus the appropriate objects
of remorse, and of a central sort of pride, are past
actions done by the very person who is remorseful
or proud, and the appropriate objects of fear and
dread, and of delighted anticipation, are events
which the subject of these emotions envisages as
happening to himself. And intentions have as their
"intentional objects" actions to be done by the very
person who has the intention. It is difficult to see
how the notion of a person could be applied, with
these conceptual connections remaining intact, to a
world in which M-type causal chains frequently \nbranch, e. g. , one in which persons frequently
undergo fission. If I remember w from the inside a
cruel or deceitful action, am I to be relieved of all
tendency to feel remorse if I discover that because
of fission someone else remembers w it too? May I
not feel proud of an action I remember w from the
inside even though I know that I am only one of
several offshoots of the person who did it, and so
cannot claim to be identical with him? Am I not to
be afraid of horrible things I expect to happen to
my future offshoots, and not to view with pleasant
anticipation the delights that are in prospect for
them? And is it to be impossible, or logically inap­
propriate, for me knowingly to form intentions,
and make decisions and plans, which because of
the prospect of immanent fission will have to be
carried out by my offshoots rather than by me? To
the extent that I can imagine such a world, I find it
incredible to suppose that these questions must be
answered in the affirmative. The prospect of
immanent fission might not be appealing, but it
seems highly implausible to suppose that the only
rational attitude toward it would be that appropri­
ate to the prospect of immanent death (for
fission, unlike death, would be something "lived
through"). It seems equally implausible to suppose
that a person's concern for the well-being of his
offshoots should be construed as altruism; surely
this concern would, or at any rate could, be just like
the self-interested concern each of us has for his
own future well-being. Yet a negative answer to my
rhetorical questions would suggest that either the
concept of a person or such concepts as those of
Notes
1 John Locke, Essay Concerning Human Understanding,
ed. Peter H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1975), p. 335 (bk 11, ch. 27, sect. 9); italics added.
2 In their paper "Remembering, " (Philosophical Review
75 (1966), C. B. Martin and Max Deutscher express
what I call the previous awareness condition by saying
that "a person can be said to remember something
happening or, in general, remember something
directly, only if he has observed or experienced it. "
Their notion of direct remembering seems to be much
the same as Norman Malcolm's notion of "personal
memory" (see his "Three forms of memory, " in
Knowledge and Certainty (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1963), pp. 203-21). To remember
that Caesar invaded Britain, I need not have had any
experience of the invasion, but no one who lacked
such experience could directly or personally remem-
Persons and their Pasts
pride, remorse, fear, etc. would undergo significant
modification in being applied to such a world. 27
A person's past history is the most important
source of his knowledge of the world, but it is also
an important source of his knowledge, and his
conception, of himself; a person's "self-image, "
his conception of his own character, values, and
potentialities, is determined in a considerable
degree by the way in which he views his own past
actions. And a person's future history is the pri­
mary focus of his desires, hopes, and fears. 28 If
these remarks do not express truths about the con­
cept of personal identity, they at least express
truths about the importance of this concept in our
conceptual scheme, or in our "form of life. " It
seems plausible to suppose that in a world in
which fission was common, personal identity
would not have this sort of importance. Roughly
speaking, the portion of past history that would
matter to a person in this special way would be
that which it is possible for him to remember w, and
not merely that which it is possible for him to
remember, . And the focus of people's "self-inter­
ested" attitudes and emotions would be the future
histories of their offshoots, and of their offshoots'
offshoots, and so on, as well as their own future
histories. In the actual world it is true both that (l)
remembering w is always remembering, (and thus
that there is special access in the strong sense
characterized in section I), and that (2) the primary
focus of a person's "self-interested" attitudes and
emotions is his own past and future history. It is
surely no accident that (1) and (2) go together.
ber that Caesar invaded Britain. In this essay I am
primarily concerned with memories that are of events,
i. e. , of something happening, and do not explicitly
consider what Malcolm calls "factual memory, " i. e. ,
memories that such and such was (or is, or will be) the
case; but what I say can be extended to cover all cases
of direct or personal memory. Martin and Deutscher
hold, and I agree, that remembering something hap­
pening is always direct remembering.
There are apparent counterexamples to the pre­
vious witnessing condition as I have formulated it.
I can be said to remember Kennedy's assassination,
which is presumably an event, yet I did not witness or
observe it, and the knowledge I had of it at the time
was indirect. But while I can be said to remember the
assassination, I could hardly be said to remember
Kennedy being shot (what I do remember is hearing \nSydney Shoemaker
about it, and the impact this made on me and those
around me). Perhaps I can be said to remember the
assassination because we sometimes mean by "the
assassination" not only the events in Dallas but their
immediate effects throughout the nation and world.
In any case, when I speak of memories of events in this
essay, I mean what Martin and Deutscher speak of as
memories of something happening.
3 Although self-reference is typically done with first­
person pronouns, it can be done with names, and even
with definite descriptions - as when de Gaulle says
"De Gaulle intends. .. " and the chairman of a meet­
ing says "The Chair recognizes. .. ," In such cases
these expressions are "self-referring, " not merely
because their reference is in fact to the speaker, but
also because the speaker intends in using them to refer
to himself.
4 There is a subtle distinction between this sort of case
and cases like the following, which I would not count
as a case of error through misidentification. Suppose
that Jones says "You are a fool, " and I mistakenly
think that he is speaking to me. Subsequently I say
"I remember Jones calling me a fool, " and my state­
ment is false through no fault of my memory. While
this is a case of knowing that Jones called someone
(someone or other) a fool and mistakenly thinking that
he was calling me a fool, it is not a case of knowing of
some particular person that Jones called him a fool but
mistakenly identifying that person as oneself. Whereas
in the other case we can say, not merely that I know
that someone or other blushed, and mistakenly think
that it was I, but that I know of some particular person
(namely the man I saw in the mirror) that he blushed
and have mistakenly identified him as myself.
5 I have discussed the immunity to error through mis­
identification of first-person present-tense statements
in Sydney Shoemaker, Identity, Cause and Mind
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984),
Essay I. There I made the mistake of associating this
feature with the peculiarities of the first-person pro­
nouns. But in fact present-tense statements having the
appropriate sorts of predicates are immune to error
through misidentification with respect to any expres­
sions that are "self-referring" in the sense of n. 3,
above, including names and definite descriptions. If
someone says "De Gaulle intends to remove France
from NATO, " and is using "de Gaulle" to refer to
himself, his statement is in the relevant sense immune
to error through misidentification, regardless of
whether he is right in thinking that his name is "de
Gaulle" and that he is the President of France.
6 H. P. Grice, "Personal identity, " Mind 50 (1941), pp.
330-50, at p. 344.
7 G. C. Nerlich, "On evidence for identity, " Australa­
sian Journal of Philosophy, 37 (1959), pp. 201-14, at
p. 208.
8 I am not here endorsing the view, which I in fact
reject, that remembering consists in the having of an
image, or some other sort of mental "representation, "
in which the memory content is in some way encoded.
It is sufficient for the existence at t of the "cognitive
state" of remembering such and such that it be true of
the person at t that he remembers such and such; I am
not here committing myself to any account of what, if
anything, someone's remembering such and such
"consists in. "
9 I should make it clear that I am not saying that what
we remember is always, or even normally, a past
cognitive and sensory state. I am not propounding
the view, which is sometimes held but which is clearly
false, that "strictly speaking" one can remember
only one's own past experiences. I am saying only
that if a person remembers an event that occurred
at time t, then at t there must have been a correspond­
ing cognitive and sensory state - which the person
mayor may not remember - that was of that event. It
would not be easy to specify just what sort of corre­
spondence is required here, and I shall not attempt to
do so. But I take it as obvious that the claim to
remember firing a gun requires, for its truth, a differ­
ent sort of past cognitive and sensory state than the
claim to remember hearing someone else fire a gun,
and that the latter, in turn, requires a different sort of
past cognitive and sensory state than the claim to
remember seeing someone fire a gun. Sometimes
one remembers a past event but no longer remembers
just how one knew of it at the time of its occurrence;
in such a case one's memory, because of vagueness
and incompleteness, corresponds to a wider range of
possible cognitive and sensory states than (say) a
memory of seeing the event or a memory of being
told about it.
10 See my book SelFKnowledge and Self-Identity (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1963), esp. ch. 4, and
my paper "Personal identity and memory, " Journal of
Philosophy 56 (1959), pp. 868-82.
11 P. F. Strawson, The Bounds of Sense (London:
Methuen, 1966), p. 165.
12 lowe to Norman Malcolm the point that to be mem­
ory knowledge, one's knowledge must be in some way
due to, must exist because of, a past cognitive and
sensory state of oneself - see his "Three forms of
Memory. " Malcolm holds that "due to" does not
here express a causal relationship, but I have been
persuaded otherwise by Martin's and Deutscher's
"Remembering. " See also my paper "On knowing
who one is" (Common Factor 4 (1966)), and David
Wiggins's Identizy and Spatio-Temporal Continuity
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), esp. pp. 50ff. The view
that there is a causal element in the concept of mem­
ory is attacked by Roger Squires in his recent paper
"Memory unchained, " Philosophical Review 78
(1969), pp. 178-96; I make a very limited reply to
this in section V of this essay.
13 P. F. Strawson, Individuals (London: Methuen,
1959), p. 20. \n14 It will perhaps be objected that the dictum that
unrestricted negative existential claims are unverifi­
able in principle is brought into question by the pos­
sibility that we might discover - what some
cosmologists hold there is good reason for believing
- that space and past time are finite. If we discovered
this, why shouldn't we be able, at least in principle, to
establish that at no place does there exist, and at no
time in the past has there existed, a duplicate of New
York?
One way of countering this objection would be to
introduce the possibility, which has been argued by
Anthony Quinton in his paper "Spaces and times, "
Philosophy 57 (1962), pp. 130-41, of there being a
multiplicity of different and spatially unrelated
spaces. Establishing that there is no duplicate of
New York in our space would not establish that
there is no space in which there is such a duplicate,
and if it is possible for there to be multiplicity of
spaces, there would seem to be no way in which the
latter could be established.
But we needn't have recourse to such recondite
possibilities in order to counter this objection, if it is
viewed as an objection to my claim that it is the fact
that remembering involves the satisfaction of the pre­
vious awareness condition that makes it possible for us
to rule out the possibility that memory claims are false
through misidentification owing to the reduplication
oflandmarks. For to discover that space or past time is
finite, and that massive reduplication does not occur,
one would have to have a vast amount of empirical
information about the world, including information
about the histories of particular things. But, as I think
the remainder of my discussion should make clear,
one could not be provided with such information by
memory (or by quasi-memory) unless one were
already entiteld in a large number of cases to refer to
particular places and things in one's memory reports
without having to regard it as possible that one's
references were mistaken owing to massive reduplica­
tion. So this entitlement would have to precede the
discovery that space and past time are finite, and
could not depend on it.
IS The point made in the preceding note can now be
expressed by saying that even if we, who have the
faculty of memory, could establish that at no place and
time has there been a duplicate of New York, this
could not be established by someone whose faculty of
knowing the past was a faculty of quasi-memory.
16 It may be objected that I have overlooked one way in
which a quasi-rememberer might begin to reconstruct
his own past history, and the histories of other
things, from the information provided him by his
quasi-memories. The quasi-rememberer's difficulties
would be solved ifhe had a way of sorting out those of
his quasi-memories that are of his own past, i. e. , are
memories, from those that are not. But it may seem
that the quasi-rememberer could easily tell which of
Persons and their Pasts
his quasi-memories of the very recent past are of his
own past, namely by noting which of them have con­
tents very similar to the contents of his present experi­
ences; e. g. , ifhe quasi-remembers from the inside the
very recent seeing of a scene that resembles very
closely the scene he presently sees, it may seem that
he can justifiably conclude that the quasi-remem­
bered seeing was his own. And it may seem that by
starting in this way he could trace back his own
history by finding among his quasi-memories a subset
of situations that form a spatiotemporally continuous
series of situations, that series terminating in the
situation he presently perceives.
This objection assumes that the quasi-rememberer
can know the degree of recentness of the situations of
which he has quasi-memories, but I shall not here
question this assumption. What I shall question is
the assumption that if the quasi-rememberer knows
that a quasi-remembered scene occurred only a
moment or so ago, and that it closely resembles the
scene he presently sees, he is entitled to believe that it
is numerically the same scene as the one he presently
sees and that in all probability it was he who saw it.
For of course it could be the case that there is some­
where else a duplicate of the scene he sees, and that his
quasi-memory is of that duplicate. It will perhaps be
objected that while this is logically possible (given the
possibility of quasi-remembering that is not remem­
bering), it is highly improbable. But while it may be
intrinsically improbable that a highly complicated
situation should be reduplicated within some limited
spatiotemporal area, it does not seem intrinsically
improbable that such a situation should be reduplic­
ated somewhere or other in the universe - unless the
universe is finite, which is something the quasi­
rememberer could have no reason for believing (see
nn. 14 and IS above). Moreover, one could not be in a
position to know how rare or frequent such reduplica­
tion is in fact, and therefore how likely or unlikely it is
that a given situation is reduplicated, unless one
already had a way of reidentifying places and things.
So the quasi-rememberer could not be in a position to
know this, for he could have a way of reidentifying
places and things only if he were already in a position
to rule out reduplication as improbable.
17 It is worth mentioning that if quasi, -remembering is
to be as much like remembering as possible, then not
just any causal chain linking a past cognitive and
sensory state with a subsequent quasi, -memory can
be allowed to count as an M-type causal chain. For as
Martin and Deutscher ("Remembering") point out,
there are various sorts of cases in which a man's
knowledge of a past event is causally due to his pre­
vious experience of it, but in which the causal con­
nection is obviously not of the right kind to permit us
to say that he remembers the event. E. g. , I have
completely forgotten the event, but know of it now
because you told me about it, and you came to know \nSydney Shoemaker
about it through my telling you about it prior to my
forgetting it. It is easier to decide in particular cases
whether the causal connection is "of the right kind"
than it is to give a general account of what it is for the
causal connection to be of the right kind, i. e. , what it is
for there to be an M-type causal chain. I shall not
attempt to do the latter here. The notion of an M-type
causal chain would of course be completely useless if it
were impossible to determine in any particular case
whether the causal connection is "of the right kind"
without already having determined that the case is one
of remembering - but I shall argue in section V that
this is not impossible.
18 In his paper "Bodily continuity and personal identity:
a reply, " Analysis 21 (1960), pp. 42-8), B. A. O.
Williams says that "identity is a one-one relation,
and. .. no principle can be a criterion of identity for
things of type T if it relies on what is logically a one­
many or many-many relation between things of type
T, " and remarks that the relation "being disposed to
make sincere memory claims which exactly fit the life
of' is a many-one relation and "hence cannot possibly
be adequate in logic to constitute a criterion of ident­
ity" (pp. 44-5). Now it may seem that my version of
the view that memory is a criterion of personal ident­
ity is open to the same objection, for if M -type causal
chains can branch and coalesce, then the relation "has
a quasi-memory which is linked by an M-type causal
chain with a cognitive and sensory state of' is not
logically a one-one relation. But while this relation­
ship is not logically one-one, the relationship "has a
quasi-memory which is linked by a non-branching
M-type causal chain with a cognitive and sensory
state of' is logically one-one, and it is the holding of
the latter relationship that I would hold to be a crit­
erion, in the sense of being a sufficient condition, for
personal identity.
19 A. N. Prior has defended the view that in cases of
fission both offshoots can be identified with the origi­
nal person, although not with each other. This of
course involves modifying the usual account of the
logical features of identity. See his" 'Opposite num­
ber'" Review of Metaphysics 2 (1957), pp. 196--201
and his "Time, existence and identity, " Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society pp. (1965-6), pp. 183-92.
Roderick Chisholm takes a very different view. Con­
sidering the supposition that "you knew that your
body, like that of an amoeba, would one day undergo
fission and that you would go off, so to speak, in two
different directions, " he says "it seems to me, first,
that there is no possibility whatever that you would be
both the person on the right and the person on the left.
It seems to me, secondly, that there is a possibility that
you would be one or the other of those two persons"
("The loose and popular and the strict and philo­
sophical senses of identity, " in Norman S. Care and
Robert H. Grimm (eds), Perception and Personal Iden­
tity (Cleveland: Press of Case Western Reserve Uni-
versity, 1969), p. 106). It is not clear to me whether
Chisholm would hold that one (but not both) of the
offshoots might be me if the memories of each stood in
the same causal relationships to my actions and
experiences as the memories of the other, and if each
resembled me, in personality, appearance, etc. as
much as the other. If so, I would disagree.
20 See Wiggins, Identity and Spatio-Temporal Continuizy,
p. 53, where such a case is discussed.
21 Joseph Butler, "Of personal identity, " First Disserta­
tion to the Analogy of Religion; repro in J. Perry (ed. ),
Personal Identity (Berkeley and Los Angeles: Univer­
sity of California Press, 1975).
22 See A. J. Ayer, The Problem of Knowledge (Harmonds­
worth: Penguin, 1956), p. 196, and B. A. O. Williams,
"Personal identity and individuation, " in Problems of
the Self (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1973), pp. 3-4.
23 See Williams, "Personal identity and individuation, "
pp. 4-5, and my "Personal identity and memory, " pp.
869-70 and 877. In the latter, and in Selj: Knowledge
and Self-Identity, I attempted to reduce the force of
this objection by arguing that it is a "conceptual
truth" that memory claims are generally true, and
that we can therefore be entitled to say that a person
remembers a past event without alread y ha ving estab­
lished, or having inductive evidence, that some other
criterion of personal identity (one not involving mem­
ory) is satisfied. This way of handling the objection no
longer seems to me satisfactory.
24 See Squires's "Memory unchained. "
25 Shoemaker, Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity, pp. 23-
5 and 245-7.
26 In Selj: Knowledge and Self-Identizy I held that saying
that Brownson is Brown would involve making a
"decision" about the relative weights to be assigned
to different criteria of personal identity, and that in
the absence of such a decision there is no right answer
to the question whether Brownson is Brown. I have
come to believe that there is a right answer to
this question, namely that Brownson is Brown, and
that my former view overlooked the importance of the
causal component in the notion of memory (see
my treatment of this example in "On knowing who
one is").
27 On this and related questions, see my exchange with
Chisholm in Care and Grimm (eds), Perception and
Personal Identity, pp. 107-27.
28 This is not to deny the possibility or occurrence of
unselfish attitudes and emotions. Even the most
unselfish man, who is willing to suffer that others
may prosper, does not and cannot regard the pleasures
and pains that are in prospect for him in the same light
as he regards those that are in prospect for others. He
may submit to torture, but he would hardly be human
if he could regularly view his own future sufferings
with the same detachment (which is not indifference)
as he views the future suffering of others. \n28
Bernard Williams
Suppose that there were some process to which two
persons, A and B, could be subjected as a result of
which they might be said - question-beggingly - to
have exchanged bodies. That is to say - less ques­
tion-beggingly - there is a certain human body
which is such that when previously we were con­
fronted with it, we were confronted with person A,
certain utterances coming from it were expressive
of memories of the past experiences of A, certain
movements of it partly constituted the actions of A
and were taken as expressive of the character of A,
and so forth; but now, after the process is com­
pleted, utterances coming from this body are
expressive of what seem to be just those memories
which previously we identified as memories of the
past experiences of B, its movements partly con­
stitute actions expressive of the character of B, and
so forth; and conversely with the other body.
There are certain important philosophical lim­
itations on how such imaginary cases are to be
constructed, and how they are to be taken when
constructed in various ways. I shall mention two
principal limitations, not in order to pursue them
further here, but precisely in order to get them out
of the way.
There are certain limitations, particularly with
regard to character and mannerisms, to our ability
to imagine such cases even in the most restricted
sense of our being disposed to take the later per-
First published in Philosophical Review 79 (1970),
pp. 161-80. Reprinted by permission of Cornell Uni­
versity.
formances of that body which was previously A's as
expressive of B's character; if the previous A and B
were extremely unlike one another both physically
and psychologically, and if, say, in addition, they
were of different sex, there might be grave diffi­
culties in reading B's dispositions in any possible
performances of A's body. Let us forget this, and
for the present purpose just take A and B as being
sufficiently alike (however alike that has to be) for
the difficulty not to arise; after the experiment,
persons familiar with A and B are just overwhelm­
ingly struck by the B-ish character of the doings
associated with what was previously A's body, and
conversely. Thus the feat of imagining an exchange
of bodies is supposed possible in the most
restricted sense. But now there is a further limita­
tion which has to be overcome if the feat is to be not
merely possible in the most restricted sense, but
also is to have an outcome which, on serious reflec­
tion, we are prepared to describe as A and B having
changed bodies - that is, an outcome where, con­
fronted with what was previously A's body, we are
prepared seriously to say that we are now con­
fronted with B.
It would seem a necessary condition of so doing
that the utterances coming from that body be taken
as genuinely expressive of memories of B's past.
But memory is a causal notion; and as we actually
use it, it seems a necessary condition of x's present
knowledge of x's earlier experiences constituting
memory of those experiences that the causal chain
linking the experiences and the knowledge should
not run outside x's body. Hence if utterances \nBernard Williams
coming from a given body are to be taken as expres­
sive of memories of the experiences of B, there
should be some suitable causal link between the
appropriate state of the body and the original hap­
pening of those experiences to B. One radical way
of securing that condition in the imagined exchange
case is to suppose, with Shoemaker, 1 that the brains
of A and of B are transposed. We may not need so
radical a condition. Thus suppose it were possible
to extract information from a man's brain and store
it in a device while his brain was repaired, or even
renewed, the information then being replaced: it
would seem exaggerated to insist that the resultant
man could not possibly have the memories he had
before the operation. With regard to our knowledge
of our own past, we draw distinctions between
merely recalling, being reminded, and learning
again, and those distinctions correspond (roughly)
to distinctions between no new input, partial new
input, and total new input with regard to the infor­
mation in question; and it seems clear that the
information-parking case. just imagined would not
count as new input in the sense necessary and
sufficient for 'learning again'. Hence we can ima­
gine the case we are concerned with in terms of
information extracted into such devices from A's
and B's brains and replaced in the other brain; this
is the sort of model which, I think not unfairly for
the present argument, I shall have in mind.
We imagine the following. The process consid­
ered above exists; two persons can enter some
machine, let us say, and emerge changed in the
appropriate ways. If A and B are the persons who
enter, let us call the persons who emerge the A­
body-person and the B-body-person: the A-body­
person is that person (whoever it is) with whom I
am confronted when, after the experiment, I am
confronted with that body which previously was
A's body ~ that is to say, that person who would
naturally be taken for A by someone who just saw
this person, was familiar with A's appearance
before the experiment, and did not know about
the happening of the experiment. A non-ques­
tion-begging description of the experiment will
leave it open which (if either) of the persons A
and B the A-body-person is; the description of the
experiment as 'persons changing bodies' of course
implies that the A-body-person is actually B.
We take two persons A and B who are going to
have the process carried out on them. (We can
suppose, rather hazily, that they are willing for
this to happen; to investigate at all closely at this
stage why they might be willing or unwilling, what
they would fear, and so forth, would anticipate
some later issues. ) We further announce that one
of the two resultant persons, the A-body-person
and the B-body-person, is going after the experi­
ment to be given $100, 000, while the other is going
to be tortured. We then ask each of A and B to
choose which treatment should be dealt out to
which of the persons who will emerge from the
experiment, the choice to be made (if it can be)
on selfish grounds.
Suppose that A chooses that the B-body-person
should get the pleasant treatment and the A-body­
person the unpleasant treatment; and B chooses
conversely (this might indicate that they thought
that 'changing bodies' was indeed a good descrip­
tion of the outcome). The experimenter cannot act
in accordance with both these sets of preferences,
those expressed by A and those expressed by B.
Hence there is one clear sense in which A and B
cannot both get what they want: namely, that if the
experimenter, before the experiment, announces to
A and B that he intends to carry out the alternative
(for example), of treating the B-body-person
unpleasantly and the A-body-person pleasantly ~
then A can say rightly, 'That's not the outcome I
chose to happen', and B can say rightly, 'That's
just the outcome I chose to happen'. So, evidently,
A and B before the experiment can each come to
know either that the outcome he chose will be that
which will happen, or that the one he chose will not
happen, and in that sense they can get or fail to get
what they wanted. But is it also true that when the
experimenter proceeds after the experiment to act
in accordance with one of the preferences and not
the other, then one of A and B will have got what he
wanted, and the other not?
There seems very good ground for saying so.
For suppose the experimenter, having elicited A's
and B's preference, says nothing to A and B about
what he will do; conducts the experiment; and
then, for example, gives the unpleasant treatment
to the B-body-person and the pleasant treatment to
the A-body-person. Then the B-body-person will
not only complain of the unpleasant treatment as
such, but will complain (since he has A's mem­
ories) that that was not the outcome he chose, since
he chose that the B-body-person should be well
treated; and since A made his choice in selfish
spirit, he may add that he precisely chose in that
way because he did not want the unpleasant things
to happen to him. The A-body-person meanwhile
will express satisfaction both at the receipt of the
$100, 000, and also at the fact that the experimenter \nhas chosen to act in the way that he, B, so wisely
chose. These facts make a strong case for saying
that the experimenter has brought it about that B
did in the outcome get what he wanted and A did
not. It is therefore a strong case for saying that the
B-body-person really is A, and the A-body-person
really is B; and therefore for saying that the process
of the experiment really is that of changing bodies.
For the same reasons it would seem that A and Bin
our example really did choose wisely, and that it
was A's bad luck that the choice he correctly made
was not carried out, B's good luck that the choice
he correctly made was carried out. This seems to
show that to care about what happens to me in the
future is not necessarily to care about what happens
to this body (the one I now have); and this in turn
might be taken to show that in some sense of
Descartes's obscure phrase, I and my body are
'really distinct' (though, of course, nothing in
these considerations could support the idea that I
could exist without a body at all).
These suggestions seem to be reinforced if we
consider the cases where A and B make other
choices with regard to the experiment. Suppose
that A chooses that the A-body-person should get
the money, and the B-body-person get the pain,
and B chooses conversely. Here again there can be
no outcome which matches the expressed prefer­
ences of both of them: they cannot both get what
they want. The experimenter announces, before
the experiment, that the A-body-person will in
fact get the money, and the B-body-person will
get the pain. So A at this stage gets what he wants
(the announced outcome matches his expressed
preference). After the experiment, the distribution
is carried out as announced. Both the A-body­
person and the B-body-person will have to agree
that what is happening is in accordance with the
preference that A originally expressed. The B­
body-person will naturally express this acknow­
ledgement (since he has A's memories) by saying
that this is the distribution he chose; he will recall,
among other things, the experimenter announcing
this outcome, his approving it as what he choose,
and so forth. However, he (the B-body-person)
certainly does not like what is now happening to
him, and would much prefer to be receiving what
the A-body-person IS receiving - namely,
$100, 000. The A-body-person will on the other
hand recall choosing an outcome other than this
one, but will reckon it good luck that the experi­
menter did not do what he recalls choosing. It
looks, then, as though the A-body-person has got
- --------------
The Self and the Future
what he wanted, but not what he chose, while the
B-body-person has got what he chose, but not what
he wanted. So once more it looks as though they
are, respectively, B and A; and that in this case the
original choices of both A and B were unwise.
Suppose, lastly, that in the original choice A
takes the line of the first case and B of the second:
that is, A chooses that the B-body-person should
get the money and the A-body-person the pain, and
B chooses exactly the same thing. In this case, the
experimenter would seem to be in the happy situa­
tion of giving both persons what they want - or at
least, like God, what they have chosen. In this case,
the B-body-person likes what he is receiving,
recalls choosing it, and congratulates himself on
the wisdom of (as he puts it) his choice; while the
A-body-person does not like what he is receiving,
recalls choosing it, and is forced to acknowledge
that (as he puts it) his choice was unwise. So once
more we seem to get results to support the sugges­
tions drawn from the first case.
Let us now consider the question, not of A and B
choosing certain outcomes to take place after the
experiment, but of their willingness to engage in
the experiment at all. If they were initially inclined
to accept the description of the experiment as
'changing bodies', then one thing that would inter­
est them would be the character of the other per­
son's body. In this respect also, what would happen
after the experiment would seem to suggest that
'changing bodies' was a good description of the
experiment. If A and B agreed to the experiment,
being each not displeased with the appearance,
physique, and so forth of the other person's body;
after the experiment the B-body-person might well
be found saying such things as: 'When I agreed to
this experiment, I thought that B's face was quite
attractive, but now I look at it in the mirror, I am
not so sure'; or the A-body-person might say,
'When I agreed to this experiment, I did not
know that A had a wooden leg; but now, after it is
over, I find that I have this wooden leg, and I want
the experiment reversed. ' It is possible that he
might say further that he finds the leg very uncom­
fortable, and that the B-body-person should say,
for instance, that he recalls that he found it very
uncomfortable at first, but one gets used to it: but
perhaps one would need to know more than at least
I do about the physiology of habituation to artificial
limbs to know whether the A-body-person would
find the leg uncomfortable: that body, after all, has
had the leg on it for some time. But apart from this
sort of detail, the general line of the outcome \nBernard Williams
regarded from this point of view seems to confirm
our previous conclusions about the experiment.
Now let us suppose that when the experiment is
proposed (in non-question-begging terms) A and B
think rather of their psychological advantages and
disadvantages. A's thoughts turn primarily to cer­
tain sorts of anxiety to which he is very prone,
while B is concerned with the frightful memories
he has of past experiences which still distress him.
They each hope that the experiment will in some
way result in their being able to get away from these
things. They may even have been impressed by
philosophical arguments to the effect that bodily
continuity is at least a necessary condition of
personal identity: A, for example, reasons that,
granted the experiment comes off, then the person
who is bodily continuous with him will not have
this anxiety, and while the other person will no
doubt have some anxiety-perhaps in some sense
his anxiety - at least that person will not be he. The
experiment is performed, and the experimenter (to
whom A and B previously revealed privately their
several difficulties and hopes) asks the A-body­
person whether he has got rid of his anxiety. This
person presumably replies that he does not know
what the man is talking about; he never had such
anxiety, but he did have some very disagreeable
memories, and recalls engaging in the experiment
to get rid of them, and is disappointed to discover
that he still has them. The B-body-person will
react in a similar way to questions about his painful
memories, pointing out that he still has his anxiety.
These results seem to confirm still further the
description of the experiment as 'changing bodies'.
And all the results suggest that the only rational
thing to do, confronted with such an experiment,
would be to identify oneself with one's memories,
and so forth, and not with one's body. The philo­
sophical arguments designed to show that bodily
continuity was at least a necessary condition of
personal identity would seem to be just mistaken.
Let us now consider something apparently dif­
ferent. Someone in whose power I am tells me that
I am going to be tortured tomorrow. I am frigh­
tened, and look forward to tomorrow in great
apprehension. He adds that when the time comes,
I shall not remember being told that this was going
to happen to me, since shortly before the torture
something else will be done to me which will make
me forget the announcement. This certainly will
not cheer me up, since I know perfectly well that I
can forget things, and that there is such a thing as
indeed being tortured unexpectedly because I had
forgotten or been made to forget a prediction of the
torture: that will still be a torture which, so long as I
do know about the prediction, I look forward to in
fear. He then adds that my forgetting the
announcement will be only part of a larger process:
when the moment of torture comes, I shall not
remember any of the things I am now in a position
to remember. This does not cheer me up, either,
since I can readily conceive of being involved in an
accident, for instance, as a result of which I wake
up in a completely amnesiac state and also in great
pain; that could certainly happen to me, I should
not like it to happen to me, nor to know that it was
going to happen to me. He now further adds that at
the moment of torture I shall not only not remem­
ber the things I am now in a position to remember,
but will have a different set of impressions of my
past, quite different from the memories I now have.
I do not think that this would cheer me up, either.
For I can at least conceive the possibility, if not the
concrete reality, of going completely mad, and
thinking perhaps that I am George IV or some­
body; and being told that something like that was
going to happen to me would have no tendency to
reduce the terror of being told authoritatively that I
was going to be tortured, but would merely com­
pound the horror. Nor do I see why I should be put
into any better frame of mind by the person in
charge adding lastly that the impressions of my
past with which I shall be equipped on the eve of
torture will exactly fit the past of another person
now living, and that indeed I shall acquire these
impressions by (for instance) information now in
his brain being copied into mine. Fear, surely,
would still be the proper reaction: and not because
in one did not know what was going to happen, but
because in one vital respect at least one did know
what was going to happen - torture, which one can
indeed expect to happen to oneself, and to be pre­
ceded by certain mental derangements as well.
If this is right, the whole question seems now to
be totally mysterious. For what we have just been
through is of course merely one side, differently
represented, of the transaction which we consid­
ered before; and it represents it as a perfectly hate­
ful prospect, while the previous considerations
represented it as something one should rationally,
perhaps even cheerfully, choose out of the options
there presented. It is differently presented, of
course, and in two notable respects; but when we
look at these two differences of presentation, can
we really convince ourselves that the second pres­
entation is wrong or misleading, thus leaving the \nroad open to the first version which at the time
seemed so convincing? Surely not.
The first difference is that in the second version
the torture is throughout represented as going to
happen to me: 'you', the man in charge persistently
says. Thus he is not very neutral. But should he
have been neutral? Or, to put it another way, does
his use of the second person have a merely emo­
tional and rhetorical effect on me, making me afraid
when further reflection would have shown that I
had no reason to be? It is certainly not obviously so.
The problem just is that through every step of his
predictions I seem to be able to follow him success­
fully. And if I reflect on whether what he has said
gives me grounds for fearing that I shall be tor­
tured, I could consider that behind my fears lies
some principle such as this: that my undergoing
physical pain in the future is not excluded by any
psychological state I may be in at the time, with the
platitudinous exception of those psychological
states which in themselves exclude experiencing
pain, notably (if it is a psychological state) uncon­
sciousness. In particular, what impressions I have
about the past will not have any effect on whether I
undergo the pain or not. This principle seems
sound enough.
It is an important fact that not everything I
would, as things are, regard as an evil would be
something that I should rationally fear as an evil if
it were predicted that it would happen to me in the
future and also predicted that I should undergo
significant psychological changes in the meantime.
For the fact that I regard that happening, things
being as they are, as an evil can be dependent on
factors of belief or character which might them­
selves be modified by the psychological changes in
question. Thus if I am appallingly subject to acro­
phobia, and am told that I shall find myself on top
of a steep mountain in the near future, I shall to
that extent be afraid; but if I am told that I shall be
psychologically changed in the meantime in such a
way as to rid me of my acrophobia (and as with the
other prediction, I believe it), then I have no reason
to be afraid of the predicted happening, or at least
not the same reason. Again, I might look forward to
meeting a certain person again with either alarm or
excitement because of my memories of our past
relations. In some part, these memories operate in
connection with my emotion, not only on the pres­
ent time, but projectively forward: for it is to a
meeting itself affected by the presence of those
memories that I look forward. If I am convinced
that when the time comes I shall not have those
The Self and the Future
memories, then I shall not have just the same
reasons as before for looking forward to that meet­
ing with the one emotion or the other. (Spiritual­
ism, incidentally, appears to involve the belief that
I have just the same reasons for a given attitude
toward encountering people again after I am dead,
as I did before: with the one modification that I can
be sure it will all be very nice. )
Physical pain, however, the example which for
simplicity (and not for any obsessional reason) I
have taken, is absolutely minimally dependent on
character or belief. No amount of change in my
character or my beliefs would seem to affect sub­
stantially the nastiness of tortures applied to me;
correspondingly, no degree of predicted change in
my character and beliefs can unseat the fear of
torture which, together with those changes, is pre­
dicted for me.
I am not at all suggesting that the only basis, or
indeed the only rational basis, for fear in the face of
these various predictions is how things will be
relative to my psychological state in the eventual
outcome. I am merely pointing out that this is one
component; it is not the only one. For certainly one
will fear and otherwise reject the changes them­
selves, or in very many cases one would. Thus one
of the old paradoxes of hedonistic utilitarianism; if
one had assurances that undergoing certain opera­
tions and being attached to a machine would pro­
vide one for the rest of one's existence with an
unending sequence of delicious and varied experi­
ences, one might very well reject the option, and
react with fear if someone proposed to apply it
compulsorily; and that fear and horror would
seem appropriate reactions in the second case may
help to discredit the interpretation (if anyone has
the nerve to propose it) that one's reason for reject­
ing the option voluntarily would be a consciousness
of duties to others which one in one's hedonic state
would leave undone. The prospect of contented
madness or vegetableness is found by many (not
perhaps by all) appalling in ways which are
obviously not a function of how things would
then be for them, for things would then be for
them not appalling. In the case we are at present
discussing, these sorts of considerations seem
merely to make it clearer that the predictions of
the man in charge provide a double ground of
horror: at the prospect of torture, and at the pro­
spect of the change in character and in impressions
of the past that will precede it. And certainly, to
repeat what has already been said, the prospect
of the second certainly seems to provide no ground \nBernard Williams
for rejecting or not fearing the prospect of the
first.
I said that there were two notable differences
between the second presentation of our situation
and the first. The first difference, which we have
just said something about, was that the man pre­
dicted the torture for me, a psychologically very
changed 'me'. We have yet to find a reason for
saying that he should not have done this, or that
I really should be unable to follow him if he
does; I seem to be able to follow him only too
well. The second difference is that in this presenta­
tion he does not mention the other man, except in
the somewhat incidental role of being the proven­
ance of the impressions of the past I end up with.
He does not mention him at all as someone who will
end up with impressions of the past derived from
me (and, incidentally, with $100, 000 as well - a
consideration which, in the frame of mind appro­
priate to this version, will merely make me jealous).
But why should he mention this man and what is
going to happen to him? My selfish concern is to be
told what is going to happen to me, and now I know:
torture, preceded by changes of character, brain
operations, changes in impressions of the past.
The knowledge that one other person, or none, or
many will be similarly mistreated may affect me in
other ways, of sympathy, greater horror at the
power of this tyrant, and so forth; but surely it
cannot affect my expectations of torture? But -
someone will say - this is to leave out exactly the
feature which, as the first presentation of the case
showed, makes all the difference: for it is to leave
out the person who, as the first presentation
showed, will be you. It is to leave out not merely
a feature which should fundamentally affect your
fears, it is to leave out the very person for whom
you are fearful. So of course, the objector will say,
this makes all the difference.
But can it? Consider the following series of cases.
In each case we are to suppose that after what is
described, A is, as before, to be tortured; we are
also to suppose the person A is informed before­
hand that just these things followed by the torture
will happen to him:
(i) A is subjected to an operation which pro­
duces total amnesia;
(ii) amnesia is produced in A, and other inter­
ference leads to certain changes in his char­
acter;
(iii) changes in his character are produced, and at
the same time certain illusory 'memory'
beliefs are induced in him: these are of a
quite fictitious kind and do not fit the life
of any actual person;
(iv) the same as (iii), except that both the char­
acter traits and the 'memory' impressions are
designed to be appropriate to another actual
person, B;
(v) the same as (iv), except that the result is
produced by putting the information into A
from the brain of B, by a method which
leaves B the same as he was before;
(vi) the same happens to A as in (v), but B is not
left the same, since a similar operation IS
conducted in the reverse direction.
I take it that no one is going to dispute that A has
reasons, and fairly straightforward reasons, for fear
of pain when the prospect is that of situation (i);
there seems no conceivable reason why this should
not extend to situation (ii), and the situation (iii)
can surely introduce no difference of principle - it
just seems a situation which for more than one
reason we should have grounds for fearing, as sug­
gested above. Situation (iv) at least introduces the
person B, who was the focus of the objection we are
now discussing. But it does not seem to introduce
him in any way which makes a material difference;
if! can expect pain through a transformation which
involves new 'memory'-impressions, it would seem
a purely external fact, relative to that, that the
'memory'-impressions had a model. Nor, in (iv),
do we satisfy a causal condition which I mentioned
at the beginning for the 'memories' actually being
memories; though notice that if the job were done
thoroughly, I might well be able to elicit from the
A-body-person the kinds of remarks about his pre­
vious expectations of the experiment - remarks
appropriate to the original B - which so impressed
us in the first version of the story. I shall have a
similar assurance of this being so in situation (v),
where, moreover, a plausible application of the
causal condition is available.
But two things are to be noticed about this
situation. First, if we concentrate on A and the A­
body-person, we do not seem to have added any­
thing which from the point of view of his fears
makes any material difference; just as, in the
move from (iii) to (iv), it made no relevant differ­
ence that the new 'memory'-impressions which
precede the pain had, as it happened, a model, so
in the move from (iv) to (v) all we have added is that
they have a model which is also their cause: and it is
still difficult to see why that, to him looking for-\nward, could possibly make the difference between
expecting pain and not expecting pain. To illus­
trate that point from the case of character: if A is
capable of expecting pain, he is capable of expect­
ing pain preceded by a change in his dispositions -
and to that expectation it can make no difference,
whether that change in his dispositions is modelled
on, or indeed indirectly caused by, the dispositions
of some other person. If his fears can, as it were,
reach through the change, it seems a mere trim­
ming how the change is in fact induced. The sec­
ond point about situation (v) is that if the crucial
question for A's fears with regard to what befalls
the A-body-person is whether the A-body-person
is or is not the person B, z then that condition has
not yet been satisfied in situation (v): for there we
have an undisputed B in addition to the A-body­
person, and certainly those two are not the same
person.
But in situation (vi), we seemed to think, that is
finally what he is. But if A's original fears could
reach through the expected changes in (v), as they
did in (iv) and (iii), then certainly they can reach
through in (vi). Indeed, from the point of view of
A's expectations and fears, there is less difference
between (vi) and (v) than there is between (v) and
(iv) or between (iv) and (iii). In those transitions,
there were at least differences - though we could
not see that they were really relevant differences -
in the content or cause of what happened to him; in
the present case there is absolutely no difference at
all in what happens to him, the only difference
being in what happens to someone else. If he can
fear pain when (v) is predicted, why should he
cease to when (vi) is?
I can see only one way of relevantly laying great
weight on the transition from (v) to (vi); and this
involves a considerable difficulty. This is to deny
that, as I put it, the transition from (v) to (vi)
involves merely the addition of something happen­
ing to somebody else; what rather it does, it will be
said, is to involve the reintroduction of A himself,
as the B-body-person; since he has reappeared in
this form, it is for this person, and not for the
unfortunate A-body-person, that A will have his
expectations. This is to reassert, in effect, the view­
point emphasized in our first presentation of the
experiment. But this surely has the consequence
that A should not have fears for the A-body-person
who appeared in situation (v). For by the present
argument, the A-body-person in (vi) is not A; the
B-body-person is. But the A-body-person in (v) is,
in character, history, everything, exactly the same
The Self and the Future
as the A-body-person in (vi); so if the latter is not
A, then neither is the former. (It is this point, no
doubt, that encourages one to speak of the differ­
ence that goes with (vi) as being, on the present
view, the reintroduction of A. ) But no one else in (v)
has any better claim to be A. So in (v), it seems, A
just does not exist. This would certainly explain
why A should have no fears for the state of things in
(v) - though he might well have fears for the path
to it. But it rather looked earlier as though he could
well have fears for the state of things in (v). Let us
grant, however, that that was an illusion, and that A
really does not exist in (v); then does he exist in (iv),
(iii), (ii), or (i)? It seems very difficult to deny it for
(i) and (ii); are we perhaps to draw the line between
(iii) and (iv)?
Here someone will say: you must not insist on
drawing a line - borderline cases are borderline
cases, and you must not push our concepts beyond
their limits. But this well-known piece of advice,
sensible as it is in many cases, seems in the present
case to involve an extraordinary difficulty. It may
intellectually comfort observers of A's situation;
but what is A supposed to make of it? To be told
that a future situation is a borderline one for its
being myself that is hurt, that it is conceptually
undecidable whether it will be me or not, is some­
thing which, it seems, I can do nothing with;
because, in particular, it seems to have no compre­
hensible representation in my expectations and the
emotions that go with them.
If I expect that a certain situation, S, will come
about in the future, there is of course a wide range
of emotions and concerns, directed on S, which I
may experience now in relation to my expectation.
Unless I am exceptionally egoistic, it is not a con­
dition on my being concerned in relation to this
expectation, that I myself will be involved in S -
where my being 'involved' in S means that I figure
in S as someone doing something at that time or
having something done to me, or, again, that Swill
have consequences affecting me at that or some
subsequent time. There are some emotions, how­
ever, which I will feel only in will be involved in S,
and fear is an obvious example.
Now the description of S under which it figures
in my expectations will necessarily be, in various
ways, indeterminate; and one way in which it may
be indeterminate is that it leaves open whether I
shall be involved in S or not. Thus I may have good
reason to expect that one of us five is going to get
hurt, but no reason to expect it to be me rather than
one of the others. My present emotions will be \nBernard Williams
correspondingly affected by this indeterminacy.
Thus, sticking to the egoistic concern involved in
fear, I shall presumably be somewhat more cheerful
than if! knew it was going to be me, somewhat less
cheerful than if! had been left out altogether. Fear
will be mixed with, and qualified by, apprehension;
and so forth. These emotions revolve around the
thought of the eventual determination of the inde­
terminacy; moments of straight fear focus on its
really turning out to be me, of hope on its turning
out not to be me. All the emotions are related to the
coming about of what I expect: and what I expect in
such a case just cannot come about save by coming
about in one of the ways or another.
There are other ways in which indeterminate
expectations can be related to fear. Thus I may
expect (perhaps neurotically) that something
nasty is going to happen to me, indeed expect that
when it happens, it will take some determinate
form, but have no range, or no closed range, of
candidates for the determinate form to rehearse in
my present thought. Different from this would be
the fear of something radically indeterminate - the
fear (one might say) of a nameless horror. If some­
body had such a fear, one could even say that he
had, in a sense, a perfectly determinate expectation:
if what he expects indeed comes about, there will
be nothing more determinate to be said about it
after the event than was said in the expectation.
Both these cases of course are cases ofJear because
one thing that is fixed amid the indeterminacy is
the belief that it is me to whom the things will
happen.
Central to the expectation of S is the thought of
what it will be like when it happens - thought
which may be indeterminate, range over alternat­
ives, and so forth. When S involves me, there can
be the possibility of a special form of such thought:
the thought of how it will be for me, the imaginat­
ive projection of myself as participant in S. 3 I do
not have to think about S in this way, when it
involves me; but I may be able to. (It might be
suggested that this possibility was even mirrored in
the language, in the distinction between 'expecting
to be hurt' and 'expecting that I shall be hurt'; but I
am very doubtful about this point, which is in any
case of no importance. )
Suppose now that there is an S with regard to
which it is for conceptual reasons undecidable
whether it involves me or not, as is proposed for
the experimental situation by the line we are dis­
cussing. It is important that the expectation of S is
not indeterminate in any of the ways we have just
been considering. It is not like the nameless horror,
since the fixed point of that case was that it was
going to happen to the subject, and that made his
state unequivocally fear. Nor is it like the expecta­
tion of the man who expects one of the five to be
hurt; his fear was indeed equivocal, but its focus,
and that of the expectation, was that when S came
about, it would certainly come about in one way or
the other. In the present case, fear (of the torture,
that is to say, not of the initial experiment) seems
neither appropriate, nor inappropriate, nor appro­
priately equivocal. Relatedly, the subject has an
incurable difficulty about how he may think about
S. If he engages in projective imaginative thinking
(about how it will be for him), he implicitly answers
the necessarily unanswerable question; if he thinks
that he cannot engage in such thinking, it looks
very much as if he also answers it, though in the
opposite direction. Perhaps he must just refrain
from such thinking; but is he just refraining from
it, if it is incurably undecidable whether he can or
cannot engage in it?
It may be said that all that these considerations
can show is that fear, at any rate, does not get its
proper footing in this case; but that there could be
some other, more ambivalent, form of concern
which would indeed be appropriate to this particu­
lar expectation, the expectation of the conceptually
undecidable situation. There are, perhaps, analog­
ous feelings that actually occur in actual situations.
Thus material objects do occasionally undergo
puzzling transformations which leave a conceptual
shadow over their identity. Suppose I were senti­
mentally attached to an object to which this sort of
thing then happened; it might be that I could
neither feel about it quite as I did originally, nor
be totally indifferent to it, but would have some
other and rather ambivalent feeling towards it.
Similarly, it may be said, toward the prospective
sufferer of pain, my identity relations with whom
are conceptually shadowed, I can feel neither as I
would if he were certainly me, nor as I would if he
were certainly not, but rather some such ambival­
ent concern.
But this analogy does little to remove the most
baffling aspect of the present case - an aspect which
has already turned up in what was said about the
subject's difficulty in thinking either projectively
or non-projectively about the situation. For to
regard the prospective pain-sufferer just like the
transmogrified object of sentiment, and to conceive
of my ambivalent distress about his future pain as
just like ambivalent distress about some future \ndamage to such an object, is of course to leave him
and me clearly distinct from one another, and thus
to displace the conceptual shadow from its proper
place. I have to get nearer to him than that. But is
there any nearer that I can get to him without
expecting his pain? If there is, the analogy has not
shown us it. We can certainly not get nearer by
expecting, as it were, ambivalent pain; there is no
place at all for that. There seems to be an obstinate
bafflement to mirroring in my expectations a situa­
tion in which it is conceptually undecidable
whether I occur.
The bafflement seems, moreover, to turn to
plain absurdity if we move from conceptual unde­
cidability to its close friend and neighbour, con­
ventionalist decision. This comes out if we
consider another description, overtly convention­
alist, of the series of cases which occasioned the
present discussion. This description would reject a
point I relied on in an earlier argument - namely,
that if we deny that the A-body-person in (vi) is A
(because the B-body-person is), then we must deny
that the A-body-person in (v) is A, since they are
exactly similar. 'No', it may be said, 'this is just to
assume that we say the same in different sorts of
situation. No doubt when we have the very good
candidate for being A - namely, the B-body-person
- we call him A; but this does not mean that we
should not call the A-body-person A in that other
situation when we have no better candidate around.
Different situations call for different descriptions. '
This line of talk is the sort of thing indeed appro­
priate to lawyers deciding the ownership of some
property which has undergone some bewildering
set of transformations; they just have to decide, and
in each situation, let us suppose, it has got to go to
somebody, on as reasonable grounds as the facts
and the law admit. But as a line to deal with a
person's fears or expectations about his own future,
it seems to have no sense at all. If A's fears can
extend to what will happen to the A-body-person in
(v), I do not see how they can be rationally diverted
from the fate of the exactly similar person in (vi) by
his being told that someone would have a reason in
the latter situation which he would not have in the
former for deciding to call another person A.
Thus, to sum up, it looks as though there are two
presentations of the imagined experiment and the
choice associated with it, each of which carries
conviction, and which lead to contrary conclusions.
The idea, moreover, that the situation after the
experiment is conceptually undecidable in the
relevant respect seems not to assist, but rather to
The Self and the Future
increase, the puzzlement; while the idea (so often
appealed to in these matters) that it is convention­
ally decidable is even worse. Following from all
that, I am not in the least clear which option it
would be wise to take if one were presented with
them before the experiment. I find that rather
disturbing.
Whatever the puzzlement, there is one feature of
the arguments which have led to it which is worth
picking out, since it runs counter to something
which is, I think, often rather vaguely supposed.
It is often recognized that there are 'first-personal'
and 'third-personal' aspects of questions about per­
sons, and that there are difficulties about the rela­
tions between them. It is also recognized that
'mentalistic' considerations (as we may vaguely
call them) and considerations of bodily continuity
are involved in questions of personal identity
(which is not to say that there are mentalistic and
bodily criteria of personal identity). It is tempting
to think that the two distinctions run in parallel:
roughly, that a first-person approach concentrates
attention on mentalistic considerations, while a
third-personal approach emphasizes considerations
of bodily continuity. The present discussion is an
illustration of exactly the opposite. The first argu­
ment, which led to the 'mentalistic' conclusion that
A and B would change bodies and that each person
should identify himself with the destination of his
memories and character, was an an argument
entirely conducted in third-personal terms. The
seconp argument, which suggested the bodily con­
tinuity identification, concerned itself with the
first-personal issue of what A could expect. That
this is so seems to me (though I will not discuss it
further here) of some significance.
I will end by suggesting one rather shaky way in
which one might approach a resolution of the prob­
lem, using only the limited materials already avail­
able.
The apparently decisive arguments of the first
presentation, which suggested that A should iden­
tify himself with the B-body-person, turned on the
extreme neatness of the situation in satisfying, if
any could, the description of 'changing bodies'. But
this neatness is basically artificial; it is the product
of the will of the experimenter to produce a situa­
tion which would naturally elicit, with minimum
hesitation, that description. By the sorts of meth­
ods he employed, he could easily have left off earl­
ier or gone on further. He could have stopped at
situation (v), leaving B as he was; or he could have
gone on and produced two persons each with \nBernard Williams
A-like character and memories, as well as one or
two with B-like characteristics. If he had done
either of those, we should have been in yet greater
difficulty about what to say; he just chose to make it
as easy as possible for us to find something to say.
Now if we had some model of ghostly persons in
bodies, which were in some sense actually moved
around by certain procedures, we could regard the
neat experiment just as the effective experiment: the
one method that really did result in the ghostly
persons' changing places without being destroyed,
dispersed, or whatever. But we cannot seriously
use such a model. The experimenter has not in
the sense of that model induced a change of bodies;
Notes
Sydney Shoemaker, Self-Knowledge and Self-Jdenti~y
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1963), pp.
23ff.
2 This of course does not have to be the crucial ques­
tion, but it seems one fair way of taking up the present
objection.
he has rather produced the one situation out of a
range of equally possible situations which we
should be most disposed to call a change of bodies.
As against this, the principle that one's fears can
extend to future pain whatever psychological
changes precede it seems positively straightfor­
ward. Perhaps, indeed, it is not; but we need to
be shown what is wrong with it. Until we are shown
what is wrong with it, we should perhaps decide
that if we were the person A then, if we were to
decide selfishly, we should pass the pain to the B­
body-person. It would be risky: that there is room
for the notion of a risk here is itself a major feature
of the problem.
3 For a more detailed treatment of issues related to this,
see 'Imagination and the self, in Bernard Williams,
Problems o/the Se! f(Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1973), pp. 38[f. \nDerek Parfit
We can, I think, describe cases in which, though
we know the answer to every other question, we
have no idea how to answer a question about
personal identity. These cases are not covered by
the criteria of personal identity that we actually
use.
Do they present a problem?
It might be thought that they do not, because
they could never occur. I suspect that some of them
could. (Some, for instance, might become scientif­
ically possible. ) But I shall claim that even if they
did, they would present no problem.
My targets are two beliefs: one about the nature
of personal identity, the other about its importance.
The first is that in these cases the question about
identity must have an answer.
No one thinks this about, say, nations or
machines. Our criteria for the identity of these do
not cover certain cases. No one thinks that in these
cases the questions "Is it the same nation? " or "Is it
the same machine? " must have answers.
Some people believe that in this respect they are
different. They agree that our criteria of personal
identity do not cover certain cases, but they believe
that the nature of their own identity through
time is, somehow, such as to guarantee that in
these cases questions about their identity must
have answers. This belief might be expressed as
Originally published in Phifosophical Review 80 (1971).
pp. 3-27. Reprinted by permission of the author and
Cornell University.
follows: "Whatever happens between now and any
future time, either I shall still exist, or I shall not.
Any future experience will either be my experience,
or it will not. "
This first belief - in the special nature of per­
sonal identity - has, I think, certain effects. It
makes people assume that the principle of self­
interest is more rationally compelling than any
moral principle. And it makes them more
depressed by the thought of aging and of death.
I cannot see how to disprove this first belief. I
shall describe a problem case. But this can only
make it seem implausible.
Another approach might be this. We might sug­
gest that one cause of the belief is the projection of
our emotions. When we imagine ourselves in a
problem case, we do feel that the question
"Would it be me? " must have an answer. But
what we take to be a bafflement about a further
fact may be only the bafflement of our concern.
I shall not pursue this suggestion here. But
one cause of our concern is the belief which is
my second target. This is that unless the question
about identity has an answer, we cannot answer
certain important questions (questions about
such matters as survival, memory and respons­
ibility).
Against this second belief my claim will be
this. Certain important questions do presuppose
a question about personal identity. But they can
be freed of this presupposition. And when they
are, the question about identity has no import­
ance. \nDerek Parfit
I
We can start by considering the much discussed
case of the man who, like an amoeba, divides. I
Wiggins has recently dramatized this case. 2 He
first referred to the operation imagined by Shoe­
maker. 3 We suppose that my brain is transplanted
into someone else's (brainless) body, and that the
resulting person has my character and apparent
memories of my life. Most of us would agree,
after thought, that the resulting person is me. I
shall here assume such agreement. 4
Wiggins then imagined his own operation. My
brain is divided, and each half is housed in a new
body. Both resulting people have my character and
apparent memories of my life.
What happens to me? There seem only three
possibilities: (l) I do not survive; (2) I survive as
one of the two people; (3) I survive as both.
The trouble with (1) is this. We agreed that I
could survive if my brain were successfully trans­
planted. And people have in fact survived with half
their brains destroyed. It seems to follow that I
could survive if half my brain were successfully
transplanted and the other half were destroyed.
But if this is so, how could I not survive if the
other half were also successfully transplanted?
How could a double success be a failure?
We can move to the second description. Perhaps
one success is the maximum score. Perhaps I shall
be one of the resulting people.
The trouble here is that in Wiggins's case each
half of my brain is exactly similar, and so, to start
with, is each resulting person. So how can I survive
as only one of the two people? What can make me
one of them rather than the other?
It seems clear that both of these descriptions -
that I do not survive, and that I survive as one of
the people - are highly implausible. Those who
have accepted them must have assumed that they
were the only possible descriptions.
What about our third description: that I survive
as both people?
It might be said, "If 'survive' implies identity,
this description makes no sense - you cannot be
two people. If it does not, the description is irrelev­
ant to a problem about identity. "
I shall later deny the second of these remarks.
But there are ways of denying the first. We might
say, "What we have called 'the two resulting peo­
ple' are not two people. They are one person. I do
survive Wiggins's operation. Its effect is to give me
two bodies and a divided mind. "
It would shorten my argument if this were
absurd. But I do not think it is. It is worth showing
why.
We can, I suggest, imagine a divided mind. We
can imagine a man having two simultaneous
experiences, in having each of which he is unaware
of having the other.
We may not even need to imagine this. Certain
actual cases, to which Wiggins referred, seem to be
best described in these terms. These involve the
cutting of the bridge between the hemispheres of
the brain. The aim was to cure epilepsy. But the
result appears to be, in the surgeon's words, the
creation of "two separate spheres of conscious­
ness, "s each of which controls one half of the
patient's body. What is experienced in each is,
presumably, experienced by the patient.
There are certain complications in these actual
cases. So let us imagine a simpler case.
Suppose that the bridge between my hemi­
spheres is brought under my voluntary control.
This would enable me to disconnect my hemi­
spheres as easily as if I were blinking. By doing
this, I would divide my mind. And we can suppose
that when my mind is divided, I can, in each half,
bring about reunion.
This ability would have obvious uses. To give an
example: I am near the end of a maths exam, and
see two ways of tackling the last problem. I decide
to divide my mind, to work, with each half, at one
of two calculations, and then to reunite my mind
and write a fair copy of the best result.
What shall I experience?
When I disconnect my hemispheres, my con­
sciousness divides into two streams. But this divi­
sion is not something that I experience. Each of my
two streams of consciousness seems to have been
straightforwardly continuous with my one stream
of consciousness up to the moment of division. The
only changes in each stream are the disappearance
of half my visual field and the loss of sensation in,
and control over, half my body.
Consider my experiences in what we can call my
"right-handed" stream. I remember that I assigned
my right hand to the longer calculation. This I now
begin. In working at this calculation I can see, from
the movements of my left hand, that I am also
working at the other. But I am not aware of work­
ing at the other. So I might, in my right-handed
stream, wonder how, in my left-handed stream, I
am getting on.
My work is now over. I am about to reunite my
mind. What should I, in each stream, expect? Sim-\nply that I shall suddenly seem to remember just
having thought out two calculations, in thinking
out each of which I was not aware of thinking out
the other. This, I submit, we can imagine. And if
my mind was divided, these memories are correct.
In describing this episode, I assumed that there
were two series of thoughts, and that they were
both mine. If my two hands visibly wrote out two
calculations, and if I claimed to remember two
corresponding series of thoughts, this is surely
what we should want to say.
If it is, then a person's mental history need not
be like a canal, with only one channel. It could be
like a river, with islands, and with separate streams.
To apply this to Wiggins's operation: we men­
tioned the view that it gives me two bodies and a
divided mind. We cannot now call this absurd. But
it is, I think, unsatisfactory.
There were two features of the case of the exam
that made us want to say that only one person was
involved. The mind was soon reunited, and there
was only one body. If a mind was permanently
divided and its halves developed in different
ways, the point of speaking of one person would
start to disappear. Wiggins's case, where there are
also two bodies, seems to be over the borderline.
After I have had his operation, the two "products"
each have all the attributes of a person. They could
live at opposite ends of the earth. (If they later met,
they might even fail to recognize each other. ) It
would become intolerable to deny that they were
different people.
Suppose we admit that they are different people.
Could we still claim that I survived as both, using
"survive" to imply identity?
We could. For we might suggest that two people
could compose a third. We might say, "I do survive
Wiggins's operation as two people. They can be
different people, and yet be me, in just the way in
which the Pope's three crowns are one crown. ,, 6
This is a possible way of giving sense to the claim
that I survive as two different people, using "sur­
vive" to imply identity. But it keeps the language of
identity only by changing the concept of a person.
And there are obvious objections to this change. 7
The alternative, for which I shall argue, is to give
up the language of identity. We can suggest that I
survive as two different people without implying
that I am these people.
When I first mentioned this alternative, I men­
tioned this objection: "If your new way of talking
does not imply identity, it cannot solve our prob­
lem. For that is about identity. The problem is
Personal Identity
that all the possible answers to the question about
identity are highly implausible. "
We can now answer this objection.
We can start by reminding ourselves that this is
an objection only if we have one or both of the
beliefs which I mentioned at the start of this paper.
The first was the belief that to any question
about personal identity, in any describable case,
there must be a true answer. For those with this
belief, Wiggins's case is doubly perplexing. If all
the possible answers are implausible, it is hard to
decide which of them is true, and hard even to keep
the belief that one of them must be true. If we give
up this belief, as I think we should, these problems
disappear. We shall then regard the case as like
many others in which, for quite unpuzzling rea­
sons, there is no answer to a question about iden­
tity. (Consider "Was England the same nation after
1066? '')
Wiggins's case makes the first belief implausible.
It also makes it trivial. For it undermines the sec­
ond belief. This was the belief that important ques­
tions turn upon the question about identity. (It is
worth pointing out that those who have only this
second belief do not think that there must be an
answer to this question, but rather that we must
decide upon an answer. )
Against this second belief my claim is this. Cer­
tain questions do presuppose a question about per­
sonal identity. And because these questions are
important, Wiggins's case does present a problem.
But we cannot solve this problem by answering the
question about identity. We can solve this problem
only by taking these important questions and priz­
ing them apart from the question about identity.
After we have done this, the question about iden­
tity (though we might for the sake of neatness
decide it) has no further interest.
Because there are several questions which pre­
suppose identity, this claim will take some time to
fill out.
We can first return to the question of survival.
This is a special case, for survival does not so much
presuppose the retaining of identity as seem
equivalent to it. It is thus the general relation
which we need to prize apart from identity. We
can then consider particular relations, such as those
involved in memory and intention.
"Will I survive? " seems, I said, equivalent to
"Will there be some person alive who is the same
person as me? "
If we treat these questions as equivalent, then
the least unsatisfactory description of Wiggins's \nDerek Parfit
case is, I think, that I survive with two bodies and a
divided mind.
Several writers have chosen to say that I am
neither of the resulting people. Given our equival­
ence, this implies that I do not survive, and hence,
presumably, that even if Wiggins's operation is not
literally death, I ought, since I will not survive it, to
regard it as death. But this seemed absurd.
It is worth repeating why. An emotion or atti­
tude can be criticized for resting on a false belief, or
for being inconsistent. A man who regarded Wig­
gins's operation as death must, I suggest, be open
to one of these criticisms.
He might believe that his relation to each of the
resulting people fails to contain some element
which is contained in survival. But how can this
be true? We agreed that he would survive ifhe stood
in this very same relation to only one of the result­
ing people. So it cannot be the nature of this rela­
tion which makes it fail, in Wiggins's case, to be
survival. It can only be its duplication.
Suppose that our man accepts this, but still
regards division as death. His reaction would now
seem wildly inconsistent. He would be like a man
who, when told of a drug that could double his
years of life, regarded the taking of this drug as
death. The only difference in the case of division
is that the extra years are to run concurrently.
This is an interesting difference. But it cannot
mean that there are no years to run.
I have argued this for those who think that there
must, in Wiggins's case, be a true answer to the
question about identity. For them, we might add,
"Perhaps the original person does lose his identity.
But there may be other ways to do this than to die.
One other way might be to multiply. To regard
these as the same is to confuse nought with two. "
For those who think that the question of identity
is up for decision, it would be clearly absurd to
regard Wiggins's operation as death. These people
would have to think, "We could have chosen to say
that I should be one of the resulting people. If we
had, I should not have regarded it as death. But
since we have chosen to say that I am neither
person, I do. " This is hard even to understand. s
My first conclusion, then, is this. The relation of
the original person to each of the resulting people
contains all that interests us - all that matters - in
any ordinary case of survival. This is why we need a
sense in which one person can survive as two. 9
One of my aims in the rest of this paper will be to
suggest such a sense. But we can first make some
general remarks.
II
Identity is a one-one relation. Wiggins's case
serves to show that what matters in survival need
not be one-one.
Wiggins's case is of course, unlikely to occur.
The relations which matter are, in fact, one-one. It
is because they are that we can imply the holding of
these relations by using the language of identity.
This use of language is convenient. But it can
lead us astray. We may assume that what matters is
identity and, hence, has the properties of identity.
In the case of the property of being one-one,
this mistake is not serious. For what matters is in
fact one-one. But in the case of another property,
the mistake is serious. Identity is all-or-nothing.
Most of the relations which matter in survival are,
in fact, relations of degree. If we ignore this, we
shall be led into quite ill-grounded attitudes and
beliefs.
The claim that I have just made - that most of
what matters are relations of degree - I have yet to
support. Wiggins's case shows only that these rela­
tions need not be one-one. The merit of the case is
not that it shows this in particular, but that it makes
the first break between what matters and identity.
The belief that identity is what matters is hard to
overcome. This is shown in most discussions of the
problem cases which actually occur: cases, say, of
amnesia or of brain damage. Once Wiggins's case
has made one breach in this belief, the rest should
be easier to remove. \0
To turn to a recent debate: most of the relations
which matter can be provisionally referred to under
the heading "psychological continuity" (which
includes causal continuity). My claim is thus that
we use the language of personal identity in order to
imply such continuity. This is close to the view that
psychological continuity provides a criterion of
identity.
Williams has attacked this view with the follow­
ing argument. Identity is a one-one relation. So
any criterion of identity must appeal to a relation
which is logically one- one. Psychological continu­
ity is not logically one-one. So it cannot provide a
criterion. II
Some writers have replied that it is enough if the
relation appealed to is always in fact one-one. 12
I suggest a slightly different reply. Psychological
continuity is a ground for speaking of identity
when it is one-one.
If psychological continuity took a one-many or
branching form, we should need, I have argued, to \nabandon the language of identity. So this possibil­
ity would not count against this view.
We can make a stronger claim. This possibility
would count in its favor.
The view might be defended as follows. Judg­
ments of personal identity have great importance.
What gives them their importance is the fact
that they imply psychological continuity. This is
why, whenever there is such continuity, we ought,
if we can, to imply it by making a judgment of
identity.
If psychological continuity took a branching
form, no coherent set of judgments of identity
could correspond to, and thus be used to imply,
the branching form of this relation. But what we
ought to do, in such a case, is take the importance
which would attach to a judgment of identity and
attach this importance directly to each limb of the
branching relation. So this case helps to show that
judgments of personal identity do derive their
importance from the fact that they imply psycho­
logical continuity. It helps to show that when we
can, usefully, speak of identity, this relation is our
ground.
This argument appeals to a principle which
Williams put forward. 13 The principle is that an
important judgment should be asserted and denied
only on importantly different grounds.
Williams applied this principle to a case in which
one man is psychologically continuous with the
dead Guy Fawkes, and a case in which two men
are. His argument was this. If we treat psycholo­
gical continuity as a sufficient ground for speaking
of identity, we shall say that the one man is Guy
Fawkes. But we could not say that the two men are,
although we should have the same ground. This
disobeys the principle. The remedy is to deny that
the one man is Guy Fawkes, to insist that sameness
of the body is necessary for identity.
Williams's principle can yield a different answer.
Suppose we regard psychological continuity as
more important than sameness of the body. 14 And
suppose that the one man really is psychologically
(and causally) continuous with Guy Fawkes. If he
is, it would disobey the principle to deny that he is
Guy Fawkes, for we have the same important
ground as in a normal case of identity. In the case
of the two men, we again have the same important
ground. So we ought to take the importance from
the judgment of identity and attach it directly to
this ground. We ought to say, as in Wiggins's case,
that each limb of the branching relation is as good
as survival. This obeys the principle.
Personal Identity
To sum up these remarks: even if psychological
continuity is neither logically, nor always in fact,
one-one, it can provide a criterion of identity. For
this can appeal to the relation of non-branching
psychological continuity, which is logically one­
one. IS
The criterion might be sketched as follows. "X
and Yare the same person if they are psychologi­
cally continuous and there is no person who is
contemporary with either and psychologically con­
tinuous with the other. " We should need to explain
what we mean by "psychologically continuous"
and say how much continuity the criterion
requires. We should then, I think, have described
a sufficient condition for speaking of identity. 16
We need to say something more. If we admit that
psychological continuity might not be one-one, we
need to say what we ought to do if it were not one­
one. Otherwise our account would be open to the
objections that it is incomplete and arbitrary. 17
I have suggested that if psychological continuity
took a branching form, we ought to speak in a new
way, regarding what we describe as having the
same significance as identity. This answers these
objections. IS
We can now return to our discussion. We have
three remaining aims. One is to suggest a sense of
"survive" which does not imply identity. Another
is to show that most of what matters in survival are
relations of degree. A third is to show that none of
these relations needs to be described in a way that
presupposes identity.
We can take these aims in the reverse order.
III
The most important particular relation is that
involved in memory. This is because it is so easy
to believe that its description must refer to iden­
tity. 19 This belief about memory is an important
cause of the view that personal identity has a special
nature. But it has been well discussed by Shoe­
maker20 and by Wiggins. 21 So we can be brief.
It may be a logical truth that we can only remem­
ber our own experiences. But we can frame a new
concept for which this is not a logical truth. Let us
call this "q-memory".
To sketch a definition22 I am q-remembering an
experience if (I) I have a belief about a past experi­
ence which seems in itself like a memory belief, (2)
someone did have such an experience, and (3) my
beliefs is dependent upon this experience in the \nDerek Parfit
same way (whatever that is) in which a memory of
an experience is dependent upon it.
According to (1), q-memories seem like mem­
ories. So I q-remember having experiences.
This may seem to make q-memory presuppose
identity. One might say, "My apparent memory of
having an experience is an apparent memory of my
having an experience. So how could I q-remember
my having other people's experiences? "
This objection rests on a mistake. When I seem
to remember an experience, I do indeed seem to
remember having it. 23 But it cannot be a part of
what I seem to remember about this experience
that I, the person who now seems to remember it,
am the person who had this experience. 24 That I am
is something that I automatically assume. (My
apparent memories sometimes come to me simply
as the belief that I had a certain experience. ) But it
is something that I am justified in assuming only
because I do not in fact have q-memories of other
people's experiences.
Suppose that I did start to have such q-mem­
ories. If I did, I should cease to assume that my
apparent memories must be about my own experi­
ences. I should come to assess an apparent memory
by asking two questions: (1) Does it tell me about a
past experience? (2) If so, whose?
Moreover (and this is a crucial point) my appar­
ent memories would now come to me as q-mem­
ories. Consider those of my apparent memories
which do come to me simply as beliefs about my
past: for example, "I did that. " If I knew that I
could q-remember other people's experiences,
these beliefs would come to me in a more guarded
form: for example, "Someone - probably I - did
that. " I might have to work out who it was.
I have suggested that the concept of q-memory is
coherent. Wiggins's case provides an illustration.
The resulting people, in his case, both have appar­
ent memories of living the life of the original per­
son. If they agree that they are not this person, they
will have to regard these as only q-memories. And
when they are asked a question like "Have you
heard this music before? ", they might have to
answer "I am sure that I q-remember hearing it.
But I am not sure whether I remember hearing it.
I am not sure whether it was I who heard it, or the
original person. "
We can next point out that on our definition
every memory is also a q-memory. Memories are,
simply, q-memories of one's own experiences.
Since this is so, we could afford now to drop the
concept of memory and use in its place the wider
concept q-memory. If we did, we should describe
the relation between an experience and what we
now call a "memory" of this experience in a way
which does not presuppose that they are had by the
same person. 25
This way of describing this relation has certain
merits. It vindicates the "memory criterion" of
personal identity against the charge of circularity. z6
And it might, I think, help with the problem of
other minds.
But we must move on. We can next take the
relation between an intention and a later action. It
may be a logical truth that we can intend to per­
form only our own actions. But intentions can be
redescribed as q-intentions. And one person could
q-intend to perform another person's actions.
Wiggins's case again provides the illustration.
We are supposing that neither of the resulting
people is the original person. If so, we shall have
to agree that the original person can, before the
operation, q-intend to perform their actions. He
might, for example, q-intend, as one of them, to
continue his present career, and, as the other, to try
something new. 27 (I say "q-intcnd as one of
them" because the phrase "q-intend that one
of them" would not convey the directness of the
relation which is involved. If! intend that someone
else should do something, I cannot get him to do it
simply by forming this intention. But if I am the
original person, and he is one of the resulting
people, I can. )
The phrase "q-intend as one of them" reminds
us that we need a sense in which one person can
survive as two. But we can first point out that the
concepts of q-memory and q-intention give us our
model for the others that we need: thus, a man
who can q-remember could q-recognize, and be a
q-witness of, what he has never seen; and a man
who can q-intend could have q-ambitions, make q­
promises, and be q-responsible for.
To put this claim in general terms: many differ­
ent relations are included within, or are a con­
sequence of, psychological continuity. We describe
these relations in ways which presuppose the con­
tinued existence of one person. But we could
describe them in new ways which do not.
This suggests a bolder claim. It might be poss­
ible to think of experiences in a wholly "imperso­
nal" way. I shall not develop this claim here. What
I shall try to describe is a way of thinking of our
own identity through time which is more flexible,
and less misleading, than the way in which we now
think. \nThis way of thinking will allow for a sense in
which one person can survive as two. A more
important feature is that it treats survival as a
matter of degree.
IV
We must first show the need for this second fea­
ture. I shall use two imaginary examples.
The first is the converse of Wiggins's case:
fusion. Just as division serves to show that what
matters in survival need not be one-one, so fusion
serves to show that it can be a question of degree.
Physically, fusion is easy to describe. Two peo­
ple come together. While they are unconscious,
their two bodies grow into one. One person then
wakes up.
The psychology of fusion is more complex. One
detail we have already dealt with in the case of the
exam. When my mind was reunited, I remembered
just having thought out two calculations. The one
person who results from a fusion can, similarly,
q-remember living the lives of the two original
people. None of their q-memories need be lost.
But some things must be lost. For any two
people who fuse together will have different char­
acteristics, different desires, and different inten­
tions. How can these be combined?
We might suggest the following. Some of these
will be compatible. These can coexist in the one
resulting person. Some will be incompatible.
These, if of equal strength, can cancel out, and
if of different strengths, the stronger can be
made weaker. And all these effects might be pre­
dictable.
To give examples - first, of compatibility: I like
Palladio and intend to visit Venice. I am about to
fuse with a person who likes Giotto and intends to
visit Padua. I can know that the one person we shall
become will have both tastes and both intentions.
Second, of incompatibility: I hate red hair, and
always vote Labour. The other person loves red
hair, and always votes Conservative. I can know
that the one person we shall become will be indif­
ferent to red hair, and a floating voter.
If we were about to undergo a fusion of this kind,
would we regard it as death?
Some of us might. This is less absurd than
regarding division as death. For after my division
the two resulting people will be in every way like
me, while after my fusion the one resulting person
will not be wholly similar. This makes it easier to
Personal Identity
say, when faced with fusion, "I shall not survive",
thus continuing to regard survival as a matter of all­
or-nothing.
This reaction is less absurd. But here are two
analogies which tell against it.
First, fusion would involve the changing of some
of our characteristics and some of our desires. But
only the very self-satisfied would think of this as
death. Many people welcome treatments with these
effects.
Second, someone who is about to fuse can have,
beforehand, just as much "intentional control"
over the actions of the resulting individual as some­
one who is about to marry can have, beforehand,
over the actions of the resulting couple. And the
choice of a partner for fusion can be just as well
considered as the choice of a marriage partner. The
two original people can make sure (perhaps by
"trial fusion") that they do have compatible char­
acters, desires and intentions.
I have suggested that fusion, while not clearly
survival, is not clearly failure to survive, and hence
that what matters in survival can have degrees.
To reinforce this claim, we can now turn to a
second example. This is provided by certain ima­
ginary beings. These beings are just like ourselves
except that they reproduce by a process of natural
division.
We can illustrate the histories of these imagined
beings with the aid of a diagram (fig. 29. 1). The
lines on the diagram represent the spatiotemporal
paths which would be traced out by the bodies of
these beings. We can call each single line (like the
double line) a "branch"; and we can call the whole
structure a "tree". And let us suppose that each
"branch" corresponds to what is thought of as the
life of one individual. These individuals are
referred to as "A", "B + I", and so forth.
Now, each single division is an instance of Wig­
gins's case. So A's relation to both B + I and B + 2
is just as good as survival. But what of A's relation
to B + 3D?
I said earlier that what matters in survival could
be provisionally referred to as "psychological con­
tinuity". I must now distinguish this relation from
another, which I shall call "psychological connect­
edness".
Let us say that the relation between a q-memory
and the experience q-remembered is a "direct"
relation. Another "direct" relation is that which
holds between a q-intention and the q-intended
action. A third is that which holds between differ­
ent expressions of some lasting q-characteristic. \nDerek Parfit
_Space_
I I I I
I I I I
I, I, I, I,
+15 \ I I' I' I'
8, /I' I' I' I'
+7
8
Figure 29. 1
"Psychological connectedness", as I define it,
requires the holding of these direct psychological
relations. "Connectedness" is not transitive, since
these relations are not transitive. Thus, if X q­
remembers most of Y's life, and Y q-remembers
most of Z's life, it does not follow that X q-remem­
bers most of Z's life. And if X carries out the q­
intentions of Y, and Y carries out the q-intentions
of Z, it does not follow that X carries out the
q-intentions of Z.
"Psychological continuity", in contrast, only
requires overlapping chains of direct psychological
relations. So "continuity" is transitive.
To return to our diagram. A is psychologically
continuous with B + 30. There are between the
two continuous chains of overlapping relations.
Thus, A has q-intentional control over B + 2,
B + 2 has q-intentional control over B + 6, and so
on up to B + 30. Or B + 30 can q-remember the
life of B + 14, B + 14 can q-remember the life of
B + 6, and so on back to A. 2R
A, however, need not be psychologically con­
nected to B + 30. Connectedness requires direct
relations. And if these beings are like us, A cannot
stand in such relations to every individual in his
indefinitely long "tree". Q-memories will weaken
with the passage of time, and then fade away. Q­
ambitions, once fulfilled, will be replaced by
others. Q-characteristics will gradually change. In
general, A stands in fewer and fewer direct psy­
chological relations to an individual in his "tree"
the more remote that individual is. And if the
individual is (like B + 30) sufficiently remote,
there may be between the two no direct psycholo­
gical relations.
Now that we have distinguished the general
relations of psychological continuity and psycholo-, ,
I,
I,
I, ,, ,, ,,
I, I, I,
I, I,
\, " 8+30 I, I,
+14
8
t
(later)
Time
t earlier
gical connectedness, I suggest that connectedness
is a more important element in survival. As a claim
about our own survival, this would need more
arguments than I have space to give. But it seems
clearly true for my imagined beings. A is as close
psychologically to B + I as I today am to myself
tomorrow. A is as distant from B + 30 as I am from
my great-great-grandson.
Even if connectedness is not more important
than continuity, the fact that one of these is a
relation of degree is enough to show that what
matters in survival can have degrees. And in any
case the two relations are quite different. So our
imagined beings would need a way of thinking in
which this difference is recognized.
v
What I propose is this.
First, A can think of any individual, anywhere in
his "tree", as "a descendant self'. This phrase
implies psychological continuity. Similarly, any
later individual can think of any earlier individual
on the single path29 which connects him to A as "an
ancestral self'.
Since psychological continuity is transitive,
"being an ancestral self of' and "being a descend­
ant self of' are also transitive.
To imply psychological connectedness, I suggest
the phrases "one of my future selves" and "one of
my past selves".
These are the phrases with which we can
describe Wiggins's case. For having past and future
selves is, what we needed, a way of continuing to
exist which does not imply identity through time.
The original person does, in this sense, survive \nWiggins's operation: the two resulting people are
his later selves. And they can each refer to him as
"my past self'. (They can share a past self without
being the same self as each other. )
Since psychological connectedness is not trans­
itive, and is a matter of degree, the relations "being
a past self of' and "being a future self of' should
themselves be treated as relations of degree. We
allow for this series of descriptions: "my most
recent self', "one of my earlier selves", "one of
my distant selves", "hardly one of my past selves (I
can only q-remember a few of his experiences), "
and, finally, "not in any way one of my past selves­
just an ancestral self. "
This way of thinking would clearly suit our first
imagined beings. But let us now turn to a second
kind of being. These reproduce by fusion as well as
by division. ]() And let us suppose that they fuse
every autumn and divide every spring. This yields
figure 29. 2
If A is the individual whose life is represented by
the three-lined "branch, " the two-lined "tree"
represents those lives which are psychologically
continuous with A's life. (It can be seen that each
individual has his own "tree, " which overlaps with
many others. )
For the imagined beings in this second world,
the phrases "an ancestral self' and "a descendant
self' would cover too much to be of much use.
(There may well be pairs of dates such that every
individual who ever lived before the first date was
an ancestral self of every individual who ever will
live after the second date. ) Conversely, since the
lives of each individual last for only half a year, the
word "I" would cover too little to do all of the work
which it does for us. So part of this work would
have to be done, for these second beings, by talk
about past and future selves.
We can now point out a theoretical flaw in our
proposed way of thinking. The phrase "a past self
of' implies psychological connectedness. Being a
past self of is treated as a relation of degree, so
t
Time
•
Figure 29. 2
--Space--
¥--'---spring
k-"--autumn
spring
autumn
Personal Identity
that this phrase can be used to imply the varying
degrees of psychological connectedness. But this
phrase can imply only the degrees of connectedness
between different lives. It cannot be used within a
single life. And our way of delimiting successive
lives does not refer to the degrees of psychological
connectedness. Hence there is no guarantee that
this phrase, "a past self of, " could be used when­
ever it was needed. There is no guarantee that
psychological connectedness will not vary in degree
within a single life.
This flaw would not concern our imagined
beings. For they divide and unite so frequently,
and their lives are in consequence so short, that
within a single life psychological connectedness
would always stand at a maximum.
But let us look, finally, at a third kind of being.
In this world there is neither division nor union.
There are a number of everlasting bodies, which
gradually change in appearance. And direct psy­
chological relations, as before, hold only over lim­
ited periods of time. This can be illustrated with a
third diagram (figure 29. 3). In this diagram the two
shadings represent the degrees of psychological
connectedness to their two central points.
These beings could not use the way of thinking
that we have proposed. Since there is no branching
of psychological continuity, they would have to
regard themselves as immortal. It might be said
that this is what they are. But there is, I suggest, a
better description.
Our beings would have one reason for thinking
of themselves as immortal. The parts of each "line"
are all psychologically continuous. But the parts of
each "line" are not all psychologically connected.
Direct psychological relations hold only between
those parts which are close to each other in time.
This gives our beings a reason for not thinking of
__ Space-.
I I
t
Time
•
Figure 29. 3 \nDerek Parfit
each "line" as corresponding to one single life. For
if they did, they would have no way of implying
these direct relations. When a speaker says, for
example, "I spent a period doing such and such, "
his hearers would not be entitled to assume that the
speaker has any memories of this period, that his
character then and now are in any way similar, that
he is now carrying out any of the plans or intentions
which he then had, and so forth. Because the word
"I" would carry none of these implications, it
would not have for these "immortal" beings the
usefulness which it has for us. 3!
To gain a better way of thinking, we must revise
the way of thinking that we proposed above. The
revision is this. The distinction between successive
selves can be made by reference, not to the branch­
ing of psychological continuity, but to the degrees
of psychological connectedness. Since this con­
nectedness is a matter of degree, the drawing of
these distinctions can be left to the choice of the
speaker and be allowed to vary from context to
context.
On this way of thinking, the word "I" can be
used to imply the greatest degree of psychological
connectedness. When the connections are reduced,
when there has been any marked change of char­
acter or style oflife, or any marked loss of memory,
our imagined beings would say, "It was not I who
did that, but an earlier self. " They could then
describe in what ways, and to what degree, they
are related to this earlier self.
This revised way of thinking would suit not only
our "immortal" beings. It is also the way in which
we ourselves could think about our lives. And it is,
I suggest, surprisingly natural.
One of its features, the distinction between suc­
cessive selves, has already been used by several
writers. To give an example, from Proust: "we
are incapable, while we are in love, of acting as fit
predecessors of the next persons who, when we are
in love no longer, we shall presently have
become. .. ,, 32
Although Proust distinguished between success­
ive selves, he still thought of one person as being
these different selves. This we would not do on the
way of thinking that I propose. IfI say, "It will not
be me, but one of my future selves, " I do not imply
that I will be that future self. He is one of my later
selves, and I am one of his earlier selves. There is
no underlying person who we both are.
To point out another feature of this way of
thinking. When I say, "There is no person who
we both are, " I am only giving my decision.
Another person could say, "It will be you, " thus
deciding differently. There is no question of either
of these decisions being a mistake. Whether to say
"I, " or "one of my future selves, " or "a descendant
self' is entirely a matter of choice. The matter of
fact, which must be agreed, is only whether the
disjunction applies. (The question "Are X and Y
the same person? " thus becomes "Is X at least an
ancestral (or descendant) self of Y? ")
VI
I have tried to show that what matters in the
continued existence of a person are, for the most
part, relations of degree. And I have proposed a
way of thinking in which this would be recognized.
I shall end by suggesting two consequences and
asking one question.
It is sometimes thought to be especially rational
to act in our own best interests. But I suggest
that the principle of self-interest has no force.
There are only two genuine competitors in this
particular field. One is the principle of biased
rationality: do what will best achieve what you
actually want. The other is the principle of impar­
tiality: do what is in the best interests of everyone
concerned.
The apparent force of the principle of self­
interest derives, I think, from these two other
principles.
The principle of self-interest is normally sup­
ported by the principle of biased rationality. This is
because most people care about their own future
interests.
Suppose that this prop is lacking. Suppose that a
man does not care what happens to him in, say, the
more distant future. To such a man, the principle
of self-interest can only be propped up by an appeal
to the principle of impartiality. We must say,
"Even if you don't care, you ought to take what
happens to you then equally into account. " But for
this, as a special claim, there seem to me no good
arguments. It can only be supported as part of the
general claim, "You ought to take what happens to
everyone equally into account. ,, 33
The special claim tells a man to grant an equal
weight to all the parts of his future. The argument
for this can only be that all the parts of his future
are equally parts of his future. This is true. But it is
a truth too superficial to bear the weight of the
argument. (To give an analogy: The unity of a
nation is, in its nature, a matter of degree. It is \ntherefore only a superficial truth that all of a man's
compatriots are equally his compatriots. This truth
cannot support a good argument for nationalism. )34
I have suggested that the principle of self-inter­
est has no strength of its own. If this is so, there is
no special problem in the fact that what we ought to
do can be against our interests. There is only the
general problem that it may not be what we want
to do.
The second consequence which I shall mention
is implied in the first. Egoism, the fear not of near
but of distant death, the regret that so much of
one's on~y life should have gone by - these are not,
I think, wholly natural or instinctive. They are all
strengthened by the beliefs about personal identity
Notes
I have been helped in writing this by D. Wiggins, D. F.
Pears, P. F. Strawson, A. ]. Ayer, M. Woods, N. New­
man, and (through his publications) S. Shoemaker.
Implicit in John Locke, Essay Concerning Human
Understanding, ed. John W. Yolton, (London: ]. M.
Dent and New York: E. P. Dutton, 1961) vol. 2, ch.
27, sect. 18 and discussed by (among others) A. N.
Prior in "Opposite number, " Review of Metaphysics
II (1957-8), and idem, "Time, existence and iden­
tity, " Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 57 (1965-
6); ]. Bennett in "The simplicity of the soul, " Journal
of Philosophy 64 (1967); and R. Chisholm and S.
Shoemaker in "The loose and popular and the strict
and the philosophical senses of identity, " in Norman
Care and Robert H. Grimm, Perception and Personal
Identity: Proceeding oflhe 1967 Oberlin Colloquium in
Philosophy, (eds), (Cleveland: Press of Case Western
Reserve University, 1967).
2 David Wiggins, Identity and Spatio-Temporal Con­
tinuity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1967), p. 50.
3 Sydney S. Shoemaker, Self-Knowledge and Self-Iden­
tity (Ithaca, N. Y: Cornell University Press, 1963),
p. 22.
4 Those who would disagree are not making a mistake.
For them my argument would need a different case.
There must be some multiple transplant, faced with
which these people would both find it hard to believe
that there must be an answer to the question about
personal identity, and be able to be shown that noth­
ing of importance turns upon this question.
R. W. Sperry, Brain and Conscious Experience, ed. ]. C.
Eccles (New York: Springer Verlag, 1966), p. 299.
6 Cf. Wiggins, Identity, p. 40.
7 Suppose the resulting people fight a duel. Are there
there three people fighting, one on each side, and one
on both? And suppose one of the bullets kills. Are
Personal Identity
which I have been attacking. If we give up these
beliefs, they should be weakened.
My final question is this. These emotions are
bad, and if we weaken them, we gain. But can we
achieve this gain without, say, also weakening loy­
alty to, or love of, other particular selves? As Hume
warned, the "refined reflections which philosophy
suggests. .. cannot diminish. .. our vicious pas-
sions. .. without diminishing. .. such as are virtu-
ous. They are. .. applicable to all our affections. In
vain do we hope to direct their influence only to
one side. ,, 35
That hope is vain. But Hume had another: that
more of what is bad depends upon false belief. This
is also my hope.
there two acts, one murder and one suicide? How
many people are left alive? One? Two? (We could
hardly say, "One and a half'. ) We could talk in this
way. But instead of saying that the resulting people
are the original person - so that the pair is a trio - it
would be far simpler to treat them as a pair, and
describe their relation to the original person in some
new way. (lowe this suggested way of talking, and the
objections to it, to Michael Woods. )
8 Cf. Sydney Shoemaker, in Perception and Personal
Identity, p. 54.
9 Cf. Wiggins Identity.
10 Bernard Williams's "The self and the future, " this
volume, ch. 28, is relevant here. He asks the question
"Shall I survive? " in a range of problem cases, and he
shows how natural it is to believe (I) that this question
must have an answer, (2) that the answer must be all-or­
nothing, and (3) that there is a "risk" of our reaching the
wrong answer. Because these beliefs are so natural, we
should need in undermining them to discuss their
causes. These, I think, can be found in the ways in
which we misinterpret what it is to remember (cf.
sect. III) and to anticipate (cf. Williams's "Imagination
and the self, " Proceedings of the British Academy 52
(1966), pp. 105-24); andalsoin the way in which certain
features of our egoistic concern - e. g. , that it is simple,
and applies to all imaginable cases - are "projected" on
to its object. (For another relevant discussion, see Ter­
ence Penelhum's Survival and Disembodied Existence
(New York: Humanities Press, 1970, final chapters. )
II Bernard Williams, "Personal identity and Individua­
tion, " Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 57 (1956-
7), pp. 229-53; also his "Bodily continuity and
personal identity: a reply, " Analysis 21 (1960-61),
43-8.
12 ]. M. Shorter, "More about bodily continuity and
personal identity, " Analysis 22 (1961-2), pp. 79-85; \nDerek Parfit
and Mrs J. M. R. Jack (unpublished), who requires
that this truth be embedded in a causal theory.
13 Williams, "Bodily Continuity, " p. 44.
14 For the reasons given by A. M. Quinton in "The
soul, " Journal of Philosophy 59 (1962), pp. 393-409.
15 Cf. S. Shoemaker, "Persons and their pasts, " this
volume, ch. 27, and idem, "Wiggins on identity, "
Philosophical Review 79 (1970), p. 542.
16 But not a necessary condition, for in the absence of
psychological continuity, bodily identity might be
sufficient.
17 Cf. Williams, "Personal identity and individuation, "
pp. 240--1, and idem, "Bodily continuity, " p. 44; and
also Wiggins, Identity, p. 38: "if coincidence under
[the conceptlfis to be genuinely sufficient we must not
withhold identity. .. simply because transitivity is
threatened. "
18 Williams produced another objection to the "psycho­
logical criterion, " that it makes it hard to explain the
difference between the concepts of identity and exact
similarity ("Bodily continuity, " p. 48). But if we
include the requirement of causal continuity, we
avoid this objection (and one of those produced by
Wiggins in his n. 47).
19 Those philosophers who have held this belief, from
Butler onward, are too numerous to cite.
20 Shoemaker, this volume, ch. 27.
21 In a paper on Butler's objection to Locke (not yet
published).
22 I here follow Shoemaker's "quasi-memory. " Cf. also
Penelhum's "retrocognition, " in his article on "Per­
sonal identity, " in Paul Edwards (ed. ), Encyclopedia of
Philosophy.
23 As Shoemaker put it, I seem to remember the experi­
ence "from the inside" (this volume, ch. 27).
24 This is what so many writers have overlooked. Cf.
Thomas Reid: "My memory testifies not only that
this was done, but that it was done by me who now
remember it" ("Of identity, " in Essays on the Intellect­
ual Powers of Man, ed. A. D. Woozley (London:
Macmillan, 1941), p. 203). This mistake is discussed
by A. B. Palma in "Memory and personal identity, "
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 42 (1964), p. 57.
25 It is not logically necessary that we only q-remember
our own experiences. But it might be necessary on
other grounds. This possibility is intriguingly
explored by Shoemaker in his "Persons and their
pasts, " this volume, ch. 27. He shows that q-memories
can provide a knowledge of the world only if the
observations which are q-remembered trace out fairly
continuous spatiotemporal paths. If the observations
which are q-remembered traced out a network of
frequently interlocking paths, they could not, I
think, be usefully ascribed to persisting observers,
but would have to be referred to in some more com­
plex way. But in fact the observations which are q­
remembered trace out single and separate paths; so we
can ascribe them to ourselves. In other words, it is
epistemologically necessary that the observations
which are q-remembered should satisfy a certain gen­
eral condition, one particular form of which allows
them to be usefully self-ascribed.
26 Cf. Wiggins's paper on Butler's objection to Locke.
27 There are complications here. He could form divergent
q-intentions only if he could distinguish, in advance,
between the resulting people (e. g. , as "the Ieft-han­
der" and "the right-hander"). And he could be con­
fident that such divergent q-intentions would be
carried out only ifhe had reason to believe that neither
of the resulting people would change their (inherited)
mind. Suppose he was torn between duty and desire.
He could not solve this dilemma by q-intending, as
one of the resulting people, to do his duty, and, as the
other, to do what he desires. For the one he q­
intended to do his duty would face the same dilemma.
28 The chain of continuity must run in one direction of
time. B + 2 is not, in the sense I intend, psycholo­
gically continuous with B + 1.
29 Cf. Wiggins, Identity.
30 Cf. Shoemaker in "Persons and their pasts, " this
volume, ch. 27.
31 Cf. Austin Duncan Jones, "Man's mortality, " Analy­
sis 28 (1967-8), pp. 65-70.
32 Proust, Within a Budding Grove (New York: Modern
Library, 1949), vol. 1, p. 226 (my own translation).
33 Cf. Thomas Nagel's The Possibility of Altruism
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1970), in which the special
claim is in effect defended as part of the general
claim.
34 The unity of a nation we seldom take for more than
what it is. This is partly because we often think of
nations, not as units, but in a more complex way. Ifwe
thought of ourselves in the way that I proposed, we
might be less likely to take our own identity for more
than what it is. We are, for example, sometimes told,
"It is irrational to act against your own interests. After
all, it will be you who will regret it. " To this we could
reply, "No, not me. Not even one of my future selves.
Just a descendant self. "
35 Hume, "The Sceptic, " in "Essays Moral, Political
and Literary, " Hume's Moral and Political Philosophy
(New York, 1959), p. 349. \n30
Richard Swinburne
1 Empiricist Theories
There are two philosophical questions about per­
sonal identity. The first is: what are the logically
necessary and sufficient conditions for a person P z
at a time tz being the same person as a person PI at
an earlier time tl, lor, loosely, what does it mean to
say that P z is the same person as PI? The second is:
what evidence of observation and experience can
we have that a person Pz at tz is the same person as
a person PI at tl (and how are different pieces of
evidence to be weighed against each other)? Many
writers about personal identity have, however,
needed to give only one account of personal iden­
tity, because their account of the logically necessary
and sufficient conditions of personal identity was in
terms of the evidence of observation and experi­
ence which would establish or oppose claims of
personal identity. They have made no sharp dis­
tinction between the meaning of such claims and
the evidence which supported them. Theories of
this kind we may call empiricist theories.
In this section I shall briefly survey the empiri­
cist theories which have been offered and argue
that they are ultimately unsatisfactory, and so go
on to argue that my two questions have very dif­
ferent answers. What we mean when we say that
two persons are the same is one thing; the evidence
Originally published in Sydney Shoemaker and
Richard Swinburne, Personal Identity, pp. 3-34. Re­
printed by permission of Blackwell Publishers.
which we may have to support our claim is some­
thing very different.
The most natural theory of personal identity
which readily occurs to people, is that personal
identity is constituted by bodily identity. P2 is the
same person as PI ifPz's body is the same body as
PI'S body. The person to whom you are talking
now and call 'John' is the same person as the person
to whom you were talking last week and then called
'John' if and only if he has the same body. To say
that the two bodies - call them BI and B2 - are the
same is not to say that they contain exactly the same
bits of matter. Bodies are continually taking in new
matter (by people eating and drinking and breath­
ing in) and getting rid of matter. But what makes
the bodies the same is that the replacement of
matter is only gradual. The matter which forms
my body is organized in a certain way, into parts -
legs, arms, heart, liver, etc. , which are intercon­
nected and exchange matter and energy in regular
ways. What makes my body today the same body as
my body yesterday is that most of the matter is the
same (although I may have lost some and gained
some) and its organization has remained roughly
the same. 2
This bodily theory of personal identity gives a
somewhat similar account of personal identity to
the account which it is natural to give of the iden­
tity of any material object or plant, and which is
due ultimately to Aristotle (Metaphysics, bk 7).
Aristotle distinguished between substances and
properties. Substances are the individual things,
like tables and chairs, cars and plants, which have \nRichard Swinburne
properties (such as being square or round or red).
Properties are 'universals'; that is, they can be
possessed by many different substances; many dif­
ferent substances can be square or red. Substances
are the individual substances which they are
because of the matter out of which they are made
and the form which is given to that matter. By 'the
form' is meant those properties (normally of shape
and organization), the possession of which is essen­
tial if a substance is to be the substance in question,
the properties which it cannot lose without ceasing
to exist. We thus distinguish between the essential
properties of a substance - those which constitute
its form - and the accidental properties of a sub­
stance. It is among the essential properties of a
certain oak tree that it has under normal condi­
tions, a certain general shape and appearance, a
certain life cycle (of producing leaves in spring
and acorns in autumn); but its exact height, its
position and the distribution of leaves on its tallest
branch are accidental properties. If the matter of
the oak tree is reduced to a heap of planks, the oak
tree, lacking its essential properties, has ceased to
exist. We think of substances as belonging to dif­
ferent kinds, natural - e. g. , oak trees or ferns; or
artificial - e. g. , cars or desks; and the defining
properties of a kind constitute the form of a sub­
stance which belongs to it. Normally there is one
and only one obvious kind to which we ascribe
some given chunk of matter - a particular chunk
of matter which we classify as an oak tree we would
find it very unnatural to classify as belonging to any
other kind - e. g. , as a largely green thing more than
twenty feet high. Although a substance may have
the latter properties, it seems unnatural to think of
them as forming a kind, and so of some substance
being the substance it is because of its possession of
those properties - with the consequence that it
would cease to exist if the matter out of which it
was made became brown instead. But sometimes a
given chunk of matter may be thought of as belong­
ing to one or other kind of thing - e. g. , as a car or as
a motor vehicle; and so we get a different substance
according to the kind of thing we judge the matter
to constitute. If the car is transformed into a lorry,
the substance which was the car has ceased to exist,
but the substance which was the motor vehicle
has not.
What makes a substance the same substance as
an earlier substance is that its matter is the same, or
obtained from the matter of the former substance
by gradual replacement, while continuing to pos­
sess the essential properties which constitute its
form. The table at which I am writing today is
the same table at which I was writing yesterday
because it consists of the same matter (or at any
rate, most of the same matter), organized in the
same way - into the form of a table. For inanimate
things, however, too much replacement of matter,
however gradual, will destroy identity. IfI replace
the drawer of my desk by another drawer, the
desk remains the same desk. But if, albeit gradu­
ally, I replace first the drawers and then the sides
and then the top, so that there is none of the
original matter left, we would say that the resulting
desk was no longer the same desk as the original
desk. For living things, such as plants, total re­
placement of matter - so long as it is gradual, and
so long as physiology and anatomy also change only
gradually if at all - will not destroy identity. The
oak tree is the same as the sapling out of which it
has grown, because replacement of matter has been
gradual, and form (i. e. , shape, physiology and
behaviour) has been largely preserved while any
changes in it have been gradual. 3 This account of
the identity of plants is also one which applies to
social entities - such as a country or an army or a
club. Two armies are the same, so long as any
replacement of soldiers has been gradual and new
soldiers play similar roles in the organization of the
army to the roles played by those who have been
replaced.
Persons too are substances. (Men, or human
beings, are persons of a certain kind - viz. , those
with similar anatomy, physiology and evolutionary
origin to ourselves. There may be persons, e. g. , on
another planet, who are not human beings. ) If we
apply Aristotle's general account of the identity of
substances to persons, it follows that for a person to
be the same person as an earlier person, he has to
have the same matter (or matter obtained from that
earlier person by gradual replacement) organized
into the form of person. The essential properties
which make the form of a person would include, for
Aristotle, not merely shape and physiological prop­
erties, but a kind of way of behaving and a capacity
for a mental life of thought and feeling. For P2 at t2
to be the same person as PI at tl, both have to be
persons (to have a certain kind of body and mental
life) and to be made of the same matter (i. e. , to be
such that P2's body is obtained from PI'S by gra­
dual replacement of parts). Such is the bodily the­
ory of personal identity. It does not deny that
persons have a mental life, but insists that what
makes a person the same as an earlier person is
sameness of body. 4 \nThe difficulty which has been felt by those mod­
ern philosophers basically sympathetic to a bodily
theory of personal identity is this. One part of the
body - viz. , the brain - seems to be of crucial
importance for determining the characteristic
behaviour of the rest. The brain controls not
merely the physiology of the body, but the way
people behave and talk and think. If a man loses
an arm or a leg, we do not think that the subsequent
person is in any way different from the original
person. If a man has a heart transplant or a liver
transplant, again we do not think that the replace­
ment makes a different person. On the other hand,
if the brain of a person PI were removed from his
body Bl and transplanted into the skull of a body
Bz of a person Pz, from which the brain was
removed and then transplanted into the empty
skull of Bl (i. e. , if brains were interchanged), we
would have serious doubt whether PI had any more
the same body. We would be inclined to say that
the person went where his brain went - viz. , that PI
at first had body BI, and then, after the transplant,
body Bz. The reason why we would say this is that
(we have very good scientific reason to believe) the
person with Bz's body would claim to be PI, to have
done and experienced the things which we know PI
to have done, and would have the character, beliefs
and attitudes of Pl. What determines my attitude
towards a person is not so much the matter out of
which his body is made, but who he claims to be,
whether he has knowledge of my past life purport­
edly on the basis of previous acquaintance with me,
and more generally what his beliefs about the world
are and what are his attitudes towards it. Hence a
philosopher seeking a materialist criterion of per­
sonal identity, will come to regard the brain, the
core of the body, rather than the rest of the body as
what matters for personal identity. So this modi­
fied bodily theory states: that Pz is the same person
as PI if and only if Pz has the same central organ
controlling memory and character, viz. , same
brain, as Pl. Let us call it the brain theory of
personal identity. A theory along these lines (with
a crucial qualification, to be discussed shortly) was
tentatively suggested by David Wiggins in Identity
and Spatio-temporal Continuity. 5
The traditional alternative to a bodily theory of
personal identity is the memory-and-character the­
ory. This claims that, given the importance for our
attitude towards persons of their memory claims
and character, continuity in respect of these would
constitute personal identity - whether or not this
continuity is caused by continuity of some bodily
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
organ, such as the brain; and the absence of con­
tinuity of memory and character in some particular
case involves the absence of personal identity, even
if there is continuity in respect of that bodily organ
which produces such continuity between other
persons on other occasions.
The simplest version of this theory was that
given by John Locke. According to Locke, memory
alone, (or 'consciousness', as he often calls it) con­
stitutes personal identity. Loosely - Pz at tz is the
same person as PI at an earlier time tl, if and only if
Pz remembers having done and experienced vari­
ous things, where these things were in fact done
and experienced by P 1
6
Before expounding Locke's theory further, we
need to be clear about the kind of memory which is
involved. First, it is what is sometimes called per­
sonal memory, i. e. , memory of one's own past
experiences. It is thus to be distinguished from
factual memory, which is memory of some fact
known previously, as when I remember that the
battle of Hastings was fought in 1066. This is not a
memory of a past experience. Personal memory is
also to be distinguished from remembering-how
(e. g. , to swim or to ride a bicycle), which is remem­
bering how to perform some task. Secondly, it is
personal memory in the weak sense. In the normal
or strong sense of 'remember', one can only
remember doing something if one really did it. I
may say that I 'remember' going up the Eiffel
Tower, but if I didn't do it, it seems natural to
say that I cannot really remember having done it. In
this sense, just as you can only know what is true,
so you can only remember what you really did.
However, there is also a weak sense of 'remember'
in which a man remembers whatever he believes
that he remembers in the strong sense. One's weak
memories are not necessarily true ones. Now if the
memory criterion defined personal identity in
terms of memory in the strong sense, it would not
be very useful; for to say that Pz remembers having
done what PI did would already entail their being
the same person, and anyone in doubt as to whether
Pz was the same person as PI, would have equal
doubt whether Pz really did remember doing what
PI did. What the criterion as stated is concerned
with is memory in the weak sense, which (because
the strong sense is the more natural one) I shall
henceforward call apparent memory.
So Locke's theory can now be rephrased as fol­
lows: Pz at tz is the same person as PI at an earlier
time tl, if and only if Pz apparently remembers
having done and experienced various things when \nRichard Swinburne
those things were in fact done and experienced by
Pl. A person is who he thinks that he is. Note that
what a person believes about his identity may be
different from what he claims publicly. We only
take public memory claims to be evidence of per­
sonal identity when we believe them to be honest,
to express genuine memory beliefs, i. e. , in my
stated sense apparent memories. No doubt it is
normally right to suppose that memory claims
express apparent memories. But there may be cir­
cumstances in which it is reasonable to doubt this;
e. g. , if the subject has a source other than memory
of the information which he claims to remember, if
it is to his interest to pretend to remember, and if
he is known to be deceitful.
Locke is very clear about the nature and con­
sequences of his theory. If I do not apparently
remember having done something, then I am not
the same person as the person who did it. And if I
do apparently remember having done the deeds of
some person long since dead, then it follows that I
am that person.
If Socrates and the present mayor of Queen­
borough agree in [identity of consciousness],
they are the same person: if the same Socrates
waking and sleeping does not partake of the
same consciousness, Socrates waking and sleep­
ing is not the same person. And to punish
Socrates waking for what sleeping Socrates
thought, and waking Socrates was never con­
scious of, would be no more right, than to
punish one twin for what his brother twin did,
whereof he knew nothing. 7
Locke's theory needs tidying up if we are to
avoid absurdity. Consider, first, the following
objection made by Thomas Reid:
Suppose a brave officer to have been flogged
when a boy at school for robbing an orchard, to
have taken a standard from the enemy in his
first campaign, and to have been made a general
in advanced life; suppose also, which must be
admitted to be possible, that, when he took the
standard, he was conscious of his having been
flogged at school, and that, when made a gen­
eral, he was conscious of his taking the stand­
ard, but had absolutely lost the consciousness of
his flogging. These things being supposed, it
follows, from Mr Locke's doctrine, that he who
was flogged at school is the same person who
took the standard, and that he who took the
standard is the same person who was made a
general. Whence it follows if there be any truth
in logic, that the general is the same person with
him who was flogged at school. But the gener­
al's consciousness does not reach so far back as
his flogging; therefore according to Mr Locke's
doctrine, he is not the same person who was
flogged. Therefore the general is, and at the
same time is not, the same person with him
who was flogged at school. H
The objection illustrates the important point
that identity is a transitive relation; if a is identical
with band b is identical with c, then necessarily a is
identical with c. We can meet the objection by
reformulating Locke's theory as follows: P2 at t2
is the same person as PI at an earlier time tl if and
only if either P2 apparently remembers what PI did
and experienced, or he apparently remembers what
some person pI at an intermediate time t' did and
experienced, when pI apparently remembers what
PI did and experienced, or they are linked by some
longer intermediate chain. (That is, P2 apparently
remembers what pI did and experienced, pI appar­
ently remembers what p" did and experienced, and
so on until we reach a person who apparently
remembers what PI did and experienced. ) If PI
and P2 are linked by such a chain, they are, we
may say, linked by continuity of memory. Clearly,
the apparent memories of the deeds and experi­
ences of the previous person at each stage in the
chain need not be completely accurate memories of
what was done and experienced. But they do need
to be fairly accurate memories of what was done
and experienced, if the later person is to be the
person who did and experienced those things.
Secondly, Locke ought to allow that while in
general apparent memory guarantees personal
identity and so amounts to genuine memory,
there are cases where it does not. One kind of
case is one to which in effect I have just referred.
If a person apparently remembers being the person
who did or experienced a certain thing, that appar­
ent memory is not genuine if no one did or experi­
enced that thing. My apparent memory of having
led a victorious army against the Russians in battle
in 1976 is not genuine if no one did this deed. Also,
an apparent memory is not genuine if it is caused
by a chain of causes which runs outside the person
(e. g. , it is caused by some informant). Ifmy appar­
ent memory of having met my great-grandfather at
the age of three months was caused by my mother
telling me much later in life that I had done this \nthing, and my having forgotten that she was the
sole source of my belief that I had met my great­
grandfather, then my apparent memory is not
genuine. Finally, if apparent memories are
inconsistent (e. g. , I apparently remember being in
Australia at a certain time and I also apparently
remember being in England at exactly that same
time), then at least one of them cannot be genuine.
Locke can allow that there are these exceptions,
and that if any of them are found to hold, we cannot
regard an apparent memory as genuine, while
insisting that, but for them, apparent memory
guarantees personal identity.
Locke's memory theory was a simple theory, and
a more complicated version of the theory which
takes in other connected points was developed by
Hume. 9 It is not only his apparent memory which
determines the attitude which others have towards
a person. How others treat a person depends also
on his beliefs about the world and his attitudes
towards it, whether they are changeable or con­
stant, and what leads them to change ~ that is, on
the person's character. Hume brings these in. He is
also aware that if memory is not mistaken (and he
assumes it normally to be correct), it is a causal
relation. If in the strong sense I remember some
past experience, this involves my past experience
being in part the cause of my having the apparent
memory which I do.
Hume regards a person as basically a mental
state with a body attached; but the mental state is
just a 'bundle or collection of different percep­
tions', i. e. , of thoughts, sensations and images.
Some of these are caused by past 'perceptions',
and among these are memories, which for Hume
are faint copies of past 'perceptions'. The bundle of
'perceptions' C z, which is my mental state now, is
linked to the bundle of perceptions CI, which we
call my mental state yesterday, by the fact that
some members of C z are caused by and resemble
(e. g. , include memories of and similar thoughts to)
members of C 1, or are linked by a causal chain
which passes through similar bundles. (Hume
does not say what links 'perceptions' into one bun­
dle ~ i. e. , what makes all the 'perceptions' which I
have at one time all mine. ) Hume calls that kind of
identity 'fictitious', because the 'perceptions'
which belong to some bundle are really distinct
entities from the 'perceptions' which belong to
some other bundle, although linked causally to
them; he contrasts it with the real identity which
would be possessed by a substance which contin­
ued to exist in a perfectly unchanged state.
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
A number of more recent writers have developed
more careful versions of a memory theory of per­
sonal identity, including GricelO and Quinton. !!
Many advocates of a memory theory have not
always been very clear in their exposition about
whether the apparent memories which form the
links in the chain of memory need to be actual
memories, or whether they need only to be
hypothetical memories. By 'actual memories' I
mean actual recallings of past experiences. The
trouble with the suggestion that actual memories
are required is that we do not very often recall our
past, and it seems natural to suppose that the deeds
and experiences of some moments of a person's life
never get recalled. Yet the memory theory, as sta­
ted so far, rules out that possibility. If I am not
connected by a chain of memories with the deeds
and experiences done by a person at a certain time,
then I am not identical with that person. It is
perhaps better if the theory claims that the appar­
ent memories which form the links need only be
hypothetical memories ~ i. e. , what a person would
apparently remember ifhe were to try to remember
the deeds and experiences in question, e. g. , in
consequence of being prompted. !2
There is however a major objection to any mem­
ory theory of personal identity, arising from the
possibility of duplication. The objection was made
briefly by Reid and at greater length in an influen­
tial article by Bernard Williams. !3 Williams ima­
gines the case of a man whom he calls Charles who
turns up in the twentieth century claiming to be
Guy Fawkes:
All the events he claims to have witnessed and
all the actions he claims to have done point
unanimously to the life-history of some one
person in the past ~ for instance Guy Fawkes.
Not only do all Charles' memory-claims that
can be checked fit the pattern of Fawkes' life as
known to historians, but others that cannot be
checked are plausible, provide explanations of
unexplained facts, and so on. !4
The fact that memory claims which 'cannot be
checked are plausible, provide explanations of
unexplained facts, and so on' is evidence that
Charles is not merely claiming to remember what
he has in fact read in a book about Guy Fawkes, and
so leaves us back with the supposition, natural to
make in normal cases, that he is reporting honestly
his apparent memories. So, by a memory theory,
Charles would be Guy Fawkes. But then suppose, \nRichard Swinburne
Williams imagines, that another man Robert turns
up, who satisfies the memory criteria for being Guy
Fawkes equally well. We cannot say that they are
both identical with Guy Fawkes, for if they were,
they would be identical with each other - which
they are not, since they currently live different lives
and have different thoughts and feelings from each
other. So apparent memory cannot constitute per­
sonal identity, although it may be fallible evidence
of it.
The objection from the possibility of duplica­
tion, together with other difficulties which will be
mentioned in later chapters, have inclined the
majority of contemporary writers to favour a theory
which makes some sort of bodily continuity central
to personal identity. As we have seen, the brain
theory takes into account the insight of memory­
and-character theory into the importance of these
factors for personal identity, by selecting the brain,
as the organ causally responsible for the continuity
of memory and character, as that part of the body,
the continuity of which constitutes the continuity
of the person.
The trouble is that any brain theory is also open
to the duplication objection. The human brain has
two very similar hemispheres - a left and a right
hemisphere. The left hemisphere plays a major role
in the control of limbs of and processing of sensory
information from the right side of the body (and
from the right sides of the two eyes); and the right
hemisphere plays a major role in the control of
limbs of and processing of sensory information
from the left side of the body (and from the left
sides of the two eyes). The left hemisphere plays a
major role in the control of speech. Although the
hemispheres have different roles in the adult, they
interact with each other; and if parts of a hemi­
sphere are removed, at any rate early in life, the
roles of those parts are often taken over by parts of
the other hemisphere. Brain operations which
remove substantial parts of the brain are not infre­
quent. It might be possible one day to remove a
whole hemisphere, without killing the person.
There are no logical difficulties in supposing that
we could transplant one of PI'S hemispheres into
one skull from which a brain had been removed,
and the other hemisphere into another such skull,
and that both transplants should take, and it may
well be practically possible to do so. It is
certainly more likely to occur than the Guy Fawkes
story told by Williams! If these transplants took,
clearly each of the resulting persons would behave
to some extent like PI, and indeed both would
probably have some of the apparent memories of
Pl. Each of the resulting persons would then be
good candidates for being PI
After all, if one of PI'S hemispheres had been
destroyed and the other remained intact and
untransplanted, and the resulting person continued
to behave and make memory claims somewhat like
those of PI, we would have had little hesitation in
declaring that person to be Pl. The same applies,
whichever hemisphere was preserved - although it
may well be that the resulting person would have
greater capacities (e. g. , speech) if one hemisphere
was preserved than if the other one was preserved.
We have seen earlier good reason for supposing
that the person goes where his brain goes, and if
his brain consists only of one hemisphere, that
should make no difference. So if the one remaining
hemisphere is then transplanted, we ought to say
that the person whose body it now controls is Pl.
Whether that person is PI can hardly be affected by
the fact that instead of being destroyed, the other
hemisphere is also transplanted so as to constitute
the brain of a person. But if it is, that other person
will be just as good a candidate for being Pl. So a
Wiggins-type account might lead us to say that
both resulting persons are Pl. But, for the reason
given earlier in connection with the Guy Fawkes
examples, that cannot be - since the two later
persons are not identical with each other. Hence,
Wiggins adds to his tentative definition a clause
stating that Pz who satisfies his criterion stated
earlier is the same person as PI, only if there is no
other later person who also satisfies the criterion. IS
But the introduction into any theory, whether a
memory theory, a brain theory, or whatever, of a
clause stating that a person who satisfies the criter­
ion in question for being the same as an earlier
person is the same, only so long as there is no
other person who satisfies the criterion also or
equally well, does have an absurd consequence.
Let us illustrate this for the brain theory. Suppose
PI'S left hemisphere is transplanted into some skull
and the transplant takes. Then, according to the
theory, whether the resulting person is PI, i. e. ,
whether PI survives, will depend on whether the
other transplant takes. If it does, since both result­
ing persons will satisfy the memory and brain con­
tinuity criteria equally well, neither will be Pl. But
if the other transplant does not take, then since
there is only one person who satisfies the criterion,
that person is Pl. So whether I survive an operation
will depend on what happens in a body entirely
different from the body which will be mine, if I do \nsurvive. But how can who I am depend on what
happens to you? A similar absurd consequence
follows when a similar clause forbidding duplica­
tion is added to a memory theory.
Yet if we abandon the duplication clause, we are
back with the original difficulty - that there may be
more than one later person who satisfies any mem­
ory criterion or brain criterion, or combination
thereof, for being the same person as an earlier
person. Our discussion brings to our attention
also the fact that both these criteria are criteria
which may be satisfied to varying degrees. Pz can
have 90 per cent, or 80 per cent, or less than 50 per
cent of the brain of PI; and likewise the similarity of
apparent memory and character may vary along a
spectrum. Just how well do criteria have to be
satisfied for the later person to be the same person
as the earlier person? Any line one might draw
seems totally artificial. One might think that it
was non-arbitrary to insist on more than 50 per
cent of the original brain matter - for only one later
person could have more than 50 per cent of the
original brain matter (whereas if our criterion
demands only a smaller proportion, more than
one later person could satisfy it). But would we
really want to say that P6 was the same person as PI
ifPz was obtained from PI by a transplant of 60 per
cent (and so more than half) of PI 's brain matter, P 3
was obtained from Pz by a transplant of 60 per cent
ofPz's brain matter, and so on until we came to P6.
By the criterion of 'more than half of the brain
matter', P6 would be the same person as Ps, Ps as
P4, and so on, and so by the transitivity of identity,
P6 would be the same person as PI - although he
would have very little of PI'S brain matter. Any
criterion of the propo! tion of brain matter trans­
ferred, to be plausible, would have to take account
of whether there had been similar transplants in the
past, and the length of the interval between them.
And then the arbitrariness of the criterion would
stare us in the face.
This problem pushes the thinker towards one of
two solutions. The first solution is to say that
personal identity is a matter of degree. Pz is the
same person as PI to the extent to which there is
sameness of brain matter and continuity of mem­
ory. After all, survival for inanimate things is a
matter of degree. As we gradually replace bits of a
desk with new bits, the resulting desk is only more
or less the same as the original desk. And if my car
is taken to pieces and some of the bits are used to
make one new car, and some of the bits used to
make another new car, both cars are partly the same
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
as and partly different from the old car. Why
cannot we say the same of people? Normally we
are not inclined to talk thus, because brain opera­
tions are rare and brain hemisphere transplants
never happen. Hence there is normally at most
only one candidate for being the same person as
an earlier person, and he is normally a very strong
candidate indeed - having a more or less identical
brain and very great similarities of apparent mem­
ory and character. So we tend to think of personal
identity as all or nothing. But it is not thus in its
logic, the argument goes. There is the logical pos­
sibility, which could become an empirical possibil­
ity, of intermediate cases - of persons who are to
some extent the same as and to some extent differ­
ent from original persons.
This view has been advocated by Derek Parfit. 16
When a person divides, as a result of a split brain
transplant, he 'survives' in part, Parfit holds, as
each of two persons. They constitute his later
'selves', neither of whom, to speak strictly, are
identical with the original person.
This theory which Parfit calls the complex
view, 17 does however, run up against a fundamen­
tal difficulty that it commits him to substantial
empirical claims which to all appearance could
very easily be false. I can bring this out by adopting
Bernard Williams's famous mad surgeon story. IS
Suppose that a mad surgeon captures you and
announces that he is going to transplant your left
cerebral hemisphere into one body, and your right
one into another. He is going to torture one of the
resulting persons and free the other with a gift of a
million pounds. You can choose which person is
going to be tortured and which to be rewarded, and
the surgeon promises to do as you choose. You
believe his promise. But how are you to choose?
You wish to choose that you are rewarded, but you
do not know which resultant person will be you.
Now on the complex theory each person will be
you to the extent to which he has your brain and
resembles you in his apparent memories and char­
acter. It would be in principle empirically ascer­
tainable whether and to what extent persons with
right hemisphere transplants resemble their origin­
als in apparent memories and character more or less
than persons with left hemisphere transplants. But
clearly the difference is not going to be great. So
Parfit must say that your choice does not greatly
matter. Both subsequent persons will be in part you
- although perhaps to slightly different degrees.
And so you will - although perhaps to slightly
different degrees - in part suffer and in part enjoy \nRichard Swinburne
what each suffers and enjoys. So you have reason
both for joyous expectation and for terrified antici­
pation. But one problem is: how could you have
reason for part joyous expectation and part terrified
anticipation, when no one future person is going to
suffer a mixed fate?
But even if this notion of partial survival does
make sense, the more serious difficulty remains,
which is this. We can make sense of the supposition
that the victim makes the wrong choice, and has the
experience of being tortured and not the experience
of being rewarded; or the right choice, and has the
experience of being rewarded and not the experi­
ence of being tortured. A mere philosophical ana­
lysis of the concept of personal identity cannot tell
you which experiences will be yours tomorrow. To
use Bernard Williams's telling word, any choice
would be a 'risk'. But on Parfit's view, no risk
would be involved ~ for knowing the extent of
continuity of brain, apparent memory, and charac­
ter, you would know the extent to which a future
person would be you and so the extent to which his
experiences would be yours. Although it may be
the case that if my cerebral hemispheres are trans­
planted into different bodies, I survive partly as the
person whose body is controlled by one and partly
as the person whose body is controlled by the other,
it may not be like that at all. Maybe I go where the
left hemisphere goes; and when my right hemi­
sphere is separated from the left hemisphere and
comes to control a body by itself, either a new
person is formed, or the resulting organism,
although behaving to some extent like a person, is
really a very complicated non-conscious machine.
As we have noted, the fate of some parts of my
body, such as my arms and legs, is quite irrelevant
to the fate of me. And plausibly the fate of some
parts of my brain is irrelevant ~ can I not survive
completely a minor brain operation which removes
a very small tumour? But then maybe it is the same
with some larger parts of the brain too. We just
don't know. If the mad surgeon's victim took the
attitude that it didn't matter which way he chose,
we must, I suggest, regard him as taking an un­
justifiably dogmatic attitude.
The alternative way out of the duplication pro­
blem is to say that although apparent memory and
brain continuity are, as they obviously are, evid­
ence of personal identity, they are fallible evidence,
and personal identity is something distinct from
them. Just as the presence of blood stains and
fingerprints matching those of a given man are
evidence of his earlier presence at the scene of the
crime, and the discovery of Roman-looking coins
and buildings is evidence that the Romans lived in
some region, so the similarity of Pz's apparent
memory to that of PI, and his having much the
same brain matter, is evidence that P z is the same
person as Pl. Yet blood stains and fingerprints are
one thing, and a man's earlier presence at the scene
of the crime another. His presence at the scene of
the crime is not analysable in terms of the later
presence of blood stains and fingerprints. The lat­
ter is evidence of the former, because you seldom
get blood stains and fingerprints at a place match­
ing those of a given man, unless he has been there
leaving them around. But it might happen. So, the
suggestion is, personal identity is distinct from,
although evidenced by, similarity of memory and
continuity of brain.
This account, which for the moment I will fol­
low Parfit in calling the simple view, can meet all
the difficulties which have beset the other theories
which we have discussed. The difficulty for the
complex view was that it seemed very peculiar
to suppose that mere logic could determine which
of the experiences had by various persons, each of
which was to some extent continuous with me in
apparent memory and brain matter, would be
mine. There seemed to be a further truth ~ that I
would or would not have those experiences ~
beyond any truths about the extent of similarity
in apparent memory and matter of future persons
to myself. The simple view claims explicitly that
personal identity is one thing, and the extent of
similarity in matter and apparent memory another.
There is no contradiction in supposing that the one
should occur without the other. Strong similarity
of matter and apparent memory is powerful evid­
ence of personal identity. I and the person who had
my body and brain last week have virtually the
same brain matter and such similar apparent mem­
ory, that it is well-nigh certain that we are the same
person. But where the brain matter is only in part
the same and the memory connection less strong, it
is only fairly probable that the persons are the
same. Where there are two later persons Pz and
Pi, each of whom had some continuity with the
earlier person Ph the evidence supports to some
extent each of the two hypotheses ~ that Pz is the
same person as Ph and that Pi is the same person as
Pl. It may give more support to one hypothesis
than to the other, but the less-well-supported
hypothesis might be the true one, or maybe neither
hypothesis is true. Perhaps PI has ceased to exist,
and two different persons have come into \n-----------------------------------
existence. So the simple view fully accepts that
mere logic cannot determine which experiences
will be mine, but it allows that continuity of appar­
ent memory and brain provides fallible evidence
about this. And of course the duplication objection
that they allow for the two subsequent persons
being the same person, which we brought against
the brain and the memory theories, has no force
against the simple theory. For although there can
be equally good evidence that each of two later
persons is the same person as an earlier person,
that evidence is fallible; and since clearly only one
person at one time can be strictly the same person
as some person at an earlier time, it follows that in
one case the evidence is misleading - although we
may not know in which case.
There are, however, other difficulties with the
simple view, and to these I shall come in due
course. In the next section I will expound and
develop the simple view, and show that it amounts
to the same as Cartesian dualism - the view that a
person consists of two parts, soul, and body. In
section 3 I shall attempt to rebut verificationist
objections to the simple view, and argue that on
the simple view the continuing existence of the
person is something of which the subject is aware
in his own experience.
The simple view is normally combined with the
doctrine that persons are indivisible, in the sense
that only one person Pz at tz can be in any degree
the same person as PI at tl; and only one person PI
at tl can in any degree be the same person as P z at
tz. Not merely is strict identity of one person with
two distinct earlier persons or two distinct later
persons impossible, but so is partial identity (e. g. ,
Parfit-style 'survival'). Neither fission nor fusion of
persons is possible. When a brain is split, at most
one of any resulting persons is to any degree the
same as the original person; and if hemispheres
from separate brains are put together to form the
brain of a new person, at most one of the original
persons from whose brains the hemispheres were
transplanted is to any degree the same as the later
person, and any identity is full identity. We have so
far noted briefly one argument in favour of the
indivisibility thesis (pp. 383-4) - the difficulty of
giving any sense to the supposition that a person PI
about to undergo fission will have in any degree the
experiences of both of the two persons Pz and P~
who will in no way have shared each other's experi­
ences. Two later cars or tables can be in part the
same as and in part different from an earlier car or
table; but cars and tables do not have experiences,
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
and so this difficulty does not arise for them. We
shall consider in due course a brief argument
against the possibility of fusion, to back up the
argument against fission, and so complete the
defence of both parts of the indivisibility thesis,
but note that although normally combined with the
simple view, the indivisibility thesis can be separ­
ated from it. I have made that separation. As I shall
understand it, the simple view is simply the view
that the truth about personal identity is not analy­
sable in terms of the fallible empirical evidence for
it of brain and memory continuity; and my primary
concern is with the simple view.
2 The Dualist Theory
The brain transplant considerations of the first
section leading to the simple view of personal iden­
tity showed that significant continuity of brain and
memory was not enough to ensure personal iden­
tity. They did not show that continuity of brain or
memory were totally dispensable: that P z at time tz
could be the same person as PI at an earlier time tl,
even though Pz had none of the brain matter (or
other bodily matter) of PI and had no apparent
memory of PI 's actions and experiences. A number
of more extravagant thought-experiments do, how­
ever, show that there is no contradiction in this
latter supposition.
There seems no contradiction in the supposition
that a person might acquire a totally new body
(including a completely new brain) - as many reli­
gious accounts oflife after death claim that men do.
To say that this body, sitting at the desk in my
room, is my body is to say two things. First, it is to
say that I can move parts of this body (arms, legs,
etc. ), just like that, without having to do any other
intentional action, and that I can make a difference
to other physical objects only by moving parts of
this body. By holding the door handle and turning
my hand, I open the door. By bending my leg and
stretching it, I kick the ball and make it move into
the goal. But I do not turn my hand or bend my leg
by doing some other intentional action; I just do
these things. 19 Secondly, it is to say that my know­
ledge of states of the world outside this body is
derived from their effects on this body - I learn
about the positions of physical objects by seeing
them, and seeing them involves light rays reflected
by them impinging on my eyes and setting up
nervous impulses in my optic nerve. My body is
the vehicle of my agency in the world and my \nRichard Swinburne
knowledge of the world. But then is it not coherent
to suppose that I might suddenly find that my
present body no longer served this function, that
I could no longer acquire information through
these eyes or move these limbs, but might discover
that another body served the same function?
I might find myself moving other limbs and acquir­
ing information through other eyes. Then I would
have a totally new body. If that body, like my last
body, was an occupant of the Earth, then we would
have a case of reincarnation, as Eastern religions
have understood that. If that body, was an occu­
pant of some distant planet, or an environment
which did not belong to the same spacezo as our
world, then we would have a case of resurrection as,
on the whole, Western religions (Christianity,
Judaism and Islam) have understood that.
This suggestion of a man acquiring a new body
(with brain) may be more plausible, to someone
who has difficulty in grasping it, by supposing the
event to occur gradually. Suppose that one morn­
ing a man wakes up to find himself unable to
control the right side of his body, including his
right arm and leg. When he tries to move the
right-side parts of his body, he finds that the cor­
responding left-side parts of his body move; and
when he tries to move the left-side parts, the cor­
responding right-side parts of his wife's body
move. His knowledge of the world comes to
depend on stimuli to his left side and to his wife's
right side (e. g. , light rays stimulating his left eye
and his wife's right eye). The bodies fuse to some
extent physiologically as with Siamese twins, while
the man's wife loses control of her right side.
The focus of the man's control of and knowledge
of the world is shifting. One may suppose the
process completed as the man's control is shifted
to the wife's body, while the wife loses control of it.
Equally coherent, I suggest, is the supposition
that a person might become disembodied. A person
has a body if there is one particular chunk of matter
through which he has to operate on and learn about
the world. But suppose that he finds himself able to
operate on and learn about the world within some
small finite region, without having to use one par­
ticular chunk of matter for this purpose. He might
find himself with knowledge of the position of
objects in a room (perhaps by having visual sensa­
tions, perhaps not), and able to move such objects
just like that, in the ways in which we know about
the positions of our limbs and can move them. But
the room would not be, as it were, the person's
body; for we may suppose that simply by choosing
to do so he can gradually shift the focus of his
knowledge and control, e. g. , to the next room.
The person would be in no way limited to operat­
ing and learning through one particular chunk of
matter. Hence we may term him disembodied. The
supposition that a person might become disem­
bodied also seems coherent.
I have been arguing so far that it is coherent to
suppose that a person could continue to exist with
an entirely new body or with no body at all. (And I
would also suggest by the way that in the cases
cited the subject would in some circumstances
have reason to believe, through his memory of
what he had just experienced, that this had hap­
pened to him. ) Could a person continue to exist
without any apparent memory of his previous
doings? Quite clearly, we do allow not merely the
logical possibility, but the frequent actuality of
amnesia - a person forgetting all or certain
stretches of his past life. Despite Locke, many a
person does forget much of what he has done. But,
of course, we normally only suppose this to happen
in cases where there is the normal bodily and brain
continuity. Our grounds for supposing that a per­
son forgets what he has done are that the evidence
of bodily and brain continuity suggests that he was
the previous person who did certain things, which
he now cannot remember having done. And in the
absence of both of the main kinds of evidence for
personal identity, we would not be justified in
supposing that personal identity held. (Character
continuity is a minor kind of evidence, hardly of
great importance on its own. ) For that reason I
cannot describe a case where we would have good
reason to suppose that Pz was identical with PI,
even though there was neither brain continuity nor
memory continuity between them. However, only
given verificationist dogma, is there any reason to
suppose that the only things which are true are
those of whose truth we can have evidence, and
I shall suggest in section 3 that there is no good
reason for believing verificationism to be true. We
can make sense of states of affairs being true, of
which we can have no evidence that they are true.
And among them surely is the supposition that the
person who acquires another body loses not merely
control of the old one, but memories of what he did
with its aid. Again, many religions have taken seri­
ously stories of persons passing through the waters
of Lethe (a river whose waters made a person forget
all his previous life) and then acquiring a new body.
Others who have heard these stories may not have
believed them true; but they have usually claimed \nto understand them, and (unless influenced by
philosophical dogma) have not suspected them of
involving contradiction.
Those who hope to survive their death, despite
the destruction of their body, will not necessarily
be disturbed if they come to believe that they will
then have no memory of their past life on Earth;
they may just want to survive and have no interest
in continuing to recall life on Earth. Again, appar­
ently, there seems to be no contradiction involved
in their belief. It seems to be a coherent belief
(whether or not true or justified). Admittedly,
there may be stories or beliefs which involve a
hidden contradiction when initially they do not
seem to do so. But the fact that there seems (and
to so many people) to be no contradiction hidden in
these stories is good reason for supposing that there
is no contradiction hidden in them - until a contra­
diction is revealed. If this were not a good reason
for believing there to be no contradiction, we
would have no good reason for believing any sen­
tence at all to be free of hidden contradiction.
Not merely is it not logically necessary that a
person have a body made of certain matter, or have
certain apparent memories, ifhe is to be the person
which he is; it is not even necessitated by laws of
nature. 21 For let us assume that natural laws dic­
tated the course of evolution and the emergence of
consciousness. In 4000 million Be the Earth was a
cooling globe of inanimate atoms. Natural laws
then, we assume, dictated how this globe would
evolve, and so which arrangements of matter will
be the bodies of conscious men, and just how
apparent memories of conscious men depend on
their brain states. My point now is that what nat­
ural laws in no way determine is which animate
body is yours and which is mine. Just the same
arrangement of matter and just the same laws could
have given to me the body (and so the apparent
memories) which are now yours, and to you the
body (and so the apparent memories) which are
now mine. It needs either God or chance to allocate
bodies to persons; the most that natural laws deter­
mine is that bodies of a certain construction are the
bodies of some person or other, who in con­
sequence of this construction have certain apparent
memories. Since the body which is presently yours
(together with the associated apparent memories)
could have been mine (logic and even natural laws
allow), that shows that none of the matter of which
my body is presently made (nor the apparent mem­
ories) is essential to my being the person I am. That
must be determined by something else.
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
The view that personal identity is something
ultimate, unanalysable in terms of such observable
and experienceable phenomena as bodily continu­
ity and continuity of memory, was put forward in
the eighteenth century by Butler, and, slightly less
explicitly, by Reid. In recent years R. M.
Chisholm22 has put forward a similar view.
I could just leave my positive theory at that -
that personal identity is unanalysable. But it will, I
hope, be useful to express it in another way, to
bring out more clearly what it involves and to
connect it with another whole tradition of philo­
sophical thought.
In section 1, I set out Aristotle's account of the
identity of substances: that a substance at one time
is the same substance as a substance at an earlier
time if and only if the later substance has the same
form as, and continuity of matter (in the sense
delineated on p. 378) with, the earlier substance.
On this view, a person is the same person as an
earlier person if he has the same form as the earlier
person (i. e. , both are persons) and has continuity of
matter with him (i. e. , has the same body).
Certainly, to be the same person as an earlier
person, a later person has to have the same form -
i. e. , has to be a person. If my arguments for the
logical possibility of there being disembodied per­
sons are correct, then the essential characteristics of
a person constitute a narrower set than those which
Aristotle would have included. My arguments sug­
gest that all that a person needs to be a person are
certain mental capacities - for having conscious
experiences (e. g. , thoughts or sensations) and per­
forming intentional actions. Thought-experiments
of the kind described earlier allow that a person
might lose his body, but they describe his continu­
ing to have conscious experiences and his perform­
ing or being able to perform intentional actions,
i. e. , to do actions which he means to do, bring
about effects for some purpose.
Yet if my arguments are correct, showing that
two persons can be the same, even if there is no
continuity between their bodily matter, we must
say that in the form stated the Aristotelian account
of identity applies only to inanimate objects and
plants and has no application to personal identity. 23
We are then faced with a choice either of saying
that the criteria of personal identity are different
from those for other substances, or of trying to give
a more general account than Aristotle's of identity
of substances which would cover both persons and
other substances. It is possible to widen the Aris­
totelian account so that we can do the latter. We \nRichard Swinburne
have only to say that two substances are the same if
and only if they have the same form and there is
continuity of the stuff of which they are made, and
allow that there may be kinds of stuff other than
matter. I will call this account of substance identity
the wider Aristotelian account. We may say that
there is a stuff of another kind, immaterial stuff,
and that persons are made of both normal bodily
matter and of this immaterial stuff, but that it is the
continuity of the latter which provides that con­
tinuity of stuff which is necessary for the identity of
the person over time.
This is in essence the way of expressing the
simple theory which is adopted by those who say
that a person living on Earth consists of two parts -
a material part, the body, and an immaterial part,
the soul. The soul is the essential part of a person,
and it is its continuing which constitutes the con­
tinuing of the person. While on Earth, the soul is
linked to a body (by the body being the vehicle of
the person's knowledge of and action upon the
physical world). But, it is logically possible, the
soul can be separated from the body and exist in a
disembodied state (in the way described earlier) or
linked to a new body. This way of expressing things
has been used in many religious traditions down
the centuries, for it is a very natural way of express­
ing what is involved in being a person once you
allow that a person can survive the death of his
body. Classical philosophical statements of it are to
be found in Plato and, above all, in Descartes. I shall
call this view classical dualism.
I wrote that 'in essence' classical dualism is the
view that there is more stuff to the person than
bodily matter, and that it is the continuing of this
stuff which is necessary for the continuing of the
person, because a writer such as Descartes did not
distinguish between the immaterial stuff, let us call
it soul-stuff, and that stuff being organized (with or
without a body) as one soul. Descartes and other
classical dualists however did not make this dis­
tinction, because they assumed (implicitly) that it
was not logically possible that persons divide - i. e. ,
that an earlier person could be in part the same
person as each of two later persons. Hence they
implicitly assumed that soul-stuff comes in essen­
tially indivisible units. That is indeed what one has
to say about soul-stuff, if one makes the supposi­
tion (as I was inclined to do, in section I), that it is
not logically possible that persons divide. There is
nothing odd about supposing that soul-stuff comes
in essentially indivisible units. Of any chunk of
matter, however small, it is always logically, if not
physically, possible that it be divided into two. Yet
it is because matter is extended, that one can always
make sense of it being divided. For a chunk of
matter necessarily takes up a finite volume of
space. A finite volume of space necessarily is com­
posed of two half-volumes. So it always makes
sense to suppose that part of the chunk which
occupies the left half-volume of space to be separ­
ated from that part of the chunk which occupies the
right half-volume. But that kind of consideration
has no application to immaterial stuff. There is no
reason why there should not be a kind of immater­
ial stuff which necessarily is indivisible; and if the
supposition of section I is correct, the soul-stuff
will have that property.
So then - once we modify the Aristotelian
understanding of the criteria for the identity of
substances, the simple view of personal identity
finds a natural expression in classical dualism.
The arguments which Descartes gave in support
of his account of persons are among the arguments
which I have given in favour of the simple theory,
and since they take for granted the wider Aristotel­
ian framework, they yield classical dualism as a
consequence. Thus Descartes argues:
Just because I know certainly that I exist, and
that meanwhile I do not remark that any other
thing necessarily pertains to my nature or
essence, excepting that I am a thinking thing,
I rightly conclude that my essence consists
solely in the fact that I am a thinking thing.
And although possibly. .. I possess a body with
which I am very intimately conjoined, yet
because, on the one side, I have a clear and
distinct idea of myself inasmuch as I am only a
thinking and unextended thing, and as, on the
other, I possess a distinct idea of body, inas­
much as it is only an extended and unthinking
thing, it is certain that this I [that is to say, my
soul by which I am what I am], is entirely and
absolutely distinct from my body, and can exist
without it. 24
Descartes is here saying that he can describe a
thought-experiment in which he continues to
exist although his body does not. I have also
described such a thought-experiment and have
argued, as Descartes in effect does, that it follows
that his body is not logically necessary for his
existence, that it is not an essential part of himself.
Descartes can go on 'thinking' (i. e. , being con­
scious) and so existing without it. Now if we take \nthe wider Aristotelian framework for granted that
the continuing of a substance involves the continu­
ing of some of the stuff of which it is made, and
since the continuing existence of Descartes does
not involve the continuing of bodily matter, it
follows that there must now be as part of Descartes
some other stuff, which he calls his soul, which
forms the essential part of Descartes.
Given that for any present person who is cur­
rently conscious, there is no logical impossibility,
whatever else may be true now of that person, that
that person continue to exist without his body, it
follows that that person must now actually have a
part other than a bodily part which can continue,
and which we may call his soul - and so that his
possession of it is entailed by his being a conscious
thing. For there is not even a logical possibility that
if I now consist of nothing but matter and the
matter is destroyed, that I should nevertheless con­
tinue to exist. From the mere logical possibility of
my continued existence there follows the actual fact
that there is now more to me than my body; and
that more is the essential part of myself. A person's
being conscious is thus to be analysed as an im­
material core of himself, his soul being conscious. 25
50 Descartes argues, and his argument seems to
me correct - given the wider Aristotelian frame­
work. Ifwe are prepared to say that substances can
be the same, even though none of the stuff (in a
wide sense) of which they are made is the same, the
conclusion does not follow. The wider Aristotelian
framework provides a partial definition of 'stuff
rather than a factual truth. To say that a person has
an immaterial soul is not to say that if you examine
him closely enough under an acute enough micro­
scope you will find some very rarefied constituent
which has eluded the power of ordinary micro­
scopes. It is just a way of expressing the point
within a traditional framework of thought that
persons can - it is logically possible - continue,
when their bodies do not. It does, however, seem a
very natural way of expressing the point - espe­
cially once we allow that persons can become dis­
embodied. Unless we adopt a wider Aristotelian
framework, we shall have to say that there can be
substances which are not made of anything, and
which are the same substances as other substances
which are made of matter.
It does not follow from all this that a person's
body is no part of him. Given that what we are
trying to do is to elucidate the nature of those
entities which we normally call 'persons', we must
say that arms and legs and all other parts of the
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
living body are parts of the person. My arms and
legs are parts of me. The crucial point that Des­
cartes was making is that the body is only, contin­
gently and possibly temporarily, part of the person;
it is not an essential part. However, Descartes does
seem in a muddle about this. In the passage from
the Meditations just cited, as elsewhere in his
works, 26 he claims sometimes (wrongly) that my
body is no part of me, and at other times (correctly)
that my body is not an essential part of me.
The other arguments which I have given for the
'simple theory', e. g. , that two embodied persons
can be the same despite their being no bodily con­
tinuity between them, can also, like the argument
of Descartes just discussed, if we assume the wider
Aristotelian framework, be cast into the form of
arguments for classical dualism.
As we have seen, classical dualism is the way of
expressing the simple view of personal identity
within what I called the wider Aristotelian frame­
work. However, this framework is a wider one than
Aristotle himself would have been happy with,
allowing a kind of stuff other than Aristotle would
have countenanced. There has been in the history
of thought a different and very influential way of
modifying Aristotle, to take account of the kind of
point made by the simple view. This way was due
to 5t Thomas Aquinas (see, e. g. , Summa contra
Gentiles). Aquinas accepted Aristotle's general doc­
trine that substances are made of matter, organized
by a form; the desk is the desk which it is because of
the matter of which it is made and the shape which
is imposed upon it. The form was normally a
system of properties, universals which had no
existence except in the particular substances in
which they were instantiated. However, Aquinas
claimed that for man the form of the body, which
he called the soul, was separable from the body and
capable of independent existence. The soul of man,
unlike the souls of animals or plants, was in Aqui­
nas's terminology, an 'intellectual substance'.
However, if we are going to modify Aristotle to
make his views compatible with the simple theory
of personal identity, this seems definitely the less
satisfactory way of doing so. Properties seem by
their very nature to be universals, and so it is hard
to give any sense to their existing except when
conjoined to some stuff. Above all, it is hard to
give sense to their being individual - a universal
can be instantiated in many different substances.
What makes the substances differ is the different
stuff of which they are composed. The form of man
can be instantiated in many different men. But \nRichard Swinburne
Aquinas wants a form which is a particular, and so
could only be combined with one body. All of this
seems to involve a greater distortion of Aristotle's
system than does classical dualism. Aquinas's sys­
tem does have some advantages over classical dual­
ism - for example, it enables him to bring out the
naturalness of a person being embodied and the
temporary and transitory character of any disem­
bodiment - but the disadvantages of taking Aris­
totle's approach and then distorting it to this
unrecognizable extent are in my view very great.
Hence my preference for what I have called clas­
sical dualism. I shall in future express the simple
view in the form of classical dualism, in order to
locate this view within the philosophical tradition
which seems naturally to express it.
There is, however, one argument often put for­
ward by classical dualists - their argument from the
indivisibility of the soul to its natural immortality -
from which I must dissociate myself. Before look­
ing at this argument, it is necessary to face the
problem of what it means to say that the soul
continues to exist. Clearly the soul continues to
exist if a person exercises his capacities for experi­
ences and action, by having experiences and per­
forming actions. But can the soul continue to exist
when the person does not exercise those capacities?
Presumably it can. For we say that an unconscious
person (who is neither having experiences or act­
ing) is still a person. We say this on the grounds
that natural processes (i. e. , processes according
with the laws of nature) will, or at any rate may,
lead to his exercising his capacities again - e. g. ,
through the end of normal sleep or through some
medical or surgical intervention. Hence a person,
and so his soul, if we talk thus, certainly exists
while natural processes may lead to his exercising
those capacities, again. But what when the person
is not exercising his capacities, and no natural
processes (whether those operative in our present
material universe or those operative in some new
world to which the person has moved) will lead to
his exercising his capacities? We could say that the
person and so his soul still exists on the grounds
that there is the logical possibility of his coming to
Notes
The logically necessary and sufficient conditions for
something being so are those conditions such that if
they are present, that thing must be so; and if they are
absent, that thing cannot be so - all this because of
considerations oflogic.
life again. To my mind, the more natural altern­
ative is to say that when ordinary natural processes
cannot lead to his exercising his capacities again, a
person and so his soul has ceased to exist; but there
remains the logical possibility that he may come
into existence again (perhaps through God causing
him to exist again). One argument against taking
the latter alternative is the argument that no sub­
stance can have two beginnings of existence. If a
person really ceases to exist, then there is not even
the logical possibility of his coming into existence
again. It would follow that the mere logical poss­
ibility of the person coming into existence again has
the consequence that a person, once existent, is
always existent (even when he has no capacity for
experience and action). But this principle - that no
substance can have two beginnings of existence - is
one which I see no good reason for adopting; and if
we do not adopt it, then we must say that souls
cease to exist when there is no natural possibility of
their exercising their capacities. But that does not
prevent souls which have ceased to exist coming
into existence again. This way of talking does
give substantial content to claims that souls do or
do not exist, when they are not exercising their
capacities.
Now classical dualists assumed (in my view, on
balance, correctly) that souls cannot be divided.
But they often argued from this, that souls were
indestructible, 27 and hence immortal, or at any rate
naturally immortal (i. e. , immortal as a result of the
operation of natural processes, and so immortal
barring an act of God to stop those processes oper­
ating). That does not follow. Material bodies may
lose essential properties without being divided - an
oak tree may die and become fossilized without
losing its shape. It does not follow from a soul's
being indivisible that it cannot lose its capacity for
experience and action - and so cease to be a soul.
Although there is (I have been arguing) no logical
necessity that a soul be linked to a body, it may be
physically necessary that a soul be linked to one
body if it is to have its essential properties (of
capacity for experience and action) and so continue
to exist.
2 Some writers have attempted to analyse the notion of
'most of the matter' of yesterday's body being the
same as 'most of the matter' of today's body in terms
of today's body being composed largely of chunks of
matter which are 'spatio-temporally continuous' with \nchunks of matter of yesterday's body, i. e. , as linked to
such chunks by a spatio-temporal chain. Two chunks
of matter MI at time II and M z at time Iz are spatio­
temporally continuous if and only if there is a material
object M' identical in quantity and intrinsic proper­
ties to both M I and Mz at every temporal instant t'
between tl and /2, such that each M' at each /' occu­
pies a place contiguous with the place occupied by the
M' at prior and succeeding instants of time if you take
instants close enough in time to t'. (More precisely
'such that the place occupied by each M' at each t' is
contiguous to places occupied by an M' at some
instant t
ff
later than t' and all instants between tff
and t' and to places occupied by an M' at some instant
t
ff
' earlier than t' and all instants between t
ff
' and t". )
It is very plausible to suppose that spatio-temporal
continuity is a necessary condition for the identity of
chunks of matter - chunks of matter cannot go from
one place to another without moving along a path
joining the places. But it is not so plausible to suppose
that spatio-temporal continuity is a sufficient condi­
tion of the identity of chunks of matter, i. e. , is enough
to ensure that two chunks of matter are the same. It
does not seem logically impossible that two qualita­
tively identical chunks should emerge from a given
chunk. Something else than spatio-temporal continu­
ity is needed to ensure that two chunks of matter are
the same. On this, see Eli Hirsch, The Concept oI
Identi(y (New York: Oxford University Press, 1982),
esp. ch. 4.
3 Aristotle did not himself go into the problem of how
much matter has to continue the same if the substance
is to be the same.
4 Aristotle himself seemed to have some hesitation
about the applicability of his theory of the identity
of substances to the identity of persons. See De anima
at 413a. He writes, first, 'that, therefore, the soul or
certain parts of it, if it is divisible, cannot be separated
from the body is quite clear'. But then he qualifies this
by writing 'Not that anything prevents at any rate
some parts from being separable'. He seems to be
supposing that there are some capacities, e. g. , for
thought, which need no bodily material for their
exercise. (For similar remarks see his 403a, 408b,
413b. ) Aquinas develops these points into his doctrine
that the Aristotle-type soul (the form of the body) is
separable from the body. See below, pp. 389ff, for this
doctrine and criticism of it.
D. Wiggins, Identity and S patio-temporal Continuity
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1967). Wiggins is even more tent­
ative in the amended version of the book, Sameness
and Substance (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980).
6 Although Locke's account of what it is for two per­
sons to be the 'same person' is the simple memory
account given above, he complicates it by providing a
different account of what it is for two persons to be the
'same man'. This account is basically the bodily
account which I have just outlined. PI is the same
Personal Identity: The Dualist Theory
man as whoever has the same body as P II but the same
person as whoever has the same memories as PI. But
Locke regards personal identity (which person, rather
than which man, one is) as what is of importance for
the way in which we should treat people, e. g. , whom
we are to reward or punish.
7 John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understand­
ing, ed. P. H. Nidditch, (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1975), sect. 19.
8 Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers oI Man
(1785; repro Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1969),
Essay III, ch. 6.
9 Hume subsequently found this view outlined above
and expanded in the main text of the A Treatise oI
Human Nature, ed. L. A. Selbye-Bigge (Oxford: Clar­
endon Press, 1975), unsatisfactory, as he wrote in his
Appendix. But the grounds of his dissatisfaction are
not clear. See Barry Stroud, Hume (London: Rout­
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1977), ch. 6.
10 H. P. Grice, 'Personal identity', Mind 50 (1941), pp.
330--50.
11 Anthony Quinton, 'The soul', Journal oI Philosophy
59 (1962), pp. 393-403.
12 We would need some well-justified theory by means
of which we could infer what some person would
apparently remember if he were to try, if we were
ever to apply our theory to answering particular ques­
tions of the form 'Is Pz identical with PI? ' The theory
would need to be established without presupposing
which past person, some person who is not now
currently recalling anything, was. For although it is
reasonable to suppose that such a person would
remember many of his recent deeds and experiences,
ifhe were to try, we cannot know which recent deeds
and experiences were his until we know what he
would apparently remember, according to the mem­
ory theory.
13 Bernard Williams, 'Personal identity and individua­
tion', Proceedings oIthe Aristotelian Society 57 (1956-
7), pp. 229-52.
14 Ibid. , p. 332.
15 He suggests analysing 'person' in such a way that
'coincidence under the concept person logically
required the continuance in one organized parcel of
all that was causally sufficient and causally necessary
to the continuance of essential and characteristic func­
tioning, no autonomously sufficient part achieving
autonomous and functionally separate existence'
(Wiggins, Identity, p. 55).
16 Derek Parfit, 'Personal identity', this volume, ch. 29.
17 He introduces this terminology in his paper 'The
importance of self-identity', Journal oI Philosophy 68
(1971), pp. 683-90.
18 Bernard Williams, 'The self and the future', this
volume, ch. 28.
19 Following A. C. Danto 'Basic actions', American
Philosophical Quarterly 2 (1965), pp. 141-8, philoso­
phers call those intentional actions which we just do, \nRichard Swinburne
not by doing some other intentional action, basic
actions, and those which we do by doing some other
intentional action, mediated actions. An intentional
action is one which an agent does, meaning to do. No
doubt certain events have to happen in our nerves and
muscles if we are to move our arms and legs, but we do
not move our arms and legs by intentionally making
these events occur.
20 Two objects belong to the same space if they are at
some distance from each other, if you can get from one
to the other by going along a path in space which joins
them. For a fuller account of the meaning of the claim
that an object occupies a different space from our
space, see Richard Swinburne, Space and Time, 2nd
edn (London: Macmillan, 1981), chs 1 and 2.
21 lowe this argument to John Knox, 'Can the self
survive the death of its mind? ', Religious Studies 5
(1969), pp. 85-97.
22 R. M. Chisholm, 'The loose and popular and the strict
and philosophical senses of identity', in N. S. Care
and R. H. Grimm (eds), Perception, and Personal
Identity (Cleveland: Press of Case Western Reserve
University, 1969).
23 1 do not discuss the difficult issue of whether the
Aristotelian account applies to animals other than
man, e. g. , whether continuity of matter and form is
necessary and sufficient for the identity of a dog at a
later time with a dog at an earlier time.
24 Descartes, Meditations on the First Philosophy, in The
Philosophical Works oj Descartes vol. 1, trans. E. S.
Haldane and G. R. T. Ross (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1911), p. 190. The clause in square
brackets occurs only in the French translation,
approved by Descartes.
25 It may be useful, in case anyone suspects the argument
of this paragraph of committing some modal fallacy,
to set it out in a more formal logical shape. 1 use the
usual logical symbols - '. ' means 'and', ,~, means
'not', '0' means 'it is logically possible'. 1 then intro­
duce the following definitions:
p = 'I am a conscious person, and 1 exist in 1984'
q = My body is destroyed at the end of 1984
r = 1 have a soul in 1984
s = 1 exist in 1985
x ranges over all consistent propositions compatible
with (p. q) and describing 1984 states of affairs
('(x)' is to be read in the normal way as 'for all states
x. .. ')
The argument may now be set out as follows:
p
(x) 0 (p. q. x. s)
~ 0 (p. q. ~r. s). .. ~r is not within the range of x.
Premiss (I)
Premiss (2)
Premiss (3)
But since ~r describes a state of affairs in 1984, it is
not compatible with (p. q). But q can hardly make a
difference to whether or not r. So p is incompatible
with ~r. .". r
The argument is designed to show that r follows from
p; and so, more generally, that every conscious person
has a soul. Premiss (3) is justified by the wider Aris­
totelian principle that if! am to continue, some of the
stuff out of which 1 am made has to continue. As 1
argued in the text, that stuff must be non-bodily stuff.
The soul is defined as that non-bodily part whose
continuing is essential for my continuing.
Premiss (2) relies on the intuition that whatever
else might be the case in 1984, compatible with
(p. q), my stream of consciousness could continue
thereafter.
If you deny (2) and say that r is a state of affairs
not entailed by (p. q), but which has to hold if it is
to be possible that s, you run into this difficulty.
There may be two people in 1984, Oliver who has a
soul, and Fagin, who does not. Both are embodied and
conscious, and to all appearances indistinguishable.
God (who can do all things logically possible, compat­
ible with how the world is up to now), having for­
gotten to give Fagin a soul, has, as he annihilates
Fagin's body at the end of 1984, no power to continue
his stream of thought. Whereas he has the power to
continue Oliver's stream of thought. This seems
absurd.
26 For examples and commentary, see Brian Smart,
'How can persons be ascribed M-predicates? ', Mind
86 (1977), pp. 49-66, at pp. 63-6.
27 Thus Berkeley: 'We have shown that the soul is in­
divisible, incorporeal, unextcnded, and it IS con­
sequently incorruptible' (Principles IIJ Human
Knowledge, sect. 141). \n31
Mark Johnston
Many of us hope for a kind of philosophy that is
precise without thereby desiccating its object, so
that the results of a philosophical investigation
could answer a question still worth asking. So it is
with the question: What is it that we are? But much
of contemporary philosophical theorizing about
personal identity conforms to what could easily
become a desiccating analytic paradigm. Cases ima­
ginary and real are produced. Competing accounts
of the necessary and sufficient conditions for per­
sonal identity are then evaluated simply in accord
with how well they jibe with intuitions wrung from
these cases.
Compare Gettierology, the search for the analy­
sis of knowledge by means of conjecturing neces­
sary and sufficient conditions for knowledge,
followed by confirmation or refutation by appeal
to intuitions about cases. l Here reliance on the
method of cases has a straightforward, if somewhat
wooden, justification. We are interested in articu­
lating our concept of knowledge and in charting its
relations to other concepts, such as the concepts of
believing a proposition, of that proposition's being
true, of one's being justified in believing the pro­
position, of one's employing a reliable method in
coming to believe the proposition, and so on. Mas­
ters of these concepts by and large agree about
when they are to be applied, and so the method of
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 84
(1987), pp. 59-83. © The Journal of Philosophy, Inc.
Reprinted by permission of Columbia University.
cases appears well adapted to investigating the rela­
tions among them.
But what relations among concepts are being
charted when we develop a systematic account of
the conditions under which a person survives, con­
tinues on, or persists through a period of time? No
doubt there is some innocuous sense in which we
are employing some nonindividual concept when
we judge that Anthony Blunt is the same person as
the notorious Maurice or that Orcutt is not the
same person as the most cultured spy. No doubt
there is some relation between this concept of being
the same person and the concepts of mental con­
tinuity, of physical continuity, and of the various
patterns of causal dependence which could be
responsible for such continuities. However, it
ought to be controversial that the relation here is
the same as the relation between knowledge and,
say, true belief. Believing correctly that p is argu­
ably part of what it means to have knowledge that p,
whereas the holding of patterns of mental and
physical continuity and dependence across a
stretch of time seems to be the sort of evidence
we might ideally rely upon in justifying our claim
that a person survived or continued on through the
stretch in question. Why should we think that we
could analyze what it means to say that someone
has survived in terms of the concepts ofthe sorts of
relations that are evidence for survival?
The method of theorizing about personal iden­
tity solely or mainly by appeal to our intuitive
reactions to puzzle cases which exhibit all sorts of
variations in kind and degree of continuity and \nMark Johnston
dependence would be justified if two requirements
were satisfied. First, our grasp of the concept of
being the same person should be able to be cor­
rectly represented as a grasp of necessary and suffi­
cient conditions for the application of the predicate
"is the same person, " conditions that could be cast
in terms of statements about continuity and
dependence, statements not themselves to be
explained in terms of statements about personal
identity. Call this the reductionist requirement. Sec­
ondly, our intuitive reactions to the puzzle cases
should be able to be taken as manifestations of our
grasp of those necessary and sufficient conditions,
and not as overgeneralizations from the everyday
run of cases or manifestations of a particular con­
ception of people, be it a religious conception (e. g. ,
that people are reincarnatable souls) or some more
inchoate secular counterpart. But then it should be
evident that this second requirement generates a
difficulty for the ideology behind the method of
cases. Given the enormous variety of apparently
conceptually coherent conceptions of people which
have been entertained, we must assume that our
common concept of people, if there is such a thing,
is quite unspecific; so the topic of personal identity
will be the dry articulation of a vague generality
compatible with all the more interesting and spe­
cific conceptions that have guided practical life.
This difficulty not having been taken seriously,
there is a dominant - and as it turns out, fairly
specific - philosophical view about people which is
defended in large part by the method of cases. The
dominant view has it that we are minds - perhaps
essentially embodied minds, although no particular
body or brain is such that its survival is essential to
ours. Put in more familiar terms, the dominant
view is what we might call, following Derek Parfit,
wide psychological reductionism. 2 Psychological reduc­
tionism is the view that truths about personal iden­
tity have as necessary and sufficient conditions
statements about the holding of relations of mental
continuity and connectedness. Connectedness
involves the holding of direct psychological con­
nections, such as the persistence of beliefs and
desires, the connection between an intention and
the later act in which the intention is carried out,
and the connection between an experience and a
memory of that experience. Connectedness can
come in twice over in the statement of the condi­
tions on personal identity. All psychological reduc­
tionists require that, if two person-stages are stages
of the same person, then psychological continuity,
the ancestral of strong or predominant psycholo-
gical connectedness, holds between them. Some
psychological reductionists also require that no
two such stages be entirely unconnected psycholo­
gically. The dominant view is properly called wide
psychological reductionism because it has it that
mental continuity and connectedness can consti­
tute personal identity even if the holding of these
relations is not secured by its normal cause, the
persistence of a particular human body or brain.
Any causal mechanism that operates so that these
psychological relations hold will do. The identity
over time of any particular human body or brain
plays no strictly indispensable role in the identity
of a particular person over time. Any particular
human body or brain is just one causal means
among others for the holding of the relations of
psychological continuity and connectedness which
constitute a particular person's survival.
David Lewis, Anthony Q}linton, and Sydney
Shoemaker are among those who have advanced
the wide psychological view. 3 The view is typically
defended by appeal to the intuition that one could
discover that one had come to inhabit a new body
and that others could confirm this by noticing one's
familiar personality manifesting itself in that new
body. Sometimes this intuition is wrung from cases
like John Locke's case of the prince and the cobbler
who appear to swap bodies. 4 Sometimes it is wrung
from cases of Star Trek-style teletransportation in
which a body is scanned at one point and is
destroyed by the scanning, while at another point
a cell-by-cell duplicate is made in accord with the
information got from the scanning. 5 Sometimes it
is wrung from cases of brain-state transfer in which
a machine wipes one brain "clean, " and another
brain is caused to go into states which are identical
in all respects to the previous states of the first
brain. 6
The body-change intuition generated by each of
these fantastic cases is supposed to support the
claim that mental continuity and connectedness,
however they are caused, are jointly sufficient for
personal identity. In support of the necessity of
mental continuity and connectedness it is observed
that if the processes in question did not secure
these psychological relations, we would not be
inclined to say that the original person came to
inhabit a new body.
The method of cases and the dominant view
taken together have a fair claim to constitute the
orthodoxy in philosophical discussions of personal
identity. Orthodoxies have a tendency to freeze the
imagination, so before criticizing this orthodoxy, it \nmay be worthwhile briefly to describe an altern­
ative method and an alternative view.
Suppose that right from the start we give up the
reductionist requirement to the effect that state­
ments about personal identity be shown to have the
same fact-stating potential as statements about
continuity and connectedness. So, in Parfit's
terms, we adopt the further-fact view, according
to which statements about personal identity are
made true by facts different from facts about men­
tal and physical continuity and dependence. 7
These latter facts constitute our evidence for per­
sonal identity and are not that in which personal
identity consists.
Once we make this first departure from the
orthodox position, the method of cases will no
longer seem to be the primary method of theorizing
about personal identity. We can no longer re­
present our intuitive reactions to puzzle cases
described in the language of continuity and con­
nectedness as mere manifestations of our concept
of personal identity. Rather, we will regard those
intuitive reactions as judgments based upon the
evidence available in the cases. And there will be
reason to think that these judgments are more
unreliable the more bizarre the cases in question
are. For many of the bizarre cases involve the
severing of just those contingent connections
which in everyday life make continuity and con­
nectedness good evidence for identity.
What then will take the primary place of the
method of cases? What are the primary phenomena
that a philosophical theory of personal identity
should aim to save? Here is a suggestion. There is
the humble and ubiquitous practice of reidentify­
ing each other over time. Philosophical skepticism
aside, this practice is a reliable and mostly unprob­
lematic source of knowledge about particular
claims of personal identity. So the primary ques­
tion for a philosophical theory of personal identity
is: What sort of thing is such that things of that sort
can be reliably and unproblematically reidentified
over time in just the way in which we reliably and
unproblematically reidentify ourselves and each
other over time? Any theory of personal identity,
such as the bare-locus view discussed below (section
2), which would represent our practice of reidenti­
fying each other over time as extremely problem­
atic so far as generating knowledge of the facts of
personal identity goes, is automatically ruled out at
this stage. And considerable implausibility attaches
to any theory that cannot reconstruct as wholly
justified the easy and uncomplicated ways in
Human Beings
which we reidentify people on the basis of their
physical appearance and manner.
Of course it may be that a number of competing
theories survive this first stage. The surviving
competitors may then be evaluated in terms of
their compatibility with our reactions to those puz­
zle cases which provide situations in which the
competing theories diverge in their pronounce­
ments. But these intuitive reactions are defeasible
judgments, which we can defeat by showing that
they are overgeneralizations from the ordinary run
of cases or are produced by some distorting influ­
ence or are outweighed by other judgments that we
have reason to respect. So the alternative treatment
of intuitive reactions will make more of comparing
cases where intuitions conflict and will look for the
underlying explanations of these conflicting intu­
itions. Sometimes the underlying explanations will
discredit the intuitions and the conceptions of peo­
ple which they appear to support, sometimes not. If
equally good competitors still survive at this second
stage, then we may be faced with genuine indeter­
minacy which our philosophical theory of personal
identity should articulate.
I shall argue that, if we adopt this alternative
method which takes a more critical attitude to the
method of cases and relegates it to a secondary role,
then our investigations will not converge on the
dominant view of personal identity. Rather than
see ourselves as minds whose particular embodi­
ments are contingent, we will see ourselves as
human beings: that is, beings which necessarily
are normally constituted by human organisms,
and whose conditions of survival deviate from
those of their constituting organisms only because
a human being will continue on if his mind con­
tinues on, so that a human being could be reduced
to the condition of a mere brain so long as that
brain continues the human being's mental life.
Although having all but its brain destroyed is too
much for a human organism to survive, a human
being might plausibly be held to survive this. But
as I (somewhat stipulatively) shall use the term
'human being', no human being could survive
teletransportation or like cases of complete body
transfer. 8
By way of beginning to displace the orthodox
position - the method of cases and the dominant
view - I shall present a well-known conundrum
about personal identity which, on the face of it,
seems to threaten both parts of the orthodox posi­
tion. A relatively orthodox reaction to the conund­
rum will be found wanting. In extracting the right \nMark Johnston
morals from the conundrum, I shall employ the
alternative methodology outlined above. It will
then become evident that the dominant view
depends for its appeal upon the exploitation of
certain systematically distorting influences on our
intuitions about puzzle cases.
1 The ConundruITl
The conundrum that threatens both the method of
cases and the dominant view derives from Bernard
Williams, 9 though I will present it in my own way.
In the fantastic tale that follows we are to sup­
pose that there is a machine which produces the
sort of psychological effects that would be pro­
duced by transposing patients' brains. When the
machine is connected up to two patients, A and B,
and turned on, the machine records all features of
their brains relevant to the determination of dis­
positional and occurrent mentality. The machine
alters the A-brain so that it comes to have asso­
ciated with it what appears to be the continuation
of B's dispositional and occurrent mentality, and so
that the person with the A-body emerges from the
machine with what appears to be B's course of
experience, memories, character traits, projects,
etc. Mutatis mutandis for the B-brain. The person
with the B-body emerges from the machine with
what appears to be A's course of experience, mem­
ories, character traits, projects, etc.
Suppose that A is faced with such a procedure.
First his psychology is realized in his brain and
body. Then the machine is turned on and his
psychology appears to be realized in the B-body
and brain. Mutatis mutandis for B. Before the
machine operates, it appears to A that the ma­
chine's operation would cause him to swap bodies
with B. So if before the machine's operation A were
to choose which of the A-body and the B-body is to
undergo pain after the machine's operation and
choose only from the self-interested point of
view, he would choose the A-body. When the
case is presented this way, many would agree with
A. After all, if the brains of A and B were surgically
transposed and the resultant composites survived,
then, so many of us believe, A and B would have
swapped bodies. The machine seems to produce
the same effects without having to transpose
brains.
But now suppose that A has to choose whether to
undergo a very painful surgical procedure which
has a small chance of curing him of some illness.
There is no effective anesthetic or analgesic that
will block the pain. But A's doctor tells him that the
latest medical technology can be used to "get
around" the pain. The doctor explains that he is
able to record all the features of A's brain relevant
to the determination of dispositional and occurrent
mentality, and reorganize those features so that
dispositional and occurrent mental features very
different from A's will be realized by A's brain.
Then and only then will A's body be subjected to
the painful surgical intervention. Only after the
pain has ceased will the machine reorganize A's
brain so that it realizes dispositional and occurrent
mentality continuous with A's mentality as it was
before the machine first acted on his brain.
Presented with such a prospect and asked to
regard the future pain as having no significance
from the self-interested point of view, A might
reasonably retort that he is being asked to undergo
a double assault. First his brain is to be fiddled with
in a fairly drastic way so as to produce radical
psychological discontinuity, and then he is to be
caused to feel severe pain. And this reaction is in
accord with the intuition most of us would have
about the case. The future pain is A's pain despite
the intervening psychological discontinuity. As
Williams notes, the concept of a person's future
pain is not such that some degree of psychological
continuity is required in order to make some future
pain his.
So we have two intuitions, the intuition that A
would swap bodies and so avoid any pain then
undergone by the A-body, and the intuition that
A would suffer pain in the A-body despite radical
psychological discontinuity. The second intuition
counts against the dominant view, which takes
psychological continuity to be necessary for perso­
nal identity. And, on reflection, a further difficulty
emerges. We have two directly conflicting intui­
tions about what could be taken to be two presenta­
tions of the same case. For we may suppose that the
medical technology referred to by the doctor is just
the machine that appears to transpose minds. What
the doctor described was just one side of the body­
swapping case followed by another body swap to
reinstate A in the A-body and B in the B-body.
The doctor refrained from describing B's experi­
ences to A; but just how can this be relevant to the
determination of our intuitions in the second pres­
entation of the case?
Taken at face value, the intuition associated with
the second presentation: that A would suffer pain
in the A-body despite intervening psychological \ndiscontinuity of the most radical sort, threatens the
dominant view. And on the face of it the two
intuitions taken together threaten the method of
cases. For how can intuition be reliable if we can be
got to react so differently to the very same case?
Robert Nozick has recently offered a diagnosis
which, if successful, would save the method of
cases and only slightly modify the dominant view.
He suggests that our intuitions about personal
identity conform to the closest-continuer schema
according to which the closest of the sufficiently
close continuers of a given individual is that indivi­
dual. 10 This is properly called a "schema" because
just which weightings of just which relations are
relevant in determining closeness of continuation
will vary depending on what kind of individual is in
question. The intuition associated with the second
presentation can be taken as showing that, when it
comes to persons, bodily continuity can make for
sufficient continuity in the absence of psycholo­
gical continuity. This explains our tracing A so
that he remains in the same body throughout.
The intuition associated with the first presentation
can be taken as showing that when bodily continu­
ity and psychological continuity diverge, we give
more weight to psychological continuity. This
explains why, when told of the adventures of B's
psychology as well as A's, we have the intuition that
A and B swap bodies. Our intuitive reactions to the
two presentations are consistent because the first
presentation simply describes a better continuer of
A than any continuer of A described in the second
presentation. That is why mentioning B and what
happens to his brain is relevant. And the dominant
view requires only modification. Psychological
continuity can be on its own sufficient for personal
identity and, in the absence of bodily continuity,
necessary for personal identity.
This would be a satisfying orthodox response
to the conundrum if it could be shown that our
intuitions about personal identity conform in gen­
eral to the closest-continuer schema interpreted in
terms of the modified dominant view. But they
do not.
Suppose the brain-state transfer machine is
developed further so that it can seem to continue
the mentality of a given patient A in each of the
bodies of two patients Band C. Typically, the
original A-body dies as a result of the machine's
operation, and, after the machine operates, the
person associated with the B-body and the person
associated with the C-body are each sufficiently
close psychological continuers of A. Suppose also,
Human Beings
however, that typically the person associated with
the C-body is a considerably better psychological
continuer of A than the person associated with the
B-body. Finally, suppose that this extra continuity
is more than enough to compensate for the extra
ten-minute delay typically involved in "reading"
A's psychology into the C-body.
Now imagine that the machine has been operat­
ing and A's psychology has been (or seems to have
been) "read into" the B-body. The person asso­
ciated with the B-body gets up and walks around
and thinks to himself, "I am A. I did not just come
into existence. " He sees the machine beginning to
"read" A's psychology into the C-body. He knows
that if the process is allowed to continue the result
will be that the person associated with the C-body
will be a better continuer of A than he is. So he
turns off the machine. According to the closest­
continuer theory, the person associated with the B­
body has made it true that he is A and has existed
before the operation of the machine as A. But, as
against this, surely our intuition is that the B-body
person's thought, "I am A. I did not just come into
existence, " is made true or false by what has hap­
pened up to and including the time at which that
thought occurs. Surely no subsequent act by the
B-body person can make this thought true or
false. The closest-continuer schema interpreted
in terms of the modified dominant view violates
the intuition that the relevant facts are settled
before the B-body person decides whether or not
to tamper with the machine. To the extent that we
have this and like intuitions, we are not to be
construed as responding to cases as if we were
adherents of the closest-continuer schema, at least
as applied to people. To that extent Nozick's reac­
tion to the conundrum, a conundrum which
derives from our present responses to two
presentations of the same case, is inadequate, even
if it were the case that philosophical theorists should
ultimatezy adopt the closest-continuer schema in some
form in the light of all the evidence about personal
identi~y.
There is another consideration that suggests that
Nozick's diagnosis of the conundrum is inad­
equate. That diagnosis crucially depends upon
the second presentation of Williams's case being
one-sided, in the sense that the only sufficiently
good continuer of A presented in the A-body per­
son. The closest-continuer schema applied in
accord with the modified dominant view implies
that if the second presentation had included refer­
ence to another body who appears to inherit A's \nMark Johnston
psychology, then we would simply have the first
presentation and the familiar body-swap intuition.
But in fact we easily understand the stipulation that
A undergoes or survives throughout the "reading
into" his brain of B's psychology and then suffers
severe pain while B undergoes the "reading into"
his brain of A's psychology. An adequate response
to the conundrum has to explain why we can make
sense of this stipulation even though we respond
as we do in the first presentation of Williams's
case.
What then can we say about the conundrum?
Here is a minimal response. (Competing elabora­
tions of the response will be considered below. ) It
seems that our reactions to the two presentations
indicate that we think of a person as a locus of
mental life; that is to say, something which typic­
ally exhibits psychological continuity and can be
traced in terms of it, but something which need not
always exhibit psychological continuity, something
which can undergo psychological discontinuity of
the most radical sort. The first presentation has us
trace A in terms of psychological continuity, the
second presentation encourages us to suppose that
A undergoes psychological discontinuity. Our
reactions are comprehensible if we think of our­
selves as loci of mental lives, where this character­
ization does not in itself require that we think of
ourselves as things of such a sort that psychological
continuity, however it is secured, is sufficient for
our survival. All that needs to be allowed is that it is
reasonable to trace a locus of mental life in terms of
psychological continuity. It is left open whether a
reasonable practice might be leading us wrong in
the puzzle case at hand.
Given this way of understanding our reactions to
the conundrum, we can take our reaction to the
second presentation as prima facie evidence against
the wide psychological view (since such a view
would make no sense of the stipulation that A
undergoes radical psychological discontinuity) with­
out automatically taking our reaction to the first
presentation as showing that psychological con­
tinuity, however it is secured, is sufficient for our
survival. At least, this is so if we are able satisfac­
torily to answer the question: Just what kind of
locus of mental life are we? in a way that does not
imply that psychological continuity, however it is
secured, is sufficient for our survival. This is the
question that will have to be answered by any
theorist of personal identity whether or not he
aims for a reduction of the persistence conditions
of people in terms of conditions on continuity.
2 What Kind of Locus of Mental Life?
The dominant view, or wide psychological reduc­
tionism, amounts to a fairly specific characteriza­
tion of the kind of thing we are, since it has
psychological continuity and connectedness figure
as necessary conditions on personal identity. But,
given its reliance on the method of cases, the
dominant view has no clear right to this necessary
condition and consequent degree of specificity. For
if the method of cases is taken at face value, we get
the result that there are no specific necessary con­
ditions on the survival of a person. That is, Wil­
liam's conundrum and like cases could be taken to
show that we are what I will call bare loci of mental
life, that is, possessors of mental life whose survival
requires no amount of either bodily or mental con­
tinuity. 1I If the method of cases is taken as the
method of theorizing about personal identity,
such a view can be made to appear quite compel­
ling. It is only when we adopt the alternative
method of theorizing about personal identity
described above that the bare-locus view can be
shown to be unacceptable.
The first presentation of Williams's case seems
to show that bodily continuity is not necessary for
survival, and the second presentation seems to
show that psychological continuity is not necessary
for survival. We may bolster up these appearances
by pointing out that we can imagine many sorts of
cases that seem to involve one's ceasing to be asso­
ciated with a particular human body and human
personality. These cases are particularly compel­
ling when imagined "from the inside. " So I am to
imagine myself undergoing a radical change in my
form, e. g. , a change like that undergone by Franz
Kafka's beetle-man, 12 and perhaps concurrently a
wild change in my psychology. There seems to be
nothing internally incoherent about such imagin­
ings. None of them exhibit the sort of conceptual
deadlock associated with the attempt to imagine a
married bachelor or a round square (if anything
could be called such an attempt). Nor do such
imaginings appear necessarily to embody some reli­
gious or secular conception of people which the
imaginer has picked up. Rather it seems that such
imaginings are not ruled out by, and so are consist­
ent with, our concept of a person. So, given the
ideology behind the method of cases, it is difficult
to dismiss such imaginings as idle. They will
appear to chart the boundaries of our concept of a
person and thus indicate the correct theory of
personal identity. \nBut such imaginings are idle. And if this can be
shown, then it is plausible to take our pure concept
of a person, understood as whatever it is that our
reactions to these puzzle cases manifest, as being
too unspecific to be of much interest, and as unspe­
cific in a way that will typically lead us wrong in
many puzzle cases.
Suppose, for example, that our pure concept of a
person is just the concept of an unspecified kind of
locus of (perhaps reflective) mental life, where this
is understood, as before, to allow that a locus of
mental life can survive radical psychological dis­
continuity. This concept is unspecific in the sense
that it embodies no determinate necessary condi­
tions on the survival of a person. There are no
determinate necessary conditions on any tracing
of a locus of mental life through any imagined
vicissitude. Of course, in the presence of imagined
bodily or mental continuities, we typically trace in
terms of them, but this is just the reflection in our
imaginative conceits of our ordinary practice of
tracing people. That practice employs such con­
tinuities as evidence for the survival of people, and
some of our reactions to imagined puzzle cases can
be taken as harmless extensions of this practice.
But, in the absence of imagined bodily or mental
continuity, our unspecific conception of people is
unconstrained by any evidence for persistence, and
we get just the intuitive responses that seem to
indicate that we are beings of the kind bare locus
of mental lift, where this characterization is now
understood as including all that is necessary and
sufficient for our persistence through time, so that
we could undergo any sort of physical or mental
metamorphosis.
How are we to show that the imaginings that
detach me from the human being I appear to be are
idle, without begging the question against the bare­
locus view? The alternative method outlined above
lays down as a first constraint on any theory of
personal identity that it enable us to reconstruct
our everyday practice of reidentifying people as an
unproblematic source of knowledge about personal
identity over time. This is a constraint which the
bare-locus view flouts.
To see this, consider one of the wilder imaginat­
ive conceits which is identity-preserving on the
view that I am a bare locus. I can imagine some­
thing that might be called my experiencing my
body turning to stone. A queer numbness creeps
up from my feet. It is as if my body is getting
heavier and heavier and less and less tractable to
my will. My senses give out, and in the end I am in
Human Beings
the grip of panic at what seems like complete
paralysis and sensory loss.
If we suppose that I can survive my body turning
to stone, we must then face the question of which
relations tie me to my body. The supposition that I
could survive my body's petrification implies that
the relations that tie me to my body are contingent.
It cannot be that I am identical with or necessarily
constituted by my living body. It seems, then, that
the relevant relation can at most involve some
actual pattern of causal interaction or some parti­
cular channel of causal influence (which mayor
may not be exploited at any particular time) by
which I, a bare locus, get information about and
direct changes in some of the states of that body.
The supposition that it is always some actual
pattern of causal interaction which ties the bare
locus that I am to a particular body can be set
aside. If I can survive my body turning to stone
because my essence is to be a bare locus of mental
life, then surely I could survive my body turning to
stone when that body is in deep (dreamless) sleep
or rendered unconscious by drugs that work on the
brain. For there was nothing in the idea of a locus
of mental life as we introduced it which required
that such a locus never undergo an interruption in
its occurrent mental life. Otherwise the bare-locus
view would be at odds with what appear to be the
facts about our surviving periods of unconscious­
ness. Suppose then that, while it was unconscious,
the living thing that I call "my body" turned to
stone. The contingent relation which held between
the bare locus that I am supposed to be and my
body before it turned to stone and which ceased to
hold when my body turned to stone was not some
actual pattern of causal interaction by which that
bare locus got information about and directed
changes in some of the states of my body. None
of that was going on when I was unconscious.
So we are driven back to the suggestion that,
according to the bare-locus view, what makes a
particular human body my body is a channel of
causal influence which holds between the bare
locus that I am and the body that I call "my
body". But now the epistemological difficulties
associated with the bare-locus view come to the fore.
Ordinary judgements that a particular person is
in a state of unconsciousness are based on the
observed continuity of human bodily life. Such
judgements typically constitute knowledge that
the particular person still exists though uncon­
scious. If one condition on knowing that p is having
evidence that converges on p as opposed to the \nMark Johnston
relevant alternatives to p, then, in cases of uncon­
sciousness, continuity of human bodily life must
favour the proposition that a single person's sur­
vival is manifested by that bodily life. But then, in
typical cases of unconsciousness or sleep, there
cannot be a relevant alternative to the effect that
people understood as bare loci have been replacing
each other behind the stage of one human body's
life. For that is an alternative that we are not in a
position to rule out when faced with a sleeping or
unconscious human body. If such an alternative
were relevant, we would have little chance of know­
ing who was in bed with us at night.
For suppose that one came to accept the bare­
locus view, complete with the account of channels
of causal influence tying bare loci to particular
human bodies. Then the ordinary judgement that
a particular person is still in bed even though in
deep sleep will have to be construed as the judge­
ment that the same bare locus of mental life is
associated with the living body in question via a
channel of causal influence which is not then being
exploited. But such a judgement brings in its train a
host of alternative hypotheses: e. g. , that there are
two or three or four or many more such loci,
perhaps each with its appropriate channel, repla­
cing each other behind the stage of the continuous
bodily life that we observe. Given the metaphysical
picture of a bare locus being tied to a body by a
channel of possible causal influence, these become
relevant alternatives. Let no one suggest that those
ignorant of the ways of bare loci can rule out these
alternatives by means of an inference to the
numerically simplest explanation of observed bodily
continuity. None of these hypotheses explain con­
tinuity of a bodily life devoid of mental accompani­
ments. They are all merely compatible with such
continuity. And indeed one should want to know
why the simplest hypothesis is not that in deep
sleep the bare locus usually tied to a given body
has faded away or has simply detached itself from
that body to wander where it will, as in the spiritu­
alist's fantasies of astral travel. The relative sim­
plicity of such alternative hypotheses could be
reasonably evaluated only in the presence of some
account of the typical or natural ways of bare loci.
Suppose there were some empirical theory that
one could offer about bare loci, perhaps confirmed
by introspection and observation of others or even
by revelation, and - the best case - such a theory
implied that bare loci did not typically migrate or
permute during unconsciousness or sleep. This is
roughly what any substance dualist, the bare-locus
theorist included, should take himself to be offer­
ing: namely, an empirical theory that fits the facts
of human experience. 13 By appeal to the theory,
one might have a way of ruling out the relevant
alternatives, and so a way of coming to know that a
single person is associated with a sleeping or
unconscious body over a period of time.
The crucial point is that our ordinary claims to
know that our friends and familiars were continu­
ously where their bodies were when they were
unconscious or in deep sleep rests on nothing like
the employment of any such theory to rule out the
possibility that any number of bare loci came to be
associated with their bodies during such periods.
These are alternatives we just do not consider, let
alone rule out. We would boggle if asked to take
them seriously. Yet they would be relevant altern­
atives if the bare-locus view were the correct view
of people. So if the bare-locus view is correct, then
our ordinary practice of reidentifying people
during periods of unconsciousness and deep sleep
does not generate knowledge. But, philosophical
skepticism aside, we have every reason to think
that it does.
One cannot save the bare-locus view by holding
that, although it is the true view, in ordinary life we
are spared the obligation to rule out the alternatives
it makes relevant by our ignorance of the fact that it
is the true view. For this sort of ignorance does not
make it easier to know. Take just one familiar
example. Suppose that my interlocutor and I both
see a woman who looks just like Mary steal a book
from the library. It is in fact Mary, and in fact I
believe this, but I am not in a position to know this
because I know that Mary has an identical twin who
dresses just like her, so there is a relevant alternat­
ive that my observational evidence does not rule
out. My interlocutor knows nothing of Mary's twin
and claims to know that Mary stole the book on the
strength of what we both saw. I take it that our
intuition is that, even if it was Mary we both saw,
his claim to know is mistaken, for he cannot know
and I not know just because he is ignorant of
crucially relevant facts. 14
If this is right, the bare-locus view flouts the first
constraint of the alternative method. Given that
view, we cannot reconstruct a part of our ordinary
practice of reidentifying each other as generating
knowledge about personal identity. If the bare­
locus view fails, a number of views fail with it.
For similar arguments would count against any
substance dualist, such as Richard Swinburne,
who identifies us with mental substances, even if \nthat substance dualist allows that we have some
mental features as permanent or essential proper­
ties. ls On any such view, similar problems will
arise with unconsciousness and deep sleep. We do
not trace a locus of mental life with a purely mental
nature or essence when we trace people through
such states.
The bare-locus view is straightforwardly sup­
ported by the method of cases. To the extent that
we find that view absurd in its consequences, we
should have grave doubts about relying simply
upun the method of cases. For if we are not bare
loci of mental life or activity, then some of our
intuitions in puzzle cases simply represent our tra­
cing what is no more than a reification of our
unspecific concept of ourselves as some or other
sort of locus of mental life. 16 But what is the correct
specific conception of ourselves, and how could we
argue for it without running foul of intuitions
generated by a misleading reification of this unspe­
cific concept of ourselves?
3 Human Organisms and Human
Beings
Suppose that, instead of engaging in the self­
defeating search for truths about ourselves that
are both purely conceptual and yet specific enough
to be interesting, we start with the specific concep­
tion of ourselves as evolved animals of a particular
sort, the conception that locates us most easily
within the naturalistic framework taken for granted
by scientifically validated common sense. We will
then try to articulate which aspects of our thought
about ourselves could lead us to displace or modify
this conception. The point of departure is then the
position that we are essentially organisms of a par­
ticular animal species, namely Homo sapiens, so that
the locus of mental life that we reidentify when we
reidentify a person over time is just an instance of a
biological kind, a kind whose members typically
exhibit a complex mental life.
That we must depart from this position is, I
think, the upshot of the case first introduced into
philosophical discussion by Sydney Shoemaker:
It is now possible to transplant certain organs. .. it is at least conceivable. .. that a human
body could continue to function normally if its
brain were replaced by one taken from another
human body. .. Two men, a Mr Brown and a
Mr Robinson, had been operated on for brain
Human Beings
tumors, and brain extractions had been per­
formed on both of them. At the end of the
operations, however, the assistant inadvertently
put Brown's brain in Robinson's head, and
Robinson's brain in Brown's head. One of
these men immediately dies, but the other, the
one with Robinson's head and Brown's brain,
eventually regains consciousness. Let us call the
latter "Brownson". .. When asked his name he
automatically replies "Brown. " He recognizes
Brown's wife and family. .. , and is able to
describe in detail events in Brown's life. .. of
Robinson's past life he evidences no knowledge
at allY
The predominant reaction to this case is to sup­
pose that Brownson is Brown and that during the
brain-switching operation Brown survives as his
denuded or debodied brain. This intuition is
robust in the sense that it remains even if we
modify the case by supposing that Brown's
deb rained body ~ call it "Brownless" ~ is provided
with enough in the way of transplanted brain-stem
tissue to keep it alive indefinitely. Although the
transplanted brain-stem tissue does not subserve
consciousness, Brownless is alive. Blood is coursing
through Brownless, compounds in that blood are
being metabolized, breath is being drawn into the
lungs of Brownless, wastes are being expelled, and
so on. Brownless is a living though badly mutilated
human organism. And it seems bizarre to suppose
that the organism Brownless came into being only
after Brown's brain was taken out of Brown's body.
Instead it seems that Brownless is the same organ­
ism as Brown. If we trace Brown's original organic
life, we find Brownless realizing most of this life
after Brown's brain is transplanted into Robinson's
deb rained body. We can allow a sense in which
Brown's mental life may seem to continue on in
Brownson. But, given the predominance of basic
life functions that continue on in Brownless, we
cannot count Brownson as the same human organ­
ism as Brown and think of human organisms as
instances of purely biological kinds: i. e. , individuals
whose persistence through time is constituted by
continuous biological life, so that the relative
importance of life functions (including mental
functioning) in tracing such an individual is deter­
mined by the relative contribution that those func­
tions make to maintaining continuous life. For in
this respect metabolism is more important than
mentation. So if 'human organism' is taken to
pick out a purely biological kind, Brownless and \nMark Johnston
not Brownson is the same human organism as
Brown. Hence if Brown survives as Brownson,
neither Brown nor his kind-mates (those essentially
the same as he) are essentially human organisms. IS
Usually, what I've called the "predominant"
reaction to Shoemaker's case, viz. , the fact that
most judge that Brownson is Brown, is taken as
establishing that Brownson is Brown. But this is
just another example of uncritical reliance on the
method of cases. Indeed, the predominant reaction
can be explained in terms of the distorting influ­
ences described below as the psychological-and
social-continuer effects. We need a principled rea­
son, consonant with the alternative method, for
taking seriously the judgment that Brownson is
Brown and thereby departing from the straightfor­
ward naturalistic conception of ourselves as essen­
tially human organisms.
The alternative method requires that we repres­
ent ourselves as things of a kind such that the easy
and uncomplicated ways in which we ordinarily
trace people are well adapted to tracing things of
that kind. Now, in tracing oneself backwards in
time, one typically relies upon experiential mem­
ory. The deliverances of experiential memory are
propositions involving claims about personal iden­
tity, viz. , that the one who is now having the
memory experience is the one whose experience is
being remembered. That is, experiential memory
does not leave us at a halfway house short of a full­
blooded belief about personal identity. It does not
leave us with some inference to make to arrive at
the belief that it was none other than the one who is
now having the memory who had the experience
being presently remembered. Moreover, it seems
that, even if one were in the Cartesian predicament
of having suspended belief in anything external to
one's own mind, experiential memory could still
deliver knowledge about personal identity.
This raises a difficulty. Once it is admitted that
among the necessary conditions on personal iden­
tity are certain bodily conditions having to do with
the survival of an organism or crucial parts of it, the
question arises how experiential memory, i. e. ,
something whose internal phenomenology makes
it seem like a faculty suited to picking up only
mental connections between earlier and later men­
tal states, could deliver any more than conclusions
of the form: the same mind that had the remem­
bered experience is the mind that is now remem­
bering. For how could such a faculty directly pick
up the fact that some bodily condition on personal
identity is satisfied? And if it could not do this, by
what right are its deliverances properly taken to
involve claims about personal identity as opposed
to claims about mere mental identity?
The way out of this difficulty for the reconstruct­
ive program that is the alternative method is to
realize that, if anything deserves the name of a
conceptual truth about the relation between per­
sons and minds, it is the claim that a person cannot
be outlived by (what once was) his own mind. It is
not a temporary feature of my mind that it is my
mind. Nor could it be. No situation could deserve a
description to the effect that the very mind that is
my mind has been or will come to be the mind of
someone else. Talk of a particular mind is just talk
about a particular person's mental functioning. So,
in delivering the conviction (and typically the
knowledge) that the mind that had the remembered
experience is the same mind that is now remember­
ing, experiential memory is eo ipso delivering the
conviction (and typically the knowledge) that the
person who had the remembered experience is
the same person as the person who is now remem­
bering.
If this is so, then, whenever we have reason to
say that a single mind has continued on, we have
reason to say that a single person has continued on.
But if we now adopt a properly naturalistic view of
our mental functioning, i. e. , see our mental func­
tioning as the characteristic functioning of our
brains, then it will be difficult, albeit not imposs­
ible, to resist the idea that one's mind would con­
tinue on if only one's brain were kept alive and
functioning. Given the conceptual connection
between people and minds, this amounts to the
conclusion that one would go where one's brain
goes and that one could survive as a mere brain.
And now we have not just a brute intuition but an
argument for the predominant reaction to Shoe­
maker's case from a principle that must hold if
experiential memory is to be reconstructed as a
faculty that could deliver knowledge about per­
sonal (as opposed to merely mental) identity.
Applying the alternative method and attempting
to reconstruct our reidentifications of others,
things go most smoothly if we understand our­
selves as tracing human organisms. But once we
try to reconstruct our reidentifications of ourselves
via memory, we see that it is human beings that we
trace, i. e. , beings that could outlive the human
organisms they are invariably constituted by if
their minds were to continue on.
Focusing on intuitions about brain-transfer
cases and, in particular, the intuition that during \nsuch processes one survives as a mere brain has led
some philosophers to take seriously a view floated
for discussion by Thomas Nagel and J. L. Mackie,
the view that we are essentially human brains, so
that, for example, 'I' in my mouth picks out a pink,
spongy thing inside my skull. 19 This extraordinary
view is of the same ilk as William James's notion
that his true self was located somewhere near the
back of his throat and G. E. Moore's conviction
that he was closer to his hands than to his feet.
Rather than argue directly against the view that I
am my brain and its strange implications (e. g. , that
when I report my weight as 150 pounds, I am like a
driver of a heavy truck who says to a bridge attend­
ant "I weigh 3 tons"), it is better to show that what
is correct in the motivation for the view can be
accommodated without needless paradox or wrig­
gling out of paradox. The plausible observation
behind the Nagel/Mackie view is that the survival
of one's brain can be sufficient for one's survival
and may well be necessary for it. But this does not
show that we are of the kind human brain, i. e. , that
in our normal unmutilated condition we are pink­
ish-grey, spongy organs awash in cerebrospinal
fluid. For the conditions under which one of us
might be held to survive as a mere brain are just the
conditions where it would make sense to talk of a
radically mutilated human being, one reduced to the
condition of a mere brain. The concept of mutila­
tion must be respected here; we cannot determine
the characteristic extent and form of a human being
by determining how much mutilation it can
undergo. The characteristic extent and form of a
human being is that of an unmutilated human
being, and that is the extent and form of an unmu­
tilated human organism. This obvious claim is in
no way threatened by the observation that each
human being has a proper part, his brain, which
is such that the survival of that part may constitute
his survival in a radically mutilated condition and
which is such that he would not survive the
destruction of that part.
Hence allowing that in cases like Shoemaker's
one would go where one's brain goes does not
imply that one is of the kind human brain, but
only that one is of a kind such that its members
survive if their mental life continues on as a result
of the survival of their organ of mentation. The
kind human being is such a kind if the tracing of the
life of a human being gives primary importance to
mental functioning among the various life func­
tions exhibited by human beings. In this sense
'human being' names a partly psychological kind,
Human Beings
whereas 'human organism', as we were under­
standing it, names a purely biological kind, a kind
such that mental functioning is given no special
persistence-guaranteeing status among the various
life functions exhibited by the instances of that
kind. Nevertheless, these kinds are intimately
related. So far, in every actual case a human being
is constituted by a particular human organism, and
so the survival of the organism is for all practical
purposes a necessary condition of the survival of
the human being. There are possible cases, such as
Shoemaker's, in which a human being can come to
be constituted by a mere brain and then by another
organism which comes to have that brain as its
organ of mentation. But it is crucial to the tracing
of a human being that there be something that is
the continued functioning of that human being's
brain, and so a human being cannot survive tele­
transportation and the like. The fact that teletrans­
portation secures certain causal dependencies
between earlier and later mental states should not
seduce us into thinking that these are states of the
same mind. A human mind is neither an independ­
ently traceable substance nor some bundle theor­
ist's ersatz for such a substance. A human mind is
just a mode of functioning of a natural unit (e. g. , a
human organism or a human brain) whose condi­
tions of persistence are statable in nonmental
terms. 20 This is the sense in which talk of a mind
is overly reified talk of an aspect of some minded
thing.
4 The Conundrum Again
We have some final work to do on Williams's con­
undrum. If we are essentially human beings, we can
undergo radical psychological discontinuity as a
result of having our brains tampered with, but we
cannot switch bodies without brain transplanta­
tion. So the view that we are essentially human
beings is incompatible with the intuition generated
by the first presentation of Williams's case. What is
going on here?
We have found good reason to suspect intuitions
that show that one or another form of continuity is
not necessary for survival; for such intuitions may
simply be generated by an unspecific concept of
ourselves as some or other kind of locus of mental
life. That having been said, it should be noted that,
in the first presentation of Williams's case, we trace
A in terms of psychological continuity even though
we have the option of tracing A in terms of bodily \nMark Johnston
continuity. This is not to be explained simply in
terms of the employment of an unspecific concept
of ourselves as loci of mental life. Why do we favor
psychological continuity over bodily continuity? Is
it that we are implicitly committed to the wide
psychological view?
I think not. Our tendency to trace people in
terms of psychological continuity in those puzzle
cases in which such continuity comes apart from
bodily continuity can be accounted for more satis­
factorily as an understandable overgeneralization
from the ordinary run of things. Let us say that X
is an excellent continuer of Y if X's occurrent
mental life evolves out of Y's occurrent mental
life and X's dispositional psychology (character
traits, quasi-memories, beliefs, and desires) evolves
out of and is very similar to Y's dispositional psy­
chology, so that X will experience and be disposed
to do what Y would have experienced and have
been disposed to do. Now in everyday life the
normal concomitant of death is the loss of any
very good continuer of oneself. When one dies,
there is no one to take one's place in the world, to
draw on one's memories and experiences, to act on
one's intentions, to do the things one would have
done in just the way one would have done them.
And the normal concomitant of survival is having
over the short term a unique and excellent conti­
nuer, namely oneself.
Now if we are essentially human beings, it will
be possible to imagine cases in which a person
ceases to be and yet nonetheless has a unique
excellent continuer and also cases in which a person
continues to exist while another becomes his
unique, excellent continuer. Parfit's teletranspor­
tation case will be a case of the first sort, whereas
Williams's first presentation depicts a case of the
second sort. If such cases are described simply in
terms of continuities, we will be liable to be misled
by the normal psychological concomitants of sur­
vival and so trace individuals in terms of psycholo­
gical continuity. By means of an understandable
overgeneralization from the ordinary run of cases,
we will be led to trace individuals in accord with
the wide psychological criterion. We could call
this overgeneralization the p~ychological-continuer
effect.
This can only be part of the explanation. The
question remains why, in reacting to the first pres­
entation of Williams's case, we do not instead
generalize from another typical "concomitant" of
survival, namely, the fact that in everyday life one
has the same body throughout any process that one
survives. Part of the answer is that people can be
got to react this way to the first presentation of
Williams's case if it is described immediately after
cases that highlight the importance of bodily con­
tinuity. But when I described the first presentation,
I followed Williams and deliberately assimilated it
to a brain-transplanting case, describing it as a case
that produces the same psychological effects as
brain transplanting without the surgical messiness
of an actual brain swap. Given the concurrent pres­
entation of a brain-swap case, the sort of bodily
continuity that is typical of survival in everyday life
is made less salient, and the psychological-conti­
nuer effect tends to operate. But in my experience
it is difficult to get the uninitiated to come up with
the body-swap intuition in response to the first
presentation of Williams's case when the first pres­
entation comes immediately after cases that
emphasize the importance of bodily continuity.
Such inconstancy in our intuitive reactions itself
suggests that our ordinary capacity to make correct
judgments about personal identity is not well
engaged by such bizarre cases. We are bewildered,
and in our bewilderment we opt for one or another
partial extension of our ordinary practice of reiden­
tification.
It must be admitted, however, that there is a
tendency among some people to respond to the
first presentation of Williams's case with the
body-swap intuition, even when the first presenta­
tion is delivered on its own and without any sug­
gestion about which other cases it should be
assimilated to. This is especially so when, in the
case presented, B, the recipient of what seems like
A's psychology, is like A in most bodily respects.
The question remains why for some, in such a case,
the psychological-continuer effect still predomin­
ates over the bodily-continuer effect.
Two factors may playa role. First, our practical
interests in the relation of personal identity: in
everyday-life the persistence of a person typically
guarantees that over the short term there will con­
tinue to be some occupant of the particular com­
plex of detailed and manifold social roles (father,
lover, friend, leader, supporter, colleague, nemesis,
regular customer, etc. ) which made up that per­
son's social life. Let us say then that personal
identity typically guarantees that one will have
over the short term a unique social continuer.
Whereas gross bodily continuity without psycho­
logical continuity does not provide a social con­
tinuer, the massive psychological continuity
described in the first presentation of Williams's \ncase is plausibly taken to provide a social continuer,
especially when the bodies involved are alike. So a
tendency to trace A through a body swap rather
than in accord with continuity of bodily life repres­
ents a fixation on the important practical con­
comitants of personal identity. Reinforcing the
psychological-continuer effect, we have the social­
continuer effect, i. e. , the tendency to trace a person
in terms of his social continuer. This too will be a
potentially distorting effect so long as we are not
essentially occupants of complexes of social roles.
The wide psychological view is thus parasitic upon
the psychological-and social-continuer effects; it
gives roughly correct conditions for the persistence
of "persons" - psychological and social continuers
of developed persons - but persons antedate, out­
live, and may sometimes be outlived by their
personas.
Secondly, if there is such a thing as the pure or
merely determinable concept of personal identity,
the concept of a persisting person as some or other
unspecified kind of persisting locus of reflective
mental life, and if the psychological-continuer
effect leads us to trace such loci along lines of
psychological continuity in cases in which bodily
and psychological continuity come apart, then it is
a short step to a more or less inchoate conception of
ourselves as souls, i. e. , primarily psychological and
so not essentially physical loci of reflective mental
life. That is, some of the primary intuitions sup­
porting the wide psychological view may well
depend upon a residual tendency to trace ourselves
as nonphysical souls, a tendency which survives
conversion to a secular world view, since it is at
least partly born of the interaction between the
pure concept of personal identity and the psy­
chological-continuer effect, a tendency which
Notes
In writing this paper I have been helped by conversations
with Rogers Albritton, Paul Benacerraf, Philippa Foot,
David Kaplan, Saul Kripke, David Lewis, Derek Parfit,
Warren Quinn, and Michael Smith. My indebtedness to
the works of Bernard Williams on personal identity
should be obvious.
For an extensi ve survey of this material, see Robert K.
Shope, The Ana(vsis oIKnllwinK (Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1983). I do not mean to suggest that
the method of cases is entirely unproblematic in epis­
temology, only that it is even more problematic when
it comes to personal identity.
Human Beings
should be at least mildly embarrassing to those
physicalists who have advanced the wide psycho­
logical view.
None of this is to give a direct argument against
the wide psychological view, but only to point out
why the arguments for it should not carry convic­
tion. There may be more direct arguments against
the wide psychological view, but if they are needed,
they are best left for another time. 21 For to give
them here would be to distract from the upshot of
the present discussion, namely that the wide psy­
chological view relies for its appeal on an analytical
method which we have no reason to respect, and
indeed upon a method which if thoroughly pur­
sued delivers the bare-locus view instead. If that is
right, it is hard to see how the wide psychological
view could now be rehabilitated. Indeed, it is hard
to see why one would want to rehabilitate it, given
the availability of the view that we are essentially
human beings. For if we take ourselves to be essen­
tially human beings, we are able to locate ourselves
in a broadly naturalistic conception of the world
and find nothing problematic in our everyday prac­
tice of reidentifying ourselves and others on the
strength of the continuous mental and physical
functioning of the human organisms we encounter.
Weighed against these advantages, we have no real
costs, but merely the deliverances of unconstrained
imaginative conceits, deliverances which have mis­
led the orthodox as a result of their uncritical over­
reliance on the method of cases, deliverances which
actually show only that the concept of personal
identity common to the adherents of particular
and divergent conceptions of personal identity is
just the unilluminating because merely determin­
able concept of some or other unspecified kind of
locus of mental life.
2 Derek Parfit, Reasons and Persons (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1984), pp. 207-8.
3 See David Lewis, "Survival and identity, " in Amelie
O. Rorty (ed. ), The Identities oI Persons (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1976); Anthony Quin­
ton, "The soul, " Journal oI Philosophy 49/15 (19 July
1962), pp. 393-409; Sydney Shoemaker with Richard
Swinburne, Personal Identizy (Oxford: Blackwell,
1984). Shoemaker clearly had some sympathy for the
view that bodily continuity is constitutive of personal
identity when he wrote Self-Knowledge and Self-Iden­
tity (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1963),
although he allowed that in exceptional cases the \nMark Johnston
bodily criterion of personal identity could be over­
ridden by the memory criterion. He decisively aban­
dons the bodily criterion in "Persons and their pasts, "
this volume, ch. 27. The most notable opponents of
the dominant view have been Bernard Williams, "Are
persons bodies? ," "Bodily continuity and personal
identity: a reply, " "Personal identity and individua­
tion, " "The self and the future, " all repro in Problems
of the Self (New York: Cambridge University Press,
1973), the last in this volume, ch. 28; and David
Wiggins, "Personal identity, " Sameness and Substance
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1980), ch. 6.
My differences with Wiggins are indicated in n. 17
below.
4 Quinton, "The Soul. " The Locke example occurs in
An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, bk II, ch.
17, sect. 15.
Derek Parfit introduces teletransportation on pp.
119-20 of Reasons and Persons, and discusses it further
on pp. 282-7. Parfit, however, claims only that tele­
transportation is as good as survival. The claim (I) on
p. 216, which seems to imply otherwise, is just mis­
leadingly formulated (personal communication).
6 Shoemaker discusses the brain-state transfer device in
Personal Identity, pp. 108-11.
7 Notice, however, that the account that follows is in no
way committed to the view that we are "separately
existing" (Parfit's phrase) entities distinct from
human brains and bodies. Instead I argue that we
are human beings, and that human beings are con­
stituted by human bodies. Thus the present paper can
be read as an extended refutation of Parfit's claim
(Reasons and Persons, p. 216) that if we believe that
personal identity is a further fact, we must also believe
we are separately existing entities. This claim is cru­
cial to the argument of Part Three of Reasons and
Persons. Parfit argues directly against the view that
we are separately existing entities. But, when it comes
to arguing for revisions in our practical attitudes, he
takes himself to have established that personal iden­
tity is never a further fact. If we are essentially human
beings in the sense of the present paper, then Parfit's
revisionary arguments are broken-backed. Moreover,
we can allow Parfit that in some puzzle cases personal
identity might well be an indeterminate matter, with­
out accepting his revisionary arguments. I elaborate
these claims in "Reasons and reductionism" (forth­
coming).
8 Although, for the purposes of this paper the possibil­
ity is set aside to avoid complications, I do not rule out
a kind of relativism about personal identity which
allows that acculturated human animals blamelessly
could have had or could come to have a conception of
personal identity according to which "they" could
survive teletransportation. (Whether the scare quotes
can be taken off' "they'" is of course a moot point. )
The main claim of the present paper is that there is no
reason to think that our actual conception of personal
identity is such as to allow us to survive teletranspor­
tation. The main impact of relativism about personal
identity and the possibility of refiguring our concep­
tion of ourselves will not be that we are not ofthe kind
human being, but that this kind may not strictly be a
substance kind, i. e. , may not fix in an absolutely invari­
ant way what kind of changes we could survive. How­
ever, on the assumption that the radical changes in
our thought and attitudes required for refiguring
our conception of ourselves will not take place, we
may treat the kind human being as if it were our
substance kind and so as if it determined our essence.
On these matters see my "Relativism and the self, "
forthcoming.
9 Bernard Williams, "The self and the future, " this
volume, ch. 28.
10 Robert Nozick, Philosophical Explanations (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1981), pp.
29-70.
11 Geoffrey Maddel argues, in The IdentiZv of the Self
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1981), that
our survival requires no amount of either mental or
bodily continuity, taking himself to be arguing in the
tradition of Butler, Reid, and McTaggart. See espe­
cially pp. 117-40. I hesitate, however, to attribute the
bare-locus view to Maddel, since he insists that people
are not objective entities at all, but rather thoroughly
"subjective" in the sense of Thomas Nagel, "Subject­
ive and objective, " in Mortal Questions (New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1979). It may be that
this idea of ourselves as subjective is a seductive Idea
of Reason in something like the Kantian sense, an idea
which derives its apparent plausibility from the fact
that the only conception of ourselves that reflective
"I" -thought appears to underwrite is the unspecific
conception of ourselves as some or other sort of
locus of reflective mental life. See what follows and
n. 16.
12 Franz Kafka, The Metamorphosis (Die Verwandlung),
trans. Willa and Edwin Muir, (New York: Schocken
Books, 1968).
l3 That is, I reject attempts to rule out every form of
substance dualism a priori in the fashion of P. F.
Strawson, Individuals (London: Methuen; New
York: Doubleday, 1964), pp. 90-103, or, more
recently, Jay Rosenberg, Thinking Clearly about
Death (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984).
On this see Sydney Shoemaker, "Two kinds of dual­
ism, " in his collected papers, Identizv, Cause and Mind
(New York: Cambridge University Press 1984). On
Donald Davidson's attempt to rule out a priori a
dualism of mental and physical events, see my "Why
having a mind matters, " in Ernest Lepore and Brian
McLaughlin (eds), Actions and Events: Perspectives on
the Philosophy of Donald Davidson (New York: Black­
well, 1985).
14 For similar cases and a discussion of relevant altern­
atives, see Alvin Goldman, "Discrimination and per-\nceptual knowledge, " Journal of Philosophy 73120 (18
Nov. 1976), pp. 771-91, and Marshall Swain, "Rea­
sons, causes, and knowledge, " Journal of Philosophy 75
(May 1978): 229-49.
15 See Richard Swinburne, "Personal identity, " Pro­
ceedings of the Aristotelian Society 74, (1973/4), pp.
231-47, and Shoemaker and Swinburne, Personal
Identity.
16 Compare Kant's diagnosis in the Paralogisms (B427)
of the Cartesian mistake: "I think myself on behalf of a
possible experience, at the same time abstracting from
all actual experience, and I conclude therefrom that I
can be conscious of my existence even apart from
experience and its empirical conditions. In so doing
I am confusing a possible abstraction from my empiri­
cally determined existence with the supposed con­
sciousness of a possible separate existence of my
thinking self, and I thus come to believe that I have
knowledge that what is substantial in me is the trans­
cendental subject. "
17 Shoemaker, Self: Knowledge and Se~Identity, pp.
23-4.
18 Hence Shoemaker's case raises problems for David
Wiggins's account of human persons in Sameness and
Substance. Wiggins suggests, "a person is any animal
that is such by its kind to have the biological capacities
to enjoy fully the psychological capacities enumer­
ated, " and extracts this consequence: "There would
Human Beings
be no one real essence of person as such, but every
person could still have the real essence of a certain
kind of animal. Indirectly this would be the real
essence in virtue of which he was a person" (p. 172).
If Brown is not the same human organism as Brown­
son, then he is not the same animal as Brownson. So if
Brown survives as Brownson, then the animal kind
human animal does not capture Brown's essence.
Similar remarks apply to Peter van Inwagen's claim
that persons are organisms, a centerpiece of his
Material Beings (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1987).
19 Thomas Nagel, "Are you your brain? ," paper deliv­
ered to Princeton Philosophy Colloquium and APA
Pacific Division, 1984. J. L. Mackie, "The transcend­
ental '1', " in Zak van Straaten (ed. ), Philosophical
Subjects: Essays Presented to P. F. Strawson (New
York: Oxford University Press, 1980).
20 The defense of this claim and the task of giving an
acceptable account of constitution, persistence, and
kinds I leave for another occasion. On the matter of
kinds, all that is needed for present purposes is that
all actual and possible members of a kind share
the same general conditions of persistence through
time and the same possible types of constitution over
time.
21 See "Reasons and reductionism. " \n\n\n\nIntroduction
The world is not a mere assemblage of objects,
events, and facts, but a structure in which things
are related in significant ways. Or at least, that is
the way we think. Among the relations that can
generate structure, causation perhaps has the pre­
eminent status, having received serious attention
from philosophers at least since the time of Aris­
totle. The importance of causation can be seen in
many ways. First, causal concepts are ubiquitous:
they are present not only when we use words that
obviously express causal concepts, such as "pro­
duce, " "yield, " "generate, " "result, " and the like,
but also in countless other familiar expressions. For
example, to kill something involves causing that
thing to die; to break something is to cause its
parts to separate from one another; and so on. If
we cleansed our language of all expressions that
involve causal concepts, we would be left with an
extremely impoverished skeleton of a language
manifestly inadequate for our needs. Second, cau­
sation is intimately tied to explanation: to explain
why or how an event occurred is often, if not
always, to identify its cause, an event or condition
that brought it about. More, it seems likely that we
cannot make sense of the notions of important
ethical concepts, like moral responsibility and
legal liability, without the use of causal concepts.
Presumably one cannot be held responsible or
liable for events or conditions that one didn't
cause, or with which one is not causally involved
in some way. Finally, knowledge of causal relations
seems essential to our ability to make predictions
about the future and control the course of natural
events. It is not for nothing that Hume called
causation "the cement of the universe. "
In "Causes and Conditions" (chapter 32), J. L.
Mackie offers an analysis of causation as an "INUS
condition, " a form of the regularity approach to
causation (an exact interpretation of Mackie on this
point depends on his conceptions of sufficiency
and necessity). On this approach, a singular causal
relation - that is, the causal relation between two
individual events - must be covered by a lawful
regularity between kinds of events under which the
cause and effect fall. According to Mackie, a cause
is a condition that, though insufficient in itself for its
effect, is a necessa~y part of a condition that is
unnecessary (since there often are alternative causes)
but sufficient for the effect. If this sounds complic­
ated, you will see that Mackie provides perspicuous
examples and explanations.
Introduction
Donald Davidson's aim in his "Causal Rela­
tions" (chapter 33) is not to offer an analysis of
causation (although a nomic regularity approach
lurks in the background), but to clarify some
important issues that are prior to such an analysis.
One such issue concerns the relata of causal rela­
tions - what sort of entities are linked by causal
relations. For Davidson, causation is an extensional
binary relation between concrete individual events,
regardless of how these events are described. In
this sense, causation differs from explanation,
which is sensitive to how events are represented.
Another important distinction which Davidson
emphasizes is one between a partial description of
an event and a part of that event, and he shows how
ignoring this distinction has led to much confusion.
In "Causation", (chapter 34), David Lewis pre­
sents an account of causation in terms of counter­
factual dependency. It is a development of the
familiar idea that a cause is a sine qua non condition
for its effect - a condition without which the effect
would not have occurred. He argues that his
approach resolves many of the difficulties that
beset the nomic regularity approach. (Lewis devel­
ops his approach further, and discusses many new
points in his several substantial postscripts to this
paper; see his Philosophical Papers. '
Wesley C. Salmon argues, in "Causal Connec­
tions" (chapter 35), that the traditional view
according to which the causal relation holds
between individual events covered by a law is fun­
damentally mistaken. According to him, processes,
rather than events, must be taken as fundamental in
understanding causation, and the basic problem of
causation, or "Hume's challenge, " is to provide a
principled distinction between genuine causal pro­
cesses and pseudo-processes, processes that,
although they exhibit regular, even lawlike, con­
nections between their elements (like the success­
ive shadows cast by a moving car), are not real
causal processes. The main question for Salmon
then is this: What distinguishes causal processes
from pseudo-processes? As an answer to this ques­
tion, he develops the idea that causal processes are
those that are able to "transmit a mark. "
In "The Nature of Causation: A Singularist
Account" (chapter 36), Michael Tooley rejects
the assumption underlying most attempts at an
analysis of causation: namely, that causal facts
supervene on noncausal facts - that is to say, once
all noncausal facts (including laws of nature) of a
world are fixed, that fixes all the causal facts as
well. Indeed, he argues against the view that causal \nPart VII
relations between individual events must always be
subsumed, or covered, by general regularities.
Instead Tooley proposes a "singularist" account,
Note
David Lewis, Philosophical Papers, vol. 2
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986).
Further reading
Anscombe, G. E. M. , "Causality and determination, " in
Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Mind (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1981); repro in Sosa
and Tooley, Causation.
Cartwright, Nancy, Nature's Capacities and their Measure­
ment (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989).
Ducasse, C. ]. , Causation and the Types IIf Necessizy (Se­
attle: University of Washington Press, 1924; Dover
reprint, 1969).
Ehring, Douglas, Causation and Persistence (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1997).
Fales, Evan, Causation and Universals (New York and
London: Routledge, 1990).
Harre, Rom, and Madden, E. H. , Causal Powers: A
Theory IIf Natural Necessity (Totowa, NJ: Rowman
and Littlefield, 1975).
Humphreys, Paul, The Chances IIf Explanation (Princeton:
Princeton University Press, 1989).
an account that allows a pair of events to be related
as cause to effect without being covered by any
law.
Kim, ]aegwon, "Epiphenomenal and supervenient causa­
tion, " in Supervenience and Mind (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1993).
Mackie, ]. 1. ., The Cement o{the Universe (Oxford: Clar­
endon Press, 1974).
Rosenberg, Alexander, and Beauchamp, Tom L. , Hume
and the Problem IIfCausatilln (Oxford and New York:
Oxford University Press, 1981).
Sosa, Ernest, and Tooley, Michael, (eds). , Causation
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
Suppes, Patrick, A Probabilistic Theory of Causality
(Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company,
1970).
Tooley, Michael, Causation: A Realist Approach (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1987).
von Wright, Georg, Explanation and Understanding
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1971).
Yablo, Stephen, "Cause and essence, " Synthese 93 (1992),
pp. 403-49. \n32
J. L. Mackie
Asked what a cause is, we may be tempted to say
that it is an event which precedes the event of
which it is the cause, and is both necessary and
sufficient for the latter's occurrence; briefly, that a
cause is a necessary and sufficient preceding con­
dition. There are, however, many difficulties in
this account. I shall try to show that what we
often speak of as a cause is a condition not of this
sort, but of a sort related to this. That is to say, this
account needs modification, and can be modified,
and when it is modified, we can explain much more
satisfactorily how we can arrive at much of what we
ordinarily take to be causal knowledge; the claims
implicit within our causal assertions can be related
to the forms of the evidence on which we are often
relying when we assert a causal connection.
Singular Causal Statements
Suppose that a fire has broken out in a certain
house, but has been extinguished before the house
has been completely destroyed. Experts investigate
the cause of the fire, and they conclude that it was
caused by an electrical short circuit at a certain
place. What is the exact force of their statement
that this short circuit caused this fire? Clearly the
experts are not saying that the short circuit was a
necessary condition for this house's catching fire at
Originally published in American Philosophical Quar­
terly 2 (1965), pp. 245-64.
this time; they know perfectly well that a short
circuit somewhere else, or the overturning of a
lighted oil stove, or anyone of a number of other
things might, if it had occurred, have set the house
on fire. Equally, they are not saying that the short
circuit was a sufficient condition for this house's
catching fire; for if the short circuit had occurred,
but there had been no inflammable material
nearby, the fire would not have broken out, and
even given both the short circuit and the inflam­
mable material, the fire would not have occurred if,
say, there had been an efficient automatic sprinkler
at just the right spot. Far from being a condition
both necessary and sufficient for the fire, the
short circuit was, and is known to the experts to
have been, neither necessary nor sufficient for it.
In what sense, then, is it said to have caused the
fire?
At least part of the answer is that there is a set of
conditions (of which some are positive and some
are negative), including the presence of inflam­
mable material, the absence of a suitably placed
sprinkler, and no doubt quite a number of others,
which combined with the short circuit constituted
a complex condition that was sufficient for the
house's catching fire - sufficient, but not neces­
sary, for the fire could have started in other ways.
Also, of this complex condition, the short circuit
was an indispensable part: the other parts of this
condition, conjoined with one another in the
absence of the short circuit, would not have pro­
duced the fire. The short circuit which is said to
have caused the fire is thus an indispensable part of \nJ. L. Mackie
a complex sufficient (but not necessary) condition
of the fire. In this case, then, the so-called cause is,
and is known to be, an insufficient but necessary part
of a condition which is itself unnecessary but suffi­
cient for the result. The experts are saying, in
effect, that the short circuit is a condition of this
sort, that it occurred, that the other conditions
which conjoined with it form a sufficient condition
were also present, and that no other sufficient con­
dition of the house's catching fire was present on
this occasion. I suggest that when we speak of the
cause of some particular event, it is often a condi­
tion of this sort that we have in mind. In view of the
importance of conditions of this sort in our know­
ledge of and talk about causation, it will be con­
venient to have a short name for them: let us call
such a condition (from the initial letters of the
words italicized above), an INUS condition. l
This account of the force of the experts' state­
ment about the cause of the fire may be confirmed
by reflecting on the way in which they will have
reached this conclusion, and the way in which any­
one who disagreed with it would have to challenge
it. An important part of the investigation will have
consisted in tracing the actual course of the fire; the
experts will have ascertained that no other condi­
tion sufficient for a fire's breaking out and taking
this course was present, but that the short circuit
did occur, and that conditions were present which
in conjunction with it were sufficient for the fire's
breaking out and taking the course that it did.
Provided that there is some necessary and suffi­
cient condition of the fire - and this is an assump­
tion that we commonly make in such contexts -
anyone who wanted to deny the experts' conclusion
would have to challenge one or another of these
points.
We can give a more formal analysis of the state­
ment that something is an INUS condition. Let 'A'
stand for the INUS condition - in our example, the
occurrence of a short circuit at that place - and let
'B' and 'C' (that is, 'not-C', or the absence of C)
stand for the other conditions, positive and nega­
tive, which were needed along with A to form a
sufficient condition of the fire - in our example, B
might be the presence of inflammable material, C
the absence of a suitably placed sprinkler. Then the
conjunction 'ABC' represents a sufficient condi­
tion of the fire, and one that contains no redundant
factors; that is, ABC is a minimal sufficient condi­
tion for the fire. 2 Similarly, let DEF, Gil I, etc. be
all the other minimal sufficient conditions of this
result. Now provided that there is some necessary
and sufficient condition for this result, the disjunc­
tion of all the minimal sufficient conditions for it
constitutes a necessary and sufficient condition. 3
That is, the formula "ABC or DEF or Gil lor. .. "
represents a necessary and sufficient condition for
the fire; each of its disjuncts, such as 'ABC', re­
presents a minimal sufficient condition; and each
conjunct in each minimal sufficient condition, such
as 'A', represents an INUS condition. To simplify
and generalize this, we can replace the conjunction
of terms conjoined with 'A' (here BC') by the
single term 'X', and the formula representing the
disjunction of all the other minimal sufficient con­
ditions - here 'DEF or Gil lor. .. ' - by the single
term' Y'. Then an INUS condition is defined as
follows:
A is an INUS condition of a result P if and only
if, for some X and for some Y, (AX or Y) is
a necessary and sufficient condition of P, but A
is not a sufficient condition of P, and X is not
a sufficient condition of P.
We can indicate this type of relation more briefly
if we take the provisos for granted and replace the
existentially quantified variables 'X' and 'Y' by
dots. That is, we can say that A is an INUS condi­
tion of P when (A. .. or. .. ) is a necessary and
sufficient condition of P.
(To forestall possible misunderstandings, I
would fill out this definition as follows. 4 First,
there could be a set of minimal sufficient condi­
tions of P, but no necessary conditions, not even a
complex one; in such a case, A might be what
Marc-Wogau calls a moment in a minimal suffi­
cient condition, but I shall not call it an INUS
condition. I shall speak of an IN US condition only
where the disjunction of all the minimal sufficient
conditions is also a necessary condition. Secondly,
the definition leaves it open that the INUS condi­
tion A might be a conjunct in each of the minimal
sufficient conditions. If so, A would be itself a
necessary condition of the result. I shall still call
A an INUS condition in these circumstances: it is
not part of the definition of an IN U S condition that
it should not be necessary, although in the standard
cases, such as that sketched above, it is not in fact
necessary. 5 Thirdly, the requirement that X by
itself should not be sufficient for P insures that A
is a nonredundant part of the sufficient condition
AX; but there is a sense in which it may not be
strictly necessary or indispensable even as a part of
this condition, for it may be replaceable: for ex-\nample KX might be another minimal sufficient
condition of p. 6 Fourthly, it is part of the definition
that the minimal sufficient condition, AX, of which
A is a nonredundant part, is not also a necessary
condition, that there is another sufficient condition
Y (which may itself be a disjunction of sufficient
conditions). Fifthly, and similarly, it is part of the
definition that A is not by itself sufficient for P.
The fourth and fifth of these points amount to this:
I shall call A an INUS condition only if there are
terms which actually occupy the places occupied by
'X' and 'Y' in the formula for the necessary and
sufficient condition. However, there may be cases
where there is only one minimal sufficient condi­
tion, say AX. Again, there may be cases where A is
itself a minimal sufficient condition, the disjunc­
tion of all minimal sufficient conditions being (A or
Y); again, [here may be cases where A i[self is [he
only minimal sufficient condition, and is itself both
necessary and sufficient for P. In any of these cases,
as well as in cases where A is an INUS condition, I
shall say that A is at least an INUS condition. As we
shall see, we often have evidence which supports
rhe conclusion rhar somerhing is nf [iliJff an (NUS
condition; we mayor may not have other evidence
which shows that it is no more than an INUS con­
dition. )
I suggest that a statement which asserts a singu­
lar causal sequence, of such a form as "A caused
P", often makes, implicitly, the following claims:
(i) A is at least an INUS condition of P - that is,
there is a necessary and sufficient condition
of P which has one of these forms: (AX or
Y), (A or Y), AX, A.
(ii) A was present on the occasion in question.
(iii) The factors represented by the 'X', if any, in
the formula for the necessary and sufficient
condition were present on the occasion in
question.
(iv) Every disjunct in 'Y' which does not contain
'A' as a conjunct was absent on the occasion
in question. (As a rule, this means that what­
ever' Y' represents was absent on this occa­
sion. If' Y' represents a single conjunction of
factors, then it was absent if at least one of its
conjuncts was absent; if it represents a dis­
junction, then it was absent if each of its
disjuncts was absent. But we do not wish to
exclude the possibility that' Y' should be, or
contain as a disjunct, a conjunction one of
whose conjuncts is A, or to require that this
conjunction should have been absent. 7
Causes and Conditions
I do not suggest that this is the whole of what is
meant by "A caused P" on any occasion, or even
that it is a part of what is meant on every occasion:
some additional and alternative parts of the mean­
ing of such statements are indicated below. s But I
am suggesting that this is an important part of the
concept of causation; the proof of this suggestion
would be that in many cases the falsifying of any
one of the above-mentioned claims would rebut the
assertion that A caused P.
This account is in fairly close agreement, in
substance if not in terminology, with at least two
accounts recently offered of the cause of a single
event.
Konrad Marc-Wogau sums up his account thus:
when historians in singular causal statements
speak ot a cause or [he cause ot a cerrain indi­
vidual event {3, then what they are referring to is
another individual event ct which is a moment
in a minimal sufficient and at the same time
necessary condition post factum {3. 9
He eKplained his phrase "necess! lry condi(j{}n
post factum" by saying that he will call an event al
a necessary condition post factum for x if the dis­
junction "al or az or a3. .. or an" represents a
necessary condition for x, and of these disjuncts
only al was present on the particular occasion when
x occurred.
Similarly Michael Scriven has said:
Causes are not necessary, even contingently so,
they are not sufficient - but they are, to talk that
language, contingently sufficient. .. . They are
part of a set of conditions that does guarantee
the outcome, and they are non-redundant in
that the rest of this set (which does not include
all the other conditions present) is not alone
sufficient for the outcome. It is not even true
that they are relatively necessary, i. e. , necessary
with regard to that set of conditions rather than
the total circumstances of their occurrence, for
there may be several possible replacements for
them which happen not to be present. There
remains a ghost of necessity; a cause is a factor
from a set of possible factors the presence of one
of which (anyone) is necessary in order that a
set of conditions actually present be sufficient
for the effect. 10
There are only slight differences between these
two accounts, or between each of them and that \nJ. L. Mackie
offered above. Scriven seems to speak too strongly
when he says that causes are not necessary: it is,
indeed, not part of the definition of a cause of this
sort that it should be necessary, but, as noted
above, a cause, or an [NUS condition, may be
necessary, either because there is only one minimal
sufficient condition or because the cause is a
moment in each of the minimal sufficient condi­
tions. On the other hand, Marc-Wogau's account
of a minimal sufficient condition seems too strong.
He says that a minimal sufficient condition con­
tains "only those moments relevant to the effect"
and that a moment is relevant to an effect if "it is a
necessary condition for (3: (3 would not have
occurred if this moment had not been present".
This is less accurate than Scriven's statement that
the cause only needs to be nonredundant. 11 Also,
Marc-Wogau's requirement, in his account of a
necessary condition post factum, that only one min­
imal sufficient condition (the one containing a)
should be present on the particular occasion,
seems a little too strong. If two or more minimal
sufficient conditions (say al and az) were present,
but a was a moment in each of them, then though
neither al nor az was necessary post factum, a
would be so. I shall use this phrase "necessary
post factum" to include cases of this sort: that is,
a is a necessary condition post factum if it is a
moment in every minimal sufficient condition
that was present. For example, in a cricket team
the wicket-keeper is also a good batsman. He
is injured during a match, and does not bat in
the second innings, and the substitute wicket­
keeper drops a vital catch that the original
wicket-keeper would have taken. The team loses
the match, but it would have won if the wicket­
keeper had both batted and taken that catch. His
injury was a moment in two minimal sufficient
conditions for the loss of the match; either his not
batting, or the catch's not being taken, would on its
own have insured the loss of the match. But we can
certainly say that his injury caused the loss of the
match, and that it was a necessary condition post
factum.
This account may be summed up, briefly and
approximately, by saying that the statement "A
caused P" often claims that A was necessary and
sufficient for P in the circumstances. This descrip­
tion applies in the standard cases, but we have
already noted that a cause is nonredundant rather
than necessary even in the circumstances, and we
shall see that there are special cases in which it may
be neither necessary nor nonredundant.
2 Difficulties and Refinements 12
Both Scriven and Marc-Wogau are concerned not
only with this basic account, but with certain diffi­
culties and with the refinements and complications
that are needed to overcome them. Before dealing
with these, I shall introduce, as a refinement of my
own account, the notion of a causal field. 13
This notion is most easily explained if we leave,
for a time, singular causal statements and consider
general ones. The question "What causes influ­
enza? " is incomplete and partially indeterminate.
It may mean "What causes influenza in human
beings in general? " If so, the (full) cause that is
being sought is a difference that will mark off cases
in which human beings contract influenza from
cases in which they do not; the causal field is then
the region that is to be thus divided, human beings in
general. But the question may mean, "Given that
influenza viruses are present, what makes some
people contract the disease whereas others do
not? " Here the causal field is human beings in con­
ditions where influenza viruses are present. In all such
cases, the cause is required to differentiate, within a
wider region in which the effect sometimes occurs
and sometimes does not, the sub-region in which it
occurs: this wider region is the causal field. This
notion can now be applied to singular causal ques­
tions and statements. "What caused this man's skin
cancer? ,, 14 may mean "Why did this man develop
skin cancer now when he did not develop it
before? " Here the causal field is the career of this
man: it is within this that we are seeking a differ­
ence between the time when skin cancer developed
and times when it did not. But the same question
may mean "Why did this man develop skin cancer,
whereas other men who were also exposed to radia­
tion did not? " Here the causal field is the class of
men thus exposed to radiation. And what is the
cause in relation to one field may not be the cause in
relation to another. Exposure to a certain dose of
radiation may be the cause in relation to the former
field: it cannot be the cause in relation to the latter
field, since it is part of the description of that field,
and being present throughout that field it cannot
differentiate one sub-region of it from another. In
relation to the latter field, the cause may be, in
Scriven's terms, "Some as-yet-unidentified consti­
tutional factor".
In our first example of the house which caught
fire, the history of this house is the field in relation
to which the experts were looking for the cause of
the fire: their question was "Why did this house \ncatch fire on this occasion, and not on others? "
However, there may still be some indeterminacy
in this choice of a causal field. Does this house,
considered as the causal field, include all its fea­
tures, or all its relatively permanent features, or
only some of these? If we take all its features, or
even all of its relatively permanent ones, as consti­
tuting the field, then some of the things that we
have treated as conditions - for example, the pres­
ence of inflammable material near the place where
the short circuit occurred - would have to be
regarded as parts of the field, and we could not
then take them also as conditions which in relation
to this field, as additions to it or intrusions into it,
are necessary or sufficient for something else. We
must therefore take the house, in so far as it con­
stitutes the causal field, as determined only in a
fairly general way, by only some of its relatively
permanent features, and we shall then be free to
treat its other features as conditions which do not
constitute the field, and are not parts of it, but
which may occur within it or be added to it. It is
in general an arbitrary matter whether a particular
feature is regarded as a condition (that is, as a
possible causal factor) or as part of the field, but it
cannot be treated in both ways at once. If we are to
say that something happened to this house because
of, or partly because of, a certain feature, we are
implying that it would still have been this house,
the house in relation to which we are seeking the
cause of this happening, even if it had not had this
particular feature.
I now propose to modify the account given above
of the claims often made by singular causal state­
ments. A statement of such a form as "A caused P"
is usually elliptical, and is to be expanded into "A
caused P in relation to the field F. " And then in
place of the claim stated in (i) above, we require
this:
(i a) A is at least an INUS condition of P in the
field F - that is, there is a condition which,
given the presence of whatever features
characterize F throughout, is necessary and
sufficient for P, and which is of one of these
forms: (AX or Y), (A or Y), AX, A.
In analysing our ordinary causal statements, we
must admit that the field is often taken for granted
or only roughly indicated, rather than specified
precisely. Nevertheless, the field in relation to
which we are looking for a cause of this effect, or
saying that such-and-such is a cause, may be defin­
ite enough for us to be able to say that certain facts
Causes and Conditions
or possibilities are irrelevant to the particular causal
problem under consideration, because they would
constitute a shift from the intended field to a dif­
ferent one. Thus if we are looking for the cause, or
causes, of influenza, meaning its cause(s) in relation
to the field human beings, we may dismiss, as not
directly relevant, evidence which shows that some
proposed cause fails to produce influenza in rats. If
we are looking for the cause of the fire in this house,
we may similarly dismiss as irrelevant the fact that
a proposed cause would not have produced a fire if
the house had been radically different, or had been
set in a radically different environment.
This modification enables us to deal with the
well-known difficulty that it is impossible, without
including in the cause the whole environment, the
whole prior state of the universe (and so excluding
any likelihood of repetition), to find a genuinely
sufficient condition, one which is "by itself, ad­
equate to secure the effect". ls It may be hard to
find even a complex condition which was abso­
lutely sufficient for this fire because we should
have to include, as one of the negative conjuncts,
such an item as the earth's not being destroyed by a
nuclear explosion just after the occurrence of the
suggested [NUS condition; but it is easy and rea­
sonable to say simply that such an explosion would,
in more senses than one, take us outside the field in
which we are considering this effect. That is to say,
it may be not so difficult to find a condition which
is sufficient in relation to the intended field. No
doubt this means that causal statements may be
vague, in so far as the specification of the field is
vague, but this is not a serious obstacle to establish­
ing or using them, either in science or in everyday
contexts. 16
It is a vital feature of the account I am suggesting
that we can say that A caused P, in the sense
described, without being able to specify exactly
the terms represented by 'X' and' Y' in our for­
mula. In saying that A is at least an IN US condition
for P in F, one is not saying what other factors,
along with A, were both present and nonredund­
ant, and one is not saying what other minimal
sufficient conditions there may be for P in F. One
is not even claiming to be able to say what they are.
This is in no way a difficulty: it is a readily recog­
nizable fact about our ordinary causal statements,
and one which this account explicitly and correctly
reflects. 17 It will be shown (in section 5) that this
elliptical or indeterminate character of our causal
statements is closely connected with some of our
characteristic ways of discovering and confirming \nJ. L. Mackie
causal relationships: it is precisely for statements
that are thus "gappy" or indeterminate that we can
obtain fairly direct evidence from quite modest
ranges of observation. On this analysis, causal
statements implicitly contain existential quantifica­
tions; one can assert an existentially quantified
statement without asserting any instantiation of it,
and one can also have good reason for asserting an
existentially quantified statement without having
the information needed to support any precise
instantiation of it. I can know that there is someone
at the door even if the question. "Who is he? "
would floor me
Marc-Wogau is concerned especially with cases
where "there are two events, each of which inde­
pendently of the other is a sufficient condition for
another event". There are, that is to say, two min­
imal sufficient conditions, both of which actually
occurred. For example, lightning strikes a barn in
which straw is stored, and a tramp throws a burn­
ing cigarette butt into the straw at the same place
and at the same time. Likewise for a historical event
there may be more than one "cause", and each of
them may, on its own, be sufficient. IS Similarly
Scriven considers a case where. .. conditions (perhaps unusual excitement
plus constitutional inadequacies) [are] present
at 4. 0 P. M. that guarantee a stroke at 4. 55 P. M.
and consequent death at 5. 0 P. M. ; but an
entirely unrelated heart attack at 4. 50 P. M. is
still correctly called the cause of death, which,
as it happens, does occur at 5. 0. P. M. . 19
Before we try to resolve these difficulties, let us
consider another of Marc-Wogau's problems:
Smith and Jones commit a crime, but if they had
not done so, the head of the criminal organization
would have sent other members to perform it in
their stead, and so it would have been committed
anyway. 20 Now in this case, if 'A' stands for the
actions of Smith and Jones, what we have is that
AX is one minimal sufficient condition of the result
(the crime), but A Z is another, and both X and Z
are present. A combines with one set of the stand­
ing conditions to produce the result by one route:
but the absence of A would have combined with
another set of the standing conditions to produce
the same result by another route. In this case we
can say that A was a necessary condition post fac­
tum. This sample satisfies the requirements of
Marc-Wogau's analysis, and of mine, of the state­
ment that A caused this result; and this agrees with
what we would ordinarily say in such a case. (We
might indeed add that there was also a deeper cause
- the existence of the criminal organization, per­
haps - but this does not matter: our formal analyses
do not insure that a particular result will have a
unique cause, nor does our ordinary causal talk
require this. ) It is true that in this case we cannot
say what will usually serve as an informal substitute
for the formal account, that the cause, here A, was
necesary (as well as sufficient) in the circum­
stances; for A would have done just as well. We
cannot even say that A was nonredundant. But this
shows merely that a formal analysis may be super­
ior to its less formal counterparts.
Now in Scriven's example, we might take it that
the heart attack prevented the stroke from occur­
ring. If so, then the heart attack is a necessary
condition post factum: it is a moment in the only
minimal sufficient condition that was present in
full, for the heart attack itself removed some factor
that was a necessary part of the minimal sufficient
condition which has the excitement as one of its
moments. This is strictly parallel to the Smith and
Jones case. Again it is odd to say that the heart
attack was in any way necessary, since the absence
of the heart attack would have done just as well:
this absence would have been a moment in that
other minimal sufficient condition, one of whose
other moments was the excitement. Nevertheless,
the heart attack was necessary post factum, and the
excitement was not. Scriven draws the distinction,
quite correctly, in terms of continuity and discon­
tinuity of causal chains: "the heart attack was, and
the excitement was not the cause of death because
the 'causal chain' between the latter and death was
interrupted, while the former's 'went to comple­
tion'. " But it is worth nothing that a break in the
causal chain corresponds to a failure to satisfy the
logical requirements of a moment in a minimal
sufficient condition that is also necessary post
factum.
Alternatively, if the heart attack did not prevent
the stroke, then we have a case parallel to that of the
straw in the barn, or of the man who is shot by a
firing squad, and two bullets go through his heart
simultaneously. In such cases the requirements of
my analysis, or of Marc-Wogau's, or of Scriven's,
are not met: each proposed cause is redundant and
not even necessary post factum, though the disjunc­
tion of them is necessary post factum and nonre­
dundant. But this agrees very well with the fact that
we TPould ordinarily hesitate to say, of either bullet,
that it caused the man's death, or of either the \nlightning or the cigarette butt that it caused the
fire, or of either the excitement or the heart attack
that it was the cause of death. As Marc-Wogau
says, "in such a situation as this we are unsure
also how to use the word 'cause'. " Our ordinary
concept of cause does not deal clearly with cases of
this sort, and we are free to decide whether or not
to add to our ordinary use, and to the various more
or less formal descriptions of it, rules which allow
us to say that where more than one at-least-INUS­
condition, and its conjunct conditions are present,
each of them caused the result. 21
The account thus far developed of singular cau­
sal statements has been expressed in terms of state­
ments about necessity and sufficiency; it is
therefore incomplete until we have added an
account of necessity and sufficiency themselves.
This question is considered in Section 4 below.
But the present account is independent of any
particular analysis of necessity and sufficiency.
Whatever analysis of these we finally adopt, we
shall use it to complete the account of what it is
to be an INUS condition, or to be at least an INUS
condition. But in whatever way this account is
completed, we can retain the general principle
that at least part of what is often done by a singular
causal statement is to pick out, as the cause, some­
thing that is claimed to be at least an IN U S con­
dition.
3 General Causal Statements
Many general causal statements are to be under­
stood in a corresponding way. Suppose, for ex­
ample, that an economist says that the restriction
of credit causes (or produces) unemployment.
Again, he will no doubt be speaking with reference
to some causal field; this is now not an individual
object, but a class, presumably economies of a
certain general kind; perhaps their specification
will include the feature that each economy of the
kind in question contains a large private enterprise
sector with free wage-earning employees. The
result, unemployment, is something which some­
times occurs and sometimes does not occur within
this field, and the same is true of the alleged cause,
the restriction of credit. But the economist is not
saying that (even in relation to this field) credit
restriction is either necessary or sufficient for
unemployment, let alone both necessary and suffi­
cient. There may well be other circumstances
which must be present along with credit restric-
Causes and Conditions
tion, in an economy of the kind referred to, if
unemployment is to result; these other circum­
stances will no doubt include various negative
ones, the absence of various counteracting causal
factors which, if they were present, would prevent
this result. Also, the economist will probably be
quite prepared to admit that in an economy of this
kind, unemployment could be brought about by
other combinations of circumstances in which the
restriction of credit plays no part. So once again the
claim that he is making is merely that the restric­
tion of credit is, in economies of this kind, a non­
redundant part of one sufficient condition for
unemployment: that is, an INUS condition. The
economist is probably assuming that there is some
condition, no doubt a complex one, which is both
necessary and sufficient for unemployment in this
field. This being assumed, what he is asserting is
that, for some X and for some Y, (AX or Y) is a
necessary and sufficient condition for P in F, but
neither A nor X is sufficient on its own, where 'A'
stands for the restriction of credit, 'P' for unem­
ployment, and' F' for the field, economies of such­
and-such a sort. In a developed economic theory
the field F may be specified quite exactly, and so
may the relevant combinations of factors repres­
ented here by 'X' and' Y'. (Indeed, the theory may
go beyond statements in terms of necessity and
sufficiency to ones of functional dependence, but
this is a complication which I am leaving aside for
the present. ) In a preliminary or popular statement,
on the other hand, the combinations of factors may
either be only roughly indicated or be left quite
undetermined. At one extreme we have the state­
ment that (AX or Y) is a necessary and sufficient
condition, where 'X' and 'Y' are given definite
meanings; at the other extreme we have the merely
existentially quantified statement that this holds
for some pair X and Y. Our knowledge in such
cases ordinarily falls somewhere between these
two extremes. We can use the same convention as
before, deliberately allowing it to be ambiguous
between these different interpretations, and say
that in any of these cases, where A is an INUS
condition of P in F, (A. .. or. .. ) is a necessary
and sufficient condition of P in F.
A great deal of our ordinary causal knowledge is
of this form. We know that the eating of sweets
causes dental decay. Here the field is human beings
who have some of their own teeth. We do not
know, indeed it is not true, that the eating of sweets
by any such person is a sufficient condition for
dental decay: some people have peculiarly resistant \nJ. L. Mackie
teeth, and there are probably measures which,
if taken along with the eating of sweets, would
protect the eater's teeth from decay. All we know
is that sweet-eating combined with a set of positive
and negative factors which we can specify, if at all,
only roughly and incompletely, constitutes a mini­
mal sufficient condition for dental decay - but not a
necessary one, for there are other combinations of
factors, which do not include sweet-eating, which
would also make teeth decay, but which we can
specify, if at all, only roughly and incompletely.
That is, if 'A' now represents sweet-eating, 'P'
dental decay, and 'F' the class of human beings
with some of their own teeth, we can say that, for
some X and Y, (AX or Y) is necessary and suffi­
cient for P in F, and we may be able to go beyond
this merely existentially quantified statement to at
least a partial specification of the X and Y in
question. That is, we can say that (A. .. or. .. ) is
a necessary and sufficient condition, but that A
itself is only an INUS condition. And the same
holds for many general causal statements of the
form "A causes (or produces) P". It is in this
sense that the application of a potential difference
to the ends of a copper wire produces an electric
current in the wire; that a rise in the temperature of
a piece of metal makes it expand; that moisture
rusts steel; that exposure to various kinds of radia­
tion causes cancer, and so on.
However, it is true that not all ordinary general
causal statements are of this sort. Some of them
are implicit statements of functional dependence.
Functional dependence is a more complicated rela­
tionship of which necessity and sufficiency can be
regarded as special cases. Here too what we com­
monly single out as causing some result is only one
of a number of factors which jointly affect the
result. Again, some causal statements pick out
something that is not only an INUS condition, but
also a necessary condition. Thus we may say that
the yellow fever virus is the cause of yellow fever.
(This statement is not, as it might appear to be,
tautologous, for the yellow fever virus and the
disease itself can be independently specified. ) In
the field in question - human beings - the injection
of this virus is not by itself a sufficient condition for
this disease, for persons who have once recovered
from yellow fever are thereafter immune to it, and
other persons can be immunized against it. The
injection of the virus, combined with the absence of
immunity (natural or artificial), and perhaps com­
bined with some other factors, constitutes a suffi­
cient condition for the disease. Beside this, the
Injection of the virus is a necessary condition of
the disease. If there is more than one complex
sufficient condition for yellow fever, the injection
of the virus into the patient's bloodstream (either
by a mosquito or in some other way) is a factor
included in every such sufficient condition. If 'A'
stands for this factor, the necessary and sufficient
condition has the form (A. .. or A. .. etc. ), where A
occurs in every disjunct. We sometimes note the
difference between this and the standard case by
using the phrase "the cause". We may say not
merely that this virus causes yellow fever, but that
it is the cause of yellow fever; but we would say only
that sweet-eating causes dental decay, not that it is
the cause of dental decay. But about an individual
case we could say that sweet-eating was the cause of
the decay of this person's teeth, meaning (as in
section 1 above) that the only sufficient condition
present here was the one of which sweet-eating is a
nonredundant part. Nevertheless, there will not in
general be anyone item which has a unique claim to
be regarded as the cause even of an individual event,
and even after the causal field has been determined.
Each of the moments in the minimal sufficient
condition, or in each minimal sufficient condition,
that was present can equally be regarded as the
cause. They may be distinguished as predisposing
causes, triggering causes, and so on, but it is quite
arbitrary to pick out as "main" and "secondary",
different moments which are equally nonredund­
ant items in a minimal sufficient condition, or
which are moments in two minimal sufficient con­
ditions each of which makes the other redundant. 22
4 Necessity and Sufficiency
One possible account of general statements of the
forms "5 is a necessary condition of T" and "5 is a
sufficient condition of T" - where '5' and 'T' are
general terms - is that they are equivalent to simple
universal propositions. That is, the former is
equivalent to "All Tare 5" and the latter to "All
5 are T". Similarly, "5 is necessary for T in the
field F" would be equivalentto "All FTare 5 ", and
"5' is sufficient for T in the field F" to "All F5 are
T". Whether an account of this sort is adequate is,
of course, a matter of dispute; but it is not disputed
that these statements about necessary and sufficient
conditions at least entail the corresponding univer­
sals. I shall work on the assumption that this
account is adequate, that general statements of
necessity and sufficiency are equivalent to univer-\nsals: it will be worthwhile to see how far this
account will take us, how far we are able, in terms
of it, to understand how we use, support, and
criticize these statements of necessity and suffi­
ciency.
A directly analogous account of the correspond­
ing singular statements is not satisfactory. Thus it
will not do to say that "A short circuit here was a
necessary condition of a fire in this house" is
equivalent to "All cases of this house's catching
fire are cases of a short circuit occurring here",
because the latter is automatically true if this
house has caught fire only once and a short circuit
has occurred on that occasion, but this is not
enough to establish the statement that the short
circuit was a necessary condition of the fire; and
there would be an exactly parallel objection to a
similar statement about a sufficient condition.
It is much more plausible to relate singular state­
ments about necessity and sufficiency to certain
kinds of non-material conditionals. Thus" A short
circuit here was a necessary condition of a fire in
this house" is closely related to the counter factual
conditional "If a short circuit had not occurred
here this house would not have caught fire", and
"A short circuit here was a sufficient condition of a
fire in this house" is closely related to what Good­
man has called the factual conditional, "Since a
short circuit occurred here, this house caught fire".
However, a further account would still have to
be given of these non-material conditionals them­
selves. I have argued elsewhere23 that they are best
considered as condensed or telescoped arguments,
but that the statements used as premisses in these
arguments are no more than simple factual univer­
sals. To use the above-quoted counterfactual con­
ditional is, in effect, to run through an incomplete
argument: "Suppose that a short circuit did not
occur here, then the house did not catch fire. " To
use the factual conditional is, in effect, to run
through a similar incomplete argument: "A short
circuit occurred here; therefore the house caught
fire. " In each case the argument might in principle
be completed by the insertion of other premisses
which, together with the stated premiss, would
entail the stated conclusion. Such additional pre­
misses may be said to sustain the non-material
conditional. It is an important point that someone
can use a non-material conditional without com­
pleting or being able to complete the argument,
without being prepared explicitly to assert pre­
misses that would sustain it, and similarly that we
can understand such a conditional without know-
Causes and Conditions
ing exactly how the argument would or could be
completed. But to say that a short circuit here was a
necessary condition of a fire in this house is to say
that there is some set of true propositions which
would sustain the above-stated counterfactual, and
to say that it was a sufficient condition is to say that
there is some set of true propositions which would
sustain the above-stated factual conditional. If this
is conceded, then the relating of singular state­
ments about necessity and sufficiency to nonmater­
ial conditionals leads back to the view that they
refer indirectly to certain simple universal proposi­
tions. Thus if we said that a short circuit here was a
necessary condition for a fire in this house, we
should be saying that there are true universal pro­
positions from which, together with true state­
ments about the characteristics of this house, and
together with the supposition that a short circuit
did not occur here, it would follow that the house
did not catch fire. From this we could infer the
universal proposition which is the more obvious,
but unsatisfactory, candidate for the analysis of this
statement of necessity, "All cases of this house's
catching fire are cases of a short circuit occurring
here", or, in our symbols, "All FP are A". We can
use this to represent approximately the statement
of necessity, on the understanding that it is to be a
consequence of some set of wider universal propo­
sitions, and is not to be automatically true merely
because there is only this one case of an FP, of this
house's catching fire. 24 A statement that A was a
sufficient condition may be similarly represented
by "All FA are P". Correspondingly, if all that we
want to say is that (A. .. or. .. ) was necessary and
sufficient for P in F, this will be represented
approximately by the pair of universals "All FP
are (A. .. or. .. ) and all F (A. .. or. .. ) are P", and
more accurately by the statement that there is some
set of wider universal propositions from which,
together with true statements about the features
of F, this pair of universals follows. This, therefore,
is the fuller analysis of the claim that in a particular
case A is an IN U S condition of P in F, and hence of
the singular statement that A caused P. (The state­
ment that A is at least an INUS condition includes
other alternatives, corresponding to cases where
the necessary and sufficient condition is (A
or. .. ), A. .. , or A. )
Let us go back now to general statements of
necessity and sufficiency and take F as a class, not
as an individual. On the view that I am adopting,
at least provisionally, the statement that Z is a
necessary and sufficient condition for P in F is \nJ. L. Mackie
equivalent to "All FP are Z and all FZ are P".
Similarly, if we cannot completely specify a neces­
sary and sufficient condition for P in F, but can
only say that the formula "(A. .. or. .. )" represents
such a condition, this is equivalent to the pair of
incomplete universals, "All FP are (A. .. or. .. )
and all F (A. .. or. .. ) are P". In saying that our
general causal statements often do no more than
specify an INUS condition, I am therefore saying
that much of our ordinary causal knowledge is
knowledge of such pairs of incomplete universals,
of what we may call elliptical or gappy causal laws.
[Sections 5-7 omitted]
8 The Direction of Causation
This account of causation is still incomplete, in that
nothing has yet been said about the direction of
causation, about what distinguishes A causing P
from P causing A. This is a difficult question,
and it is linked with the equally difficult question
of the direction of time. I cannot hope to resolve it
completely here, but I shall state some of the relev­
ant considerations. 25
First, it seems that there is a relation which may
be called causal priority, and that part of what is
meant by "A caused P" is that this relation holds in
one direction between A and P, not the other.
Secondly, this relation is not identical with tem­
poral priority; it is conceivable that there should be
evidence for a case of backward causation, for A
being causally prior to P whereas P was temporally
prior to A. Most of us believe, and I think with
good reason, that backward causation does not
occur, so that we can and do normally use temporal
order to limit the possibilities about causal order;
but the connection between the two is synthetic.
Thirdly, it could be objected to the analysis of
"necessary" and "sufficient" offered in section 4
above that it omits any reference to causal order,
whereas our most common use of "necessary" and
"sufficient" in causal contexts includes such a
reference. Thus "A is (causally) sufficient for B"
says "If A, then B, and A is causally prior to B",
but "B is (causally) necessary for A" is not equival­
ent to this: it says "If A, then B, and B is causally
prior to A". However, it is simpler to use "neces­
sary" and "sufficient" in senses which exclude this
causal priority, and to introduce the assertion of
priority separately into our accounts of "A caused
P" and "A causes P. " Fourthly, although "A is (at
least) an INUS condition of P" is not synonymous
with "P is (at least) an IN US condition of A", this
difference of meaning cannot exhaust the relation
of causal priority. If it did exhaust it, the direction
of causation would be a trivial matter, for, given
that there is some necessary and sufficient condi­
tion of A in the field, it can be proved that if A is
(at least) an INUS condition of P, then P is also (at
least) an INUS condition of A: we can construct a
minimal sufficient condition of A in which P is a
moment? 6
Fifthly, it is often suggested that the direction of
causation is linked with controllability. If there is a
causal relation between A and B, and we can con­
trol A without making use of B to do so, and the
relation between A and B still holds, then we
decide that B is not causally prior to A and, in
general, that A is causally prior to B. But this
means only that if one case of causal priority is
known, we can use it to determine others: our
rejection of the possibility that B is causally prior
to A rests on our knowledge that our action is
causally prior to A, and the question how we
know the latter, and even the question of what
causal priority is, have still to be answered. Simil­
arly, if one of the causally related kinds of event,
say A, can be randomized, so that occurrences of A
are either not caused at all, or are caused by some­
thing which enters this causal field only in this way,
by causing A, we can reject both the possibility that
B is causally prior to A and the possibility that
some common cause is prior both to A and separ­
ately to B, and we can again conclude that A is
causally prior to B. But this still means only that we
can infer causal priority in one place if we first
know that it is absent from another place. It is
true that our knowledge of the direction of causa­
tion in ordinary cases is thus based on what we find
to be controllable, and on what we either find to be
random or find that we can randomize; but this
cannot without circularity be taken as providing a
full account either of what we mean by causal
priority or of how we know about it.
A suggestion put forward by Popper about the
direction of time seems to be relevant here. 27 If a
stone is dropped into a pool, the entry of the stone
will explain the expanding circular waves. But the
reverse process, with contracting circular waves,
"would demand a vast number of distant coherent
generators of waves the coherence of which, to be
explicable, would have to be shown. .. as originat­
ing from one centre". That is, if B is an occurrence
which involves a certain sort of "coherence" \nbetween a large number of separated items,
whereas A is a single event, and A and Bare
causally connected, A will explain B in a way in
which B will not explain A unless some other single
event, say C, first explains the coherence in B.
Such examples give us a direction of explanation,
and it may be that this is the basis, or part of the
basis, of the relation I have called causal priority.
9 Conclusions
Even if Mill was wrong in thinking that science
consists mainly of causal knowledge, it can hardly
be denied that such knowledge is an indispensable
element in science, and that it is worthwhile to
investigate the meaning of causal statements and
the ways in which we can arrive at causal know­
ledge. General causal relationships are among the
items which a more advanced kind of scientific
theory explains, and is confirmed by its success in
explaining. Singular causal assertions are involved
in almost every report of an experiment: doing such
and such produced such and such an effect. Mater­
ials are commonly identified by their causal prop­
erties: to recognize something as a piece of a certain
material, therefore, we must establish singular cau­
sal assertions about it, that this object affected that
other one, or was affected by it, in such and such
a way. Causal assertions are embedded in both the
results and the procedures of scientific invest­
igation.
The account that I have offered of the force of
various kinds of causal statements agrees both with
our informal understanding of them and with
accounts put forward by other writers: at the
same time it is formal enough to show how such
statements can be supported by observations and
experiments, and thus to throw a new light on
philosophical questions about the nature of causa­
tion and causal explanation and the status of causal
knowledge.
One important point is that, leaving aside the
question of the direction of causation, the analysis
has been given entirely within the limits of what
can still be called a regularity theory of causa­
tion, in that the causal laws involved in it are no
more than straightforward universal propositions,
although their terms may be complex and perhaps
incompletely specified. Despite this limitation, I
have been able to give an account of the meaning
of statements about singular causal sequences,
regardless of whether such a sequence is or is not
Causes and Conditions
of a kind that frequently recurs: repetition is not
essential for causal relation, and regularity does not
here disappear into the mere fact that this single
sequence has occurred. It has, indeed, often been
recognized that the regularity theory could cope
with single sequences if, say, a unique sequence
could be explained as the resultant of a number of
laws each of which was exemplified in many other
sequences; but my account shows how a singular
causal statement can be interpreted, and how the
corresponding sequence can be shown to be causal,
even if the corresponding complete laws are not
known. It shows how even a unique sequence can
be directly recognized as causal.
One consequence of this is that it now becomes
possible to reconcile what have appeared to be
conflicting views about the nature of historical
explanation. We are accustomed to contrast the
"covering-law" theory adopted by Hempel, Pop­
per, and others with the views of such critics as
Dray and Scriven who have argued that explana­
tions and causal statements in history cannot be
thus assimilated to the patterns accepted in the
physical sciences. 28 But while my basic analysis of
singular causal statements in sections I and 2 agrees
closely with Scriven's, I have argued in section 4
that this analysis can be developed in terms of
complex and elliptical universal propositions, and
this means that wherever we have a singular causal
statement we shall still have a covering law, albeit a
complex and perhaps elliptical one. Also, I have
shown in section 5, and indicated briefly, for the
functional dependence variants, in section 7, that
the evidence which supports singular causal state­
ments also supports general causal statements or
covering laws, though again only complex and
elliptical ones. Hempel recognized long ago that
historical accounts can be interpreted as giving
incomplete "explanation sketches", rather than
what he would regard as full explanations, which
would require fully stated covering laws, and that
such sketches are also common outside history. But
in these terms what I am saying is that explanation
sketches and the related elliptical laws are often all
that we can discover, that they playa part in all
sciences, that they can be supported and even
established without being completed, and do not
serve merely as preliminaries to or summaries of
complete deductive explanations. If we modify the
notion of a covering law to admit laws which not
only are complex but also are known only in an
elliptical form, the covering-law theory can accom­
modate many of the points that have been made in \nJ. L. Mackie
criticism of it, while preserving the structural sim­
ilarity of explanation in history and in the physical
sciences. In this controversy, one point at issue has
been the symmetry of explanation and prediction,
and my account may help to resolve this dispute. It
shows, in agreement with what Scriven has argued,
how the actual occurrence of an event in the
observed circumstances may be a vital part of the
evidence which supports an explanation of that
event, which shows that it was A that caused P on
this occasion. A prediction on the other hand can­
not rest on observation of the event predicted.
Also, the gappy law which is sufficient for an
explanation will not suffice for a prediction (or for
a retrodiction): a statement of initial conditions
together with a gappy law will not entail the asser­
tion that a specific result will occur, though of
course such a law may be, and often is, used to
make tentative predictions the failure of which will
not necessarily tell against the law. But the recog­
nition of these differences between prediction and
explanation does not affect the covering-law theory
as modified by the recognition of elliptical laws.
Although what I have given is primarily an
account of physical causation, it may be indirectly
relevant to the understanding of human action and
mental causation. It is sometimes suggested that
our ability to recognize a single occurrence as an
instance of mental causation is a feature which
distinguishes mental causation from physical or
"Humean" causation. 29 But this suggestion arise's
from the use of too simple a regularity account of
physical causation. If we first see clearly what we
mean by singular causal statements in general, and
how we can support such a statement by observa­
tion of the single sequence itself, even in a physical
Notes
This term was suggested by D. C. Stove, who has also
given me a great deal of help criticizing earlier ver­
sions of this article.
2 The phrase "minimal sufficient condition" is bor­
rowed from Konrad Marc-Wogau, "On historical
explanation, " Theoria 28 (1962), pp. 213-33. This
article gives an analysis of singular causal statements,
with special reference to their use by historians, which
is substantially equivalent to the account I am sug­
gesting. Many further references are made to this
article, especially in n. 9 below.
3 Cf. p. 227, n. 8, where it is pointed out that in order to
infer that the disjunction of all the minimal sufficient
conditions will be a necessary condition, "it is neces-
case, we shall be better able to contrast with this
our awareness of mental causes, and to see whether
the latter has any really distinctive features.
This account also throws light on both the form
and the status of the "causal principle", the deter­
ministic assumption which is used in any applica­
tion of the methods of eliminative induction. These
methods need not presuppose determinism in gen­
eral, but only that each specific phenomenon in­
vestigated by such a method is deterministic.
Moreover, they require not only that the phenom­
enon should have some cause, but that there should
be some restriction of the range of possibly relevant
factors (at least to spatio-temporally neighbouring
ones). Now the general causal principle, that every
event has some cause, is so general that it is pecu­
liarly difficult either to confirm or to disconfirm,
and we might be tempted either to claim for it some
a priori status, to turn it into a metaphysical abso­
lute presupposition, or to dismiss it as vacuous. But
the specific assumption that this phenomenon has
some cause based somehow on factors drawn from
this range, or even that this phenomenon has some
neighboring cause, is much more open to empirical
confirmation and disconfirmation: indeed, the for­
mer can be conclusively falsified by the observation
of a positive instance of P, and a negative case in
which P does not occur, but where each of the
factors in the given range is either present in both
or absent from both. This account, then, encour­
ages us to regard the assumption as something to be
empirically confirmed or disconfirmed. At the
same time it shows that there must be some prin­
ciple of the confirmation of hypotheses other than
the eliminative methods themselves, since each
such method rests on an empirical assumption.
sary to presuppose that an arbitrary event C, if it
occurs, must have sufficient reason to occur. " This
presupposition is equivalent to the presupposition
that there is some (possibly complex) condition that
is both necessary and sufficient for C.
It is of some interest that some common turns of
speech embody this presupposition. To say "Nothing
but X will do, " or "Either X or Y will do, but nothing
else will, " is a natural way of saying that X, or the
disjunction (X or Y), is a necessary condition for
whatever result we have in mind. But taken literally,
these remarks say only that there is no sufficient
condition for this result other than X, or other than
(X or Y). That is, we use to mean "a necessary \ncondition" phrases whose literal meanings would be
"the only sufficient condition, " or "the disjunction of
all sufficient conditions. " Similarly, to say that Z is
"all that's needed" is a natural way of saying that Z is
a sufficient condition, but taken literally, this remark
says that Z is the only necessary condition. But, once
again, that the only necessary condition will also be a
sufficient one follows only if we presuppose that some
condition is both necessary and sufficient.
4 I am indebted to the referees appointed by American
Philosophical Quarterly, in which this material was
first published, for the suggestion that these points
should be clarified.
Special cases where an INUS condition is also a neces­
sary one are mentioned at the end of sect. 3.
6 This point, and the term "nonredundant", are taken
from Michael Scriven's review of Nagel's The Struc­
ture oj Science, in Review IIJ Metaphysics (1964). See
esp. the passage on p. 408 quoted below.
7 See example of the wicket-keeper discussed below.
8 See sects 7, 8.
9 See Marc-Wogau, "On historical explanation", pp.
226-7. Marc-Wogau's full formulation is as follows:
Let 'msc' stand for minimal sufficient condition
and 'nc' for necessary condition. Then suppose
we have a class K of individual events ai, a2, .. . an' (It seems reasonable to assume that K is
finite; however, even if K were infinite, the reason­
ing below would not be affected. ) My analysis of
the singular causal statement: a is the cause of
(3, where a and (3 stand for individual events, can
be summarily expressed in the following state­
ments:
(I) (EK) (K = {al, az. .. ., an});
(2) (x) (x E K == x msc (j);
(3) (al V a2 V. .. an) ncB;
(4) (x) ((x E Kx f al): :: J x is not fulfilled when a
occurs);
(5) a is a moment in al.
(3) and (4) say that al is a necessary condition post
Jactum for (j. If al is a necessary condition post
factum for (3, then every moment in al is a neces­
sary condition post Jactum for /3, and therefore also
a. As has been mentioned before (n. 6) there is
assumed to be a temporal sequence between a and
/3; (3 is not itself an element in K.
10 Scriven, review, p. 408.
II However, Marc-Wogau "On historical explanation, "
pp. 222-3, n. 7, draws attention to the difficulty of
giving an accurate definition of "a moment in a suffi­
cient condition". Further complications are involved
in the account given in sect. 5 of "clusters" of factors
and the progressive localization of a cause. A condi­
tion which is minimally sufficient in relation to one
degree of analysis of factors may not be so in relation
to another degree of analysis.
Causes and Conditions
12 This section is something of an aside: the main argu­
ment is resumed in sect. 3.
13 This notion of a causal field was introduced by John
Anderson. He used it, e. g. , in "The problem of caus­
ality, " first published in the Australasian Journal oj
Psychology and Philosophy 16 (1938), and repro in
Studies in Empirical Philosophy (Sydney: Angus and
Robertson, 1962), pp. 126-36, to overcome certain
difficulties and paradoxes in Mill's account of causa­
tion. I have also used this notion to deal with problems
of legal and moral responsibility, in "Responsibility
and language, " Australasian Journal oj Philosophy 33
(1955), pp. 143-59.
14 These examples are borrowed from Scriven, review,
pp. 409-10. Scriven discusses them with reference to
what he calls a "contrast class", the class of cases
where the effect did not occur with which the case
where it did occur is being contrasted. What I call the
causal field is the logical sum of the case (or cases) in
which the effect is being said to be caused with what
Scriven calls the contrast class.
15 Cf. Bertrand Russell, "On the notion of cause, " in
Mysticism and Logic (London: Allen & Unwin,
1917), p. 187. Cf. also Scriven's first difficulty,
review, p. 409: "First, there are virtually no known
sufficient conditions, literally speaking, since
human or accidental interference is almost inexhaust­
ibly possible, and hard to exclude by specific qualifi­
cation without tautology. " The introduction of the
causal field also automatically covers Scriven's third
difficulty and third refinement, that of the contrast
class and the relativity of causal statements to
contexts.
16 J. R. Lucas, "Causation", R. J. Butler (ed. ), Analytical
Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell, 1962), pp. 57-9,
resolves this kind of difficulty by an informal appeal
to what amounts to this notion of a causal field:
". .. these circumstances [cosmic cataclysms,
etc. ]. .. destroy the whole causal situation in which
we had been looking for Z to appear. .. predictions are
not expected to come true when quite unforeseen
emergencies arise. "
17 This is related to Scriven's second difficulty, review,
p. 409: "there still remains the problem of saying what
the other factors are which, with the cause, make up
the sufficient condition. If they can be stated, causal
explanation is then simply a special case of subsump­
tion under a law. If they cannot, the analysis is surely
mythological. " Scriven correctly replies that "a com­
bination of the thesis of macro-determinism. .. and
observation-plus-theory frequently gives us the very
best of reasons for saying that a certain factor com­
bines with an unknown sub-set of the conditions pres­
ent into a sufficient condition for a particular effect. "
He gives a statistical example of such evidence, but
the whole of my account of typical sorts of evidence
for causal relationships in sects 5 and 7 is an expanded
defence of a reply of this sort. \nJ. L. Mackie
18 Marc-Wogau, "On historical explanation", pp. 228-
33.
19 Scriven, review, pp. 410--11: this is Scriven's fourth
difficulty and refinement.
20 Marc-Wogau, "Oh historical explanation", p. 232:
the example is taken from P. Gardiner, The Nature
of Historical Explanation (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1952), p. 101.
21 Scriven's fifth difficulty and refinement are con­
cerned with the direction of causation. This is con­
sidered briefly in sect. 8 below.
22 Cf. Marc-Wogau's concluding remarks, "On histor­
ical explanation", pp. 232-3.
23 J. L. Mackie, "Counterfactuals and causal laws", R. J.
Butler (ed. ) Analytical Philosophy (Oxford: Blackwell,
1962), pp. 66--80.
24 This restriction may be compared with one which
Nagel imposes on laws of nature: "the vacuous truth
of an unrestricted universal is not sufficient for count­
ing it a law; it counts as a law only if there is a set of
other assumed laws from which the universal is logic­
ally derivable" (Ernest Nagel, The Structure of Science
(New York: Harcourt, Brace and World, 1961), p. 60).
It might have been better if he had added "or if there
is some other way in which it is supported (ultimately)
by empirical evidence". Cf. my remarks in "Counter­
factuals and causal laws", pp. 72-4, 78-80.
25 As was mentioned in n. 21, Scriven's fifth difficulty
and refinement are concerned with this point (review,
pp. 411-12), but his answer seems to me inadequate.
Lucas touches on it ('Causation', pp. 51-3). The
problem of temporal asymmetry is discussed, e. g. ,
by J. J. c. Smart, Philosophy and Scientific Realism
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963), pp. 142-
8, and by A. Grtinbaum in the article cited in n. 28
below.
26 I am indebted to one of the referees of American
Philosophical Quarter! )! for correcting an inaccurate
statement on this point in an earlier version.
27 Karl Popper, "The arrow of time", Nature 177
(1956), p. 538; also vol. 178, p. 382 and vol. 179,
p. 1297.
28 See e. g. , C. G. Hempel, "The function of general laws
in history", Journal of Philosophy, 39 (1942), repro in
H. Feigl and W. Sellars (eds), Readings in Philosoph­
ical Analysis (New York, Appletan-Century-Crofts,
1949), pp. 459-71; c. G. Hempel and P. Oppenheim,
"Studies in the logic of explanation", Philosophy of
Science 15 (1948), repro in H. Feigl and M. Brodbeck
(eds), Readings in the Philosophy of Science (New York:
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1953), pp. 319-52; K. R.
Popper, Logik der Forschung (Vienna: J. Springer,
1934), trans. as The Logic of Scientific Discovery
(New York: Harper & Row, 1959), pp. 59-60, also
The Open Society (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1952), vol. 2, p. 262; W. Dray, Laws and Expla­
nation in Histo~)! (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1957); N. Rescher, 'On prediction and explanation',
British Journal jor the Philosophy of Science 9, (1958),
pp. 281-90; various papers in H. Feigl and G. Max­
well (eds), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, vol. 3 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1962); A. Grtinbaum, "Temporally-asym­
metric principles, parity between explanation and
prediction, and mechanism versus teleology", Philo­
sophy of Science, 29 (1962), pp. 146--70.
Dray's criticisms of the covering-law theory
include the following: we cannot state the law used
in a historical explanation without making it so vague
as to be vacuous (Laws, esp. pp. 24--37) or so complex
that it covers only a single case and is trivial on that
account (p. 39); the historian does not come to the task
of explaining an event with a sufficient stock of laws
already formulated and empirically validated (pp. 42-
3); historians do not need to replace judgement about
particular cases with deduction from empirically
validated laws (pp. 51-2). It will be clear that my
account resolves each of these difficulties. Grtinbaum
draws an important distinction between (I) an asym­
metry between explanation and prediction with
regard to the grounds on which we claim to know
that the explanandum is true, and (2) an asymmetry
with respect to the logical relation between the ex­
planans and the explanandum; he thinks that only the
former sort of asymmetry obtains. I suggest that my
account of the use of gappy laws will clarify both the
sense in which Grtinbaum is right (since an explana­
tion and a tentative prediction can use similarly gappy
laws which are similarly related to the known initial
conditions and the result) and the sense in which, in
such a case, we may contrast an entirely satisfactory
explanation with a merely tentative prediction.
Scriven (in his most recent statement, the review
cited in n. 10 above) says that "we often pin down a
factor as a cause by excluding other possible causes.
Simple - but disastrous for the covering-law theory of
explanation, because we can eliminate causes only for
something we know has occurred. And if the grounds
for our explanation of an event have to include know­
ledge of that event's occurrence, they cannot be used
(without circularity) to predict the occurrence of that
event" (p. 414). That is, the observation of this event
in these circumstances may be a vital part of the
evidence that justifies the particular causal explana­
tion that we give of this event: it may itself go a long
way toward establishing the elliptical law in relation to
which we explain it (as I have shown in sect. 5),
whereas a law used for prediction cannot thus rest
on the observation of the event predicted. But as my
account also shows, this does not introd uce an asym­
metry of Grtinbaum's second sort, and is therefore
not disastrous for the covering-law theory.
29 See, e. g. , G. E. M. Anscombe, Intention (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1957), esp. p. 16; J. Teichmann, "Mental
cause and effect", Mind, 70 (1961), pp. 36--52. Teich­
mann speaks (p. 36) of "the difference between them \nand ordinary (or 'Humean') sequences of cause and
effect", and says (p. 37) "it is sometimes in order for
the person who blinks to say absolutely dogmatically
that the cause is such-and-such, and to say this inde­
pendently of his knowledge of any previously estab­
lished correlations, " and again, "if the noise is a cause
it seems to be one which is known to be such in a
Causes and Conditions
special way. It seems that while it is necessary for an
observer to have knowledge of a previously estab­
lished correlation between noises and Smith's jump­
ings, before he can assert that one causes the other,
it is not necessary for Smith himself to have such
knowledge. " \n33
Donald Davidson
What is the logical form of singular causal state­
ments like: 'The flood caused the famine', 'The
stabbing caused Caesar's death', 'The burning of
the house caused the roasting of the pig'? This
question is more modest than the question how
we know such statements are true, and the question
whether they can be analyzed in terms of, say,
constant conjunction. The request for the logical
form is modest because it is answered when we
have identified the logical or grammatical roles of
the words (or other significant stretches) in the
sentences under scrutiny. It goes beyond this to
define, analyze, or set down axioms governing,
particular words or expressions.
I
According to Hume, "we may define a cause to be
an object, followed by another, and where all the
objects similar to the first are followed by objects
similar to the second. " This definition pretty
clearly suggests that causes and effects are entities
that can be named or described by singular terms;
probably events, since one can follow another. But
in the Treatise, under "rules by which to judge of
causes and effects, " Hume says that "where several
different objects produce the same effect, it must
be by means of some quality, which we discover to
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 64
(1967), pp. 691-703. Copyright [) by Donald David­
son. Reprinted by permission of the author and
Columbia University.
be common amongst them. For as like effects imply
like causes, we must always ascribe the causation to
the circumstances, wherein we discover the
resemblance. " Here it seems to be the "quality"
or "circumstances" of an event that is the cause
rather than the event itself, for the event itself is the
same as others in some respects and different in
other respects. The suspicion that it is not events,
but something more closely tied to the descriptions
of events, that Hume holds to be causes, is fortified
by Hume's claim that causal statements are never
necessary. For if events were causes, then a true
description of some event would be 'the cause of b',
and, given that such an event exists, it follows
logically that the cause of b caused b.
Mill said that the cause "is the sum total of the
conditions positive and negative taken together. .. which being realized, the consequent invariably
follows. " Many discussions of causality have con­
centrated on the question whether Mill was right in
insisting that the "real Cause" must include all the
antecedent conditions that jointly were sufficient
for the effect, and much ingenuity has been spent
on discovering factors, pragmatic or otherwise, that
guide and justify our choice of some "part" of the
conditions as the cause. There has been general
agreement that the notion of cause may be at least
partly characterized in terms of sufficient and (or)
necessary conditions. 1 Yet it seems to me we do not
understand how such characterizations are to be
applied to particular causes.
Take one of Mill's examples: some man, say
Smith, dies, and the cause of his death is said to
be that his foot slipped in climbing a ladder. Mill \nwould say we have not given the whole cause, since
having a foot slip in climbing a ladder is not always
followed by death. What we were after, however,
was not the cause of death in general but the cause
of Smith's death: does it make sense to ask under
what conditions Smith's death invariably follows?
Mill suggests that part of the cause of Smith's
death is "the circumstance of his weight, " perhaps
because if Smith had been light as a feather, his slip
might not have injured him. Mill's explanation of
why we don't bother to mention this circumstance
is that it is too obvious to bear mention, but it
seems to me that if it was Smith's fall that killed
him, and Smith weighed twelve stone, then
Smith's fall was the fall of a man who weighed
twelve stone, whether or not we know it or mention
it. How could Smith's actual fall, with Smith
weighing, as he did, twelve stone, be any more
efficacious in killing him than Smith's actual
fall?
The difficulty has nothing to do with Mill's
sweeping view of the cause, but attends any
attempt of this kind to treat particular causes as
necessary or sufficient conditions. Thus Mackie
asks, "What is the exact force of [the statement of
some experts J that this short circuit caused this
fire? " And he answers, "Clearly the experts are
not saying that the short circuit was a necessary
condition for this house's catching fire at this time;
they know perfectly well that a short circuit some­
where else, or the overturning of a lighted oil
stove. .. might, if it had occurred, have set the
house on fire. ,, 2 Suppose the experts know what
they are said to; how does this bear on the question
whether the short circuit was a necessary condition
of this particular fire? For a short circuit elsewhere
could not have caused this fire, nor could the over­
turning of a lighted oil stove.
To talk of particular events as conditions is
bewildering, but perhaps causes aren't events (like
the short circuit, or Smith's fall from the ladder),
but correspond rather to sentences (perhaps like
the fact that this short circuit occurred, or the fact
that Smith fell from the ladder). Sentences can
express conditions of truth for others - hence the
word 'conditional'.
If causes correspond to sentences rather than
singular terms, the logical form of a sentence
like:
(l) The short circuit caused the fire
would be given more accurately by:
Causal Relations
(2) The fact that there was a short circuit caused it
to be the case that there was a fire.
In (2) the italicized words constitute a sentential
connective like 'and' or 'if. .. then. .. '. This
approach no doubt receives support from the idea
that causal laws are universal conditionals, and
singular causal statements ought to be instances of
them. Yet the idea is not easily implemented. Sup­
pose, first, that a causal law is (as it is usually said
Hume taught) nothing but a universally quantified
material conditional. If (2) is an instance of such,
the italicized words have just the meaning of the
material conditional, 'If there was a short circuit,
then there was a fire'. No doubt (2) entails this, but
not conversely, since (2) entails something stron­
ger: namely, the conjunction 'There was a short
circuit and there was a fire'. We might try treating
(2) as the conjunction of the appropriate law and
'There was a short circuit and there was a fire' -
indeed, this seems a possible interpretation of
Hume's definition of cause quoted above - but
then (2) would no longer be an instance of the
law. And aside from the inherent implausibility of
this suggestion as giving the logical form of (2) (in
contrast, say, to giving the grounds on which it
might be asserted), there is also the oddity that an
inference from the fact that there was a short
circuit and there was a fire, and the law, to (2)
would turn out to be no more than a conjoining of
the premises.
Suppose, then, that there is a non-truth-func­
tional causal connective, as has been proposed by
many. 3 In line with the concept of a cause as a
condition, the causal connective is conceived as a
conditional, though stronger than the truth-func­
tional conditional. Thus Arthur Pap writes, "The
distinctive property of causal implication as com­
pared with material implication is just that the
falsity of the antecedent is no ground for inferring
the truth of the causal implication. ,, 4 If the
connective Pap had in mind were that of (2), this
remark would be strange, for it is a property of the
connective in (2) that the falsity of either the "ante­
cedent" or the "consequent" is a ground for infer­
ring the falsity of (2). That treating the causal
connective as a kind of conditional unsuits it for
the work of (I) or (2) is perhaps even more evident
from Burks's remark that "p is causally sufficient
for q is logically equivalent to ~ q is causally suffi­
cient for ~ p. "s Indeed, this shows not only that
Burks's connective is not that of (2), but also that it
is not the subjunctive causal connective would \nDonald Davidson
cause. My tickling Jones would cause him to laugh,
but his not laughing would not cause it to be the
case that I didn't tickle him.
These considerations show that the connective
of (2), and hence by hypothesis of (I), cannot, as is
often assumed, be a conditional of any sort, but
they do not show that (2) does not give the logical
form of singular causal statements. To show this
needs a stronger argument, and I think there is one,
as follows.
It is obvious that the connective in (2) is not
truth-functional, since (2) may change from true
to false if the contained sentences are switched.
Nevertheless, substitution of singular terms for
others with the same extension in sentences like
(I) and (2) does not touch their truth-value. If
Smith's death was caused by the fall from the
ladder and Smith was the first man to land on the
moon, then the fall from the ladder was the cause of
the death of the first man to land on the moon. And
if the fact that there was a fire in Jones's house
caused it to be the case that the pig was roasted, and
Jones's house is the oldest building on Elm Street,
then the fact that there was a fire in the oldest
building on Elm Street caused it to be the case
that the pig was roasted. We must accept the prin­
ciple of extensional substitution, then. Surely also
we cannot change the truth-value of the likes of (2)
by substituting logically equivalent sentences for
sentences in it. Thus (2) retains its truth if for
'there was a fire' we substitute the logically equiva­
lent 'x(x = x & there was a fire) = x(x = x)';
retains it still if for the left side of this identity we
write the coextensive singular term 'x(x = x &
Nero fiddled)'; and still retains it if we replace
'x (x = x & Nero fiddled) = x(x = x)' by the logi­
cally equivalent 'Nero fiddled' Since the only
aspect of 'there was a fire' and 'Nero fiddled' that
matters to this chain of reasoning is the fact of their
material equivalence, it appears that our assumed
principles have led to the conclusion that the main
connective of (2) is, contrary to what we supposed,
truth-functional. 6
Having already seen that the connective of (2)
cannot be truth-functional, it is tempting to try to
escape the dilemma by tampering with the princi­
ples of substitution that led to it. But there is
another, and, I think, wholly preferable way out:
we may reject the hypothesis that (2) gives the
logical form of (I), and with it the ideas that the
'caused' of (1) is a more or less concealed sentential
connective, and that causes are fully expressed only
by sentences.
II
Consider these six sentences:
(3) It is a fact that Jack fell down.
(4) Jack fell down and Jack broke his crown.
(5) Jack fell down before Jack broke his crown.
(6) Jack fell down, which caused it to be the case
that Jack broke his crown.
(7) Jones forgot the fact that Jack fell down.
(8) That Jack fell down explains the fact that Jack
broke his crown.
Substitution of equivalent sentences for, or sub­
stitution of coextensive singular terms or predic­
ates in, the contained sentences, will not alter the
truth-value of (3) or (4): here extensionality reigns.
In (7) and (8), intensionality reigns, in that similar
substitution in or for the contained sentences is not
guaranteed to save truth. (5) and (6) seem to fall in
between; for in them substitution of coextensive
singular terms preserves truth, whereas substitu­
tion of equivalent sentences does not. However this
last is, as we just saw with respect to (2), and hence
also (6), untenable middle ground.
Our recent argument would apply equally
against taking the 'before' of (5) as the sentential
connective it appears to be. And of course we don't
interpret 'before' as a sentential connective, but
rather as an ordinary two-place relation true of
ordered pairs of times; this is made to work by
introducing an extra place into the predicates ('x
fell down' becoming 'x fell down at t') and an
ontology of times to suit. The logical form of (5)
is made perspicuous, then, by:
(5') There exist times t and t' such that Jack fell
down at t, Jack broke his crown at t' and t
preceded t'.
This standard way of dealing with (5) seems to me
essentially correct, and I propose to apply the same
strategy to (6), which then comes out:
(6') There exist events e and e' such that e is a
falling down of Jack, e' is a breaking of his
crown by Jack, and e caused e'.
Once events are on hand, an obvious economy
suggests itself: (5) may as well be construed as
about events rather than times. With this, the
canonical version of (5) becomes just (6'), with
'preceded' replacing 'caused'. Indeed, it would be
difficult to make sense of the claim that causes \nprecede, or at least do not follow, their effects if (5)
and (6) did not thus have parallel structures. We
will still want to be able to say when an event
occurred, but with events this requires an ontology
of pure numbers only. So 'Jack fell down at 3 p. m. '
says that there is an event e that is a falling down of
Jack, and the time of e, measured in hours after
noon, is three; more briefly, (: 3e) (F (Jack, e)
& t(e) = 3).
On the present plan, (6) means some fall of
Jack's caused some breaking of Jack's crown; so
(6) is not false if Jack fell more than once, broke
his crown more than once, or had a crown-breaking
fall more than once. Nor, if such repetitions turned
out to be the case, would we have grounds for
saying that (6) referred to one rather than another
of the fracturings. The same does not go for 'The
short circuit caused the fire' or 'The flood caused
the famine' or 'Jack's fall caused the breaking of
Jack's crown'; here singularity is imputed. ('Jack's
fall', like 'the day after tomorrow', is no less a
singular term because it may refer to different
entities on different occasions. ) To do justice to
'Jack's fall caused the breaking of Jack's crown'
what we need is something like. 'The one and
only falling down of Jack caused the one and only
breaking of his crown by Jack'; in some symbols of
the trade, '(i) F (Jack, e) caused (i) B (Jack's crown,
el'.
Evidently (1) and (2) do not have the same
logical form. If we think in terms of standard
notations for first-order languages, it is (1) that
more or less wears its form on its face; (2), like
many existentially quantified sentences, does not
(witness 'Somebody loves somebody'). The rela­
tion between (1) and (2) remains obvious and close:
(1) entails (2), but not conversely. 7
III
The salient point that emerges so far is that we
must distinguish firmly between causes and the
features we hit on for describing them, and hence
between the question whether a statement says
truly that one event caused another and the further
question whether the events are characterized in
such a way that we can deduce, or otherwise infer,
from laws or other causal lore, that the relation was
causal. "The cause of this match's lighting is that it
was struck. - Yes, but that was only part of the
cause; it had to be a dry match, there had to be
adequate oxygen in the atmosphere, it had to
Causal Relations
be struck hard enough, etc. " We ought now to
appreciate that the "Yes, but" comment does not
have the force we thought. It cannot be that the
striking of this match was only part of the cause, for
this match was in fact dry, in adequate oxygen, and
the striking was hard enough. What is partial in the
sentence "The cause of this match's lighting is that
it was struck" is the description of the cause; as we
add to the description of the cause, we may
approach the point where we can deduce, from
this description and laws, that an effect of the
kind described would follow.
If Flora dried herself with a coarse towel, she
dried herself with a towel. This is an inference we
know how to articulate, and the articulation
depends in an obvious way on reflecting in lan­
guage an ontology that includes such things as
towels: if there is a towel that is coarse and was
used by Flora in her drying, there is a towel that
was used by Flora in her drying. The usual way of
doing things does not, however, give similar
expression to the similar inference from 'Flora
dried herself with a towel on the beach at noon' to
'Flora dried herself with a towel', or for that mat­
ter, from the last to 'Flora dried herself. But if, as I
suggest, we render 'Flora dried herself as about an
event, as well as about Flora, these inferences turn
out to be quite parallel to the more familiar ones.
Thus if there was an event that was a drying by
Flora of herself and that was done with a towel, on
the beach, at noon, then clearly there was an event
that was a drying by Flora of herself - and so on.
The mode of inference carries over directly to
causal statements. If it was a drying she gave herself
with a coarse towel on the beach at noon that
caused those awful splotches to appear on Flora's
skin, then it was a drying she gave herself that did
it; we may also conclude that it was something that
happened on the beach, something that took place
at noon, and something that was done with a towel,
that caused the tragedy. These little pieces of rea­
soning seem all to be endorsed by intuition, and it
speaks well for the analysis of causal statements in
terms of events that on that analysis the arguments
are transparently valid.
Mill, we are now in better position to see, was
wrong in thinking we have not specified the whole
cause of an event when we have not wholly speci­
fied it. And there is not, as Mill and others have
maintained, anything elliptical in the claim that
a certain man's death was caused by his eating a
particular dish, even though death resulted only
because the man had a particular bodily \nDonald Davidson
constitution, a particular state of present health,
and so on. On the other hand Mill was, I think,
quite right in saying that "there certainly is, among
the circumstances that took place, some combina­
tion or other on which death is invariably conse­
quent. .. the whole of which circumstances
perhaps constituted in this particular case the
conditions of the phenomenon. .. ". 8 Mill's critics
are no doubt justified in contending that we may
correctly give the cause without saying enough
about it to demonstrate that it was sufficient; but
they share Mill's confusion if they think every
deletion from the description of an event repres­
ents something deleted from the event described.
The relation between a singular causal statement
like 'The short circuit caused the fire' and neces­
sary and sufficient conditions seems, in brief, to be
this. The fuller we make the description of the
cause, the better our chances of demonstrating
that it was sufficient (as described) to produce the
effect, and the worse our chances of demonstrating
that it was necessary; the fuller we make the
description of the effect, the better our chances of
demonstrating that the cause (as described) was
necessary, and the worse our chances of demon­
strating that it was sufficient. The symmetry of
these remarks strongly suggests that in whatever
sense causes are correctly said to be (described as)
sufficient, they are as correctly said to be necessary.
Here is an example. We may suppose there is some
predicate 'P (x, y, e)' true of Brutus, Caesar, and
Brutus's stabbing of Caesar and such that any stab
(by anyone of anyone) that is P is followed by the
death of the stabbed. And let us suppose further
that this law meets Mill's requirements of being
unconditional - it supports counterfactuals of the
form 'If Cleopatra had received a stab that was P,
she would have died'. Now we can prove (assuming
a man dies only once) that Brutus's stab was suffi­
cient for Caesar's death. Yet it was not the cause of
Caesar's death, for Caesar's death was the death of
a man with more wounds than Brutus inflicted, and
such a death could not have been caused by an
event that was P ('P' was chosen to apply only to
stabbings administered by a single hand). The
trouble here is not that the description of the
cause is partial, but that the event described was
literally (spatio temporally) only part of the cause.
Can we then analyze 'a caused b' as meaning that
a and b may be described in such a way that the
existence of each could be demonstrated, in the
light of causal laws, to be a necessary and sufficient
condition of the existence of the other? One objec-
tion, foreshadowed in previous discussion, is that
the analysandum does, but the analysans does not,
entail the existence of a and b. Suppose we add, in
remedy, the condition that either a or b, as
described, exists. Then on the proposed analysis
one can show that the causal relation holds between
any two events. To apply the point in the direction
of sufficiency, imagine some description '(~x)Fx'
under which the existence of an event a may
be shown sufficient for the existence of b. Then
the existence of an arbitrary event c may equally be
shown sufficient for the existence of b: just take
as the description of c the following: '(Zy)(y =
c & (: 3! x)Fx)'. 9 It seems unlikely that any simple
and natural restrictions on the form of allowable
descriptions would meet this difficulty, but since I
have abjured the analysis of the causal relation, I
shall not pursue the matter here.
There remains a legitimate question concerning
the relation between causal laws and singular causal
statements that may be raised independently. Set­
ting aside the abbreviations successful analysis
might authorize, what form are causal laws apt to
have if from them, and a premise to the effect that
an event of a certain (acceptable) description exists,
we are to infer a singular causal statement saying
that the event caused, or was caused by, another? A
possibility I find attractive is that a full-fledged
causal law has the form of a conjunction:
(S) (e)(n)((Fe & t(e) = n) -->
(: 3! f)(Gf & t(f) = n + E &
(L) C(eJ))) and
(N) (e)(n)((Ge & t(e) = n + E) -->
(: 3! f)(Ff & t(f) = n & C(j, e)))
Here the variables 'e' and 'f' range over events, 'n'
ranges over numbers, F and G are properties of
events, 'C (e, f)' is read 'e causes j\ and 't' is a
function that assigns a number to an event to mark
the time the event occurs. Now, given the premise:
(P) (: 3! e) (Fe & t(e) = 3)
(C) (ie) (Fe & t(e) = 3) caused
(ie)(Ge & t(e) = 3 + E)
It is worth remarking that part (N) of (L) is as
necessary to the proof of (C) from (P) as it is to
the proof of (C) from the premise '(: 3! e)(Ge &
t( e) = 3 + E))'. This is perhaps more reason for
holding that causes are, in the sense discussed
above, necessary as well as sufficient conditions. \nExplaining "why an event occurred, " on this
account of laws, may take an instructively large
number of forms, even if we limit explanation to
the resources of deduction. Suppose, for example,
we want to explain the fact that there was a fire in
the house at 3: 01 p. m. Armed with appropriate
premises in the form of (P) and (L), we may
deduce: that there was a fire in the house at 3: 01
p. m. ; that it was caused by a short circuit at 3: 00
p. m. ; that there was only one fire in the house at
3: 01 p. m. ; that this fire was caused by the one and
only short circuit that occurred at 3: 00 p. m. Some
of these explanations fall short of using all that is
given by the premises; and this is lucky, since we
often know less. Given only (5) and (P), for ex­
ample, we cannot prove there was only one fire in
the house at 3: 01 p. m. , though we can prove there
was exactly one fire in the house at 3: 01 p. m. that
was caused by the short circuit. An interesting case
is where we know a law in the form of (N), but not
the corresponding (5). Then we may show that,
given that an event of a particular sort occurred,
there must have been a cause answering to a certain
description, but, given the same description of the
cause, we could not have predicted the effect.
An example might be where the effect is getting
pregnant.
If we explain why it is that a particular event
occurred by deducting a statement that there is
such an event (under a particular description)
from a premise known to be true, then a simple
way of explaining an event, for example the fire in
the house at 3: 01 p. m. , consists in producing a
statement of the form of (C); and this explanation
makes no use of laws. The explanation will be
greatly enhanced by whatever we can say in favor
of the truth of (C); needless to say, producing the
likes of (L) and (P), if they are known true, clinches
the matter. In most cases, however, the request for
explanation will describe the event in terms that fall
under no full-fledged law. The device to which we
will then resort, if we can, is apt to be redescription
of the event. For we can explain the occurrence of
any event a if we know (L), (P), and the further fact
that a = (u)(Ge & t(e) = 3 + f). Analogous re­
marks apply to the redescription of the cause, and
to cases where all we want, or can, explain is the
fact that there was an event of a certain sort.
The great majority of singular causal statements
are not backed, we may be sure, by laws in the way
(C) is backed by (L). The relation in general is
rather this: if 'a caused b' is true, then there are
descriptions of a and b such that the result of
Causal Relations
substituting them for 'a' and 'b' in 'a caused b' is
entailed by true premises of the form of (L) and
(P); and the converse holds if suitable restrictions
are put on the descriptions. lo If this is correct, it
does not follow that we must be able to dredge up a
law if we know a singular causal statement to be
true; all that follows is that we know there must be a
covering law. And very often, I think, our justifica­
tion for accepting a singular causal statement is that
we have reason to believe an appropriate causal law
exists, though we do not know what it is. General­
izations like 'If you strike a well-made match hard
enough against a properly prepared surface, then,
other conditions being favorable, it will light' owe
their importance not to the fact that we can hope
eventually to render them un tendentious and
exceptionless, but rather to the fact that they sum­
marize much of our evidence for believing that full­
fledged causal laws exist covering events we wish to
explain. 11
If the story I have told is true, it is possible to
reconcile, within limits, two accounts thought by
their champions to be opposed. One account agrees
with Hume and Mill to this extent: it says that a
singular causal statement 'a caused b' entails that
there is a law to the effect that "all the objects similar
to a are followed by objects similar to b" and that we
have reason to believe the singular statement only in
so far as we have reason to believe there is such a law.
The second account (persuasively argued by C. J.
Ducassel2) maintains that singular causal state­
ments entail no law and that we can know them to
be true without knowing any relevant law. Both of
these accounts are entailed, I think, by the account
I have given, and they are consistent (I therefore
hope) with each other. The reconciliation depends,
of course, on the distinction between knowing
there is a law "covering" two events and knowing
what the law is: in my view, Ducasse is right that
singular causal statements entail no law; Hume is
right that they entail there is a law.
IV
Much of what philosophers have said of causes and
causal relations is intelligible only on the assump­
tion (often enough explicit) that causes are indi­
vidual events, and causal relations hold between
events. Yet, through failure to connect this basic
aperfu with the grammar of singular causal judg­
ments, these same philosophers have found them­
selves pressed, especially when trying to put causal \nDonald Davidson
statements into quantificational form, into trying to
express the relation of cause to effect by a sentential
connective. Hence the popularity of the utterly
misleading question: can causal relations be
expressed by the purely extensional material con­
ditional, or is some stronger (non-Humean) con­
nection involved? The question is misleading
because it confuses two separate matters: the logi­
cal form of causal statements and the analysis of
causality. So far as form is concerned, the issue of
nonextensionality does not arise, since the relation
of causality between events can be expressed (no
matter how "strong" or "weak" it is) by an ordin­
ary two-place predicate in an ordinary, extensional
first-order language. These plain resources will
perhaps be outrun by an adequate account of the
form of causal laws, subjunctives, and counterfac­
tual conditionals, to which most attempts to ana­
lyze the causal relation turn. But this is, I have
urged, another question.
This is not to say there are no causal idioms that
directly raise the issue of apparently non-truth­
functional connectives. On the contrary, a host of
statement forms, many of them strikingly similar,
at least at first view, to those we have considered,
challenge the account just given. Here are samples:
'The failure of the sprinkling system caused the
fire', 'The slowness with which controls were
applied caused the rapidity with which the inflation
developed', 'The collapse was caused, not by the
fact that the bolt gave way, but by the fact that it
gave way so suddenly and unexpectedly', 'The fact
that the dam did not hold caused the flood'. Some
Notes
I am indebted to Harry Lewis and David Nivison, as well
as to other members of seminars at Stanford University to
whom I presented the ideas in this paper during 1966/67,
for many helpful comments. I have profited greatly from
discussion with John Wallace of the questions raised here;
he mayor may not agree with my answers. My research
was supported in part by the National Science Founda­
tion.
For a recent example, with reference to many others,
see J. L. Mackie, "Causes and conditions, " this
volume, ch. 32.
2 Ibid. , p. 413.
3 For example by: Mackie, ibid. , p. 421; Arthur Burks,
"The logic of causal propositions, " Mind, 601239
(July 1951), pp. 363-82; and Arthur Pap, "Disposi­
tion concepts and extensional logic, " in H. Feigl, M.
of these sentences may yield to the methods I have
prescribed, especially if failures are counted among
events, but others remain recalcitrant. What we
must say in such cases is that in addition to, or in
place of, giving what Mill calls the "producing
cause, " such sentences tell, or suggest, a causal
story. They are, in other words, rudimentary causal
explanations. Explanations typically relate state­
ments, not events. I suggest therefore that the
'caused' of the sample sentences in this paragraph
is not the 'caused' of straightforward singular cau­
sal statements, but is best expressed by the words
'causally explains'. 13
A final remark. It is often said that events can be
explained and predicted only in so far as they have
repeatable characteristics, but not in so far as they
are particulars. No doubt there is a clear and trivial
sense in which this is true, but we ought not to lose
sight of the less obvious point that there is an
important difference between explaining the fact
that there was an explosion in the broom closet and
explaining the occurrence of the explosion in the
broom closet. Explanation of the second sort
touches the particular event as closely as language
can ever touch any particular. Of course this claim
is persuasive only ifthere are such things as events
to which singular terms, especially definite
descriptions, may refer. But the assumption, onto­
logical and metaphysical, that there are events, is
one without which we cannot make sense of much
of our most common talk; or so, at any rate, I have
been arguing. I do not know any better, or further,
way of showing what there is.
Scriven, and G. Maxwell (eds), Minnesota Studies in
the Philosophy oj Science, vol. 2, (Minneapolis: Uni­
versity of Minnesota Press, 1958), pp. 196-224.
4 Pap, "Disposition concepts, " p. 212.
5 Burks, "Logic of causal propositions, " p. 369.
6 This argument is closely related to one spelled out by
Dagfinn F q, llesdal, in "Q]. Iantification into causal
contexts" in R. S. Cohen and M. W. Wartofsky
(eds), Boston Studies in the Philosophy oj Science, vol.
2 (New York: Humanities Press, 1966), pp. 263-74, to
show that unrestricted quantification into causal con­
texts leads to difficulties. His argument is in turn a
direct adaptation of Quine's (Word and Object (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1960), pp. 197-8) to show
that (logical) modal distinctions collapse under certain
natural assumptions. My argument derives directly
from Frege. \n7 A familiar device I use for testing hypotheses about
logical grammar is translation into standard quantifi­
cational form; since the semantics of such languages is
transparent, translation into them is a way of provid­
ing a semantic theory (a theory of the logical form) for
what is translated. In this employment, canonical
notation is not to be conceived as an improvement
on the vernacular, but as a comment on it.
For elaboration and defense of the view of events
sketched in this section, see my "The logical form of
action sentences, " in Nicholas Rescher (ed. ), The
Logic oj Action and Preference, (Pittsburgh: Pittsburgh
University Press, 1967).
8 J. S. Mill, A System oJLogic (orig. pub. 1843; London:
Routledge & Sons, 1872), bk III, ch. 5, sect. 3.
9 Here I am indebted to Professor Carl Hempel, and in
the next sentence to John Wallace.
10 Clearly this account cannot be taken as a definition of
the causal relation. Not only is there the inherently
vague quantification over expressions (of what lan­
guage? ), but there is also the problem of spelling out
the "suitable restrictions. "
11 The thought in these paragraphs, like much more that
appears here, was first adumbrated in my "Actions,
reasons, and causes, " Journal oj Philosophy 60123 (7
Nov. 1963), pp. 685-700, esp. pp. 696-9; repr. in
Bernard Berofsky (ed. ), Free Will and Determinism,
(New York: Harper & Row, 1966). This conception
of causality was subsequently discussed and, with
various modifications, employed by Samuel Gorovitz,
"Causal judgments and causal explanations, " Journal
oj Philosophy 62123 (2 Dec. 1965), pp. 695-711, and
by Bernard Berofsky, "Causality and general laws, "
Journal oj Philosop~y, 63/6 (17 Mar. 1966), pp.
148-57.
Causal Relations
12 See C. J. Ducasse, "Critique ofHume's conception of
causality, " Journal oJPhilosophy 63/6 (17 Mar. 1966);
pp. 141-8; idem, Causation and the Types oj Necessity
(Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1924); idem,
Nature, Mind, and Death (La Salle, III. : Open Court,
1951), pt 2. I have omitted from my "second account"
much that Ducasse says that is not consistent with
Hume.
13 Zeno Vendler has ingeniously marshaled the linguistic
evidence for a deep distinction, in our use of 'cause',
'effect', and related words, between occurrences of
verb-nominalizations that are fact-like or proposi­
tional, and occurrences that are event-like. (See
Zeno Vendler, "Effects, results and consequences, "
in R. J. Butler (ed. ), Analytic Philosophy (New York:
Barnes & Noble, 1962), pp. 1-15. ) Vendler concludes
that the 'caused' of 'John's action caused the disturb­
ance' is always flanked by expressions used in the
propositional or fact-like sense, whereas 'was an effect
of or 'was due to' in 'The shaking of the earth was an
effect of (was due to) the explosion' is flanked by
expressions in the event-like sense. My distinction
between essentially sentential expressions and the
expressions that refer to events is much the same as
Vendler's and owes much to him, though I have used
more traditional semantic tools and have interpreted
the evidence differently.
My suggestion that 'caused' is sometimes a relation,
sometimes a connective, with corresponding changes
in the interpretation of the expressions flanking it, has
much in common with the thesis of J. M. Shorter's
"Causality, and a method of analysis, " in Analytic
Philosophy, 11, 1965, pp. 145-57. \n34
David Lewis
Hume defined causation twice over. He wrote: "we
may define a cause to be an object followed by
another, and where all the objects, similar to the first,
are followed by objects similar to the second. Or, in
other words, where, i{the first object had not been, the
second never had existed. " I
Descendants of Hume's first definition still
dominate the philosophy of causation: a causal
succession is supposed to be a succession that
instantiates a regularity. To be sure, there have
been improvements. Nowadays we try to distin­
guish the regularities that count - the "causal laws"
- from mere accidental regularities of succession.
We subsume causes and effects under regularities
by means of descriptions they satisfy, not by overall
similarity. And we allow a cause to be only one
indispensable part, not the whole, of the total situ­
ation that is followed by the effect in accordance
with a law. In present-day regularity analyses, a
cause is defined (roughly) as any member of any
minimal set of actual conditions that are jointly
sufficient, given the laws, for the existence of the
effect.
More precisely, let C be the proposition that c
exists (or occurs), and let E be the proposition that
e exists. Then c causes e, according to a typical
regularity analysis/ iff (1) C and E are true; and
(2) for some nonempty set i? of true law-proposi­
tions and some set ~ of true propositions of part-
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 70
(1973), pp. 556-67. Copyright (f) by David Lewis. Rep­
rinted by permission of the author and Columbia Uni­
versity Press.
icular fact, i? and ~ jointly imply C ~ E, although
i? and ~ jointly do not imply E, and ~ alone does
not imply C ~ E. 3
Much needs doing, and much has been done, to
turn definitions like this one into defensible ana­
lyses. Many problems have been overcome. Others
remain: in particular, regularity analyses tend to
confuse causation itself with various other causal
relations. If c belongs to a minimal set of conditions
jointly sufficient for e, given the laws, then c may
well be a genuine cause of e. But c might rather be
an effect of e: one which could not, given the laws
and some of the actual circumstances, have
occurred otherwise than by being caused bye. Or
c might be an epiphenomenon of the causal history
of e: a more or less inefficacious effect of some
genuine cause of e. Or c might be a preempted
potential cause of e: something that did not cause
e, but that would have done so in the absence of
whatever really did cause e.
It remains to be seen whether any regularity
analysis can succeed in distinguishing genuine
causes from effects, epiphenomena, and preempted
potential causes - and whether it can succeed with­
out falling victim to worse problems, without piling
on the epicycles, and without departing from the
fundamental idea that causation is instantiation of
regularities. I have no proof that regularity analyses
are beyond repair, nor any space to review the
repairs that have been tried. Suffice it to say that
the prospects look dark. I think it is time to give up
and try something else.
A promising alternative is not far to seek.
Hume's "other words" - that if the cause had not \nbeen, the effect never had existed - are no mere
restatement of his first definition. They propose
something altogether different: a counterfactual
analysis of causation.
The proposal has not been well received. True,
we do know that causation has something or other
to do with counterfactuals. We think of a cause as
something that makes a difference, and the differ­
ence it makes must be a difference from what
would have happened without it. Had it been
absent, its effects - some of them, at least, and
usually all - would have been absent as well. Yet
it is one thing to mention these platitudes now and
again, and another thing to rest an analysis on
them. That has not seemed worthwhile. { We have
learned all too well that counterfactuals are ill
understood, wherefore it did not seem that much
understanding could be gained by using them to
analyze causation or anything else. Pending a better
understanding of counterfactuals, moreover, we
had no way to fight seeming counterexamples to a
counterfactual analysis.
But counterfactuals need not remain ill under­
stood, I claim, unless we cling to false preconcep­
tions about what it would be like to understand
them. Must an adequate understanding make no
reference to unactualized possibilities? Must it
assign sharply determinate truth-conditions?
Must it connect counterfactuals rigidly to covering
laws? Then none will be forthcoming. So much the
worse for those standards of adequacy. Why not
take counterfactuals at face value: as statements
about possible alternatives to the actual situation,
somewhat vaguely specified, in which the actual
laws may or may not remain intact? There are
now several such treatments of counterfactuals,
differing only in details. 5 If they are right, then
sound foundations have been laid for analyses that
use counterfactuals.
In this paper, I shall state a counterfactual ana­
lysis, not very different from Hume's second defi­
nition, of some sorts of causation. Then I shall try
to show how this analysis works to distinguish
genuine causes from effects, epiphenomena, and
preempted potential causes.
My discussion will be incomplete in at least four
ways. Explicit preliminary settings-aside may pre­
vent confusion.
(l) I shall confine myself to causation among
events, in the everyday sense of the word: flashes,
battles, conversations, impacts, strolls, deaths,
touchdowns, falls, kisses, and the like. Not that
Causation
events are the only things that can cause or be
caused; but I have no full list of the others, and
no good umbrella-term to cover them all.
(2) My analysis is meant to apply to causation
in particular cases. It is not an analysis of causal
generalizations. Presumably those are quantified
statements involving causation among particular
events (or non-events), but it turns out not to be
easy to match up the causal generalizations of nat­
ural language with the available quantified forms.
A sentence of the form "C-events cause E-events, "
for instance, can mean any of
(a) For some c in C and some e in E, c causes e.
(b) For every e in E, there is some c in C such that
c causes e.
(c) For every c in C, there is some e in E such that
c causes e.
not to mention further ambiguities. Worse still,
"Only C-events cause E-events" ought to mean
(d) For every c, if there is some e in E such that c
causes e, then c is in C.
if "only" has its usual meaning. But no; it unam­
biguously means (b) instead! These problems are
not about causation, but about our idioms of quan­
tification.
(3) We sometimes single out one among all the
causes of some event and call it "the" cause, as if
there were no others. Or we single out a few as the
"causes, " calling the rest mere "causal factors" or
"causal conditions. " Or we speak of the "decisive"
or "real" or "principal" cause. We may select the
abnormal or extraordinary causes, or those under
human control, or those we deem good or bad, or
just those we want to talk about. I have nothing to
say about these principles of invidious discrimina­
tion. 6 I am concerned with the prior question of
what it is to be one of the causes (unselectively
speaking). My analysis is meant to capture a
broad and nondiscriminatory concept of causation.
(4) I shall be content, for now, if! can give an
analysis of causation that works properly under
determinism. By determinism I do not mean any
thesis of universal causation, or universal predict­
ability-in-principle, but rather this: the prevailing
laws of nature are such that there do not exist any
two possible worlds which are exactly alike up to
some time, which differ thereafter, and in which
those laws are never violated. Perhaps by ignoring
indeterminism I squander the most striking
advantage of a counterfactual analysis over a regu­
larity analysis: that it allows undetermined events \nDavid Lewis
to be caused. 7 I fear, however, that my present
analysis cannot yet cope with all varieties of causa­
tion under indeterminism. The needed repair
would take us too far into disputed questions
about the foundations of probability.
Comparative Similarity
To begin, I take as primitive a relation of compar­
ative overall similarity among possible worlds. We
may say that one world is closer to actuality than
another if the first resembles our actual world more
than the second does, taking account of all the
respects of similarity and difference and balancing
them off one against another.
(More generally, an arbitrary world w can play
the role of our actual world. In speaking of our
actual world without knowing just which world is
ours, I am in effect generalizing over all worlds. We
really need a three-place relation: world WI is closer
to world w than world Wz is. I shall henceforth leave
this generality tacit. )
I have not said just how to balance the respects of
comparison against each other, so I have not said
just what our relation of comparative similarity is
to be. Not for nothing did I call it primitive. But I
have said what sort of relation it is, and we are
familiar with relations of that sort. We do make
judgments of comparative overall similarity - of
people, for instance - by balancing off many
respects of similarity and difference. Often our
mutual expectations about the weighting factors
are definite and accurate enough to permit com­
munication. I shall have more to say later about the
way the balance must go in particular cases to make
my analysis work. But the vagueness of overall
similarity will not be entirely resolved. Nor should
it be. The vagueness of similarity does infect cau­
sation, and no correct analysis can deny it.
The respects of similarity and difference that
enter into the overall similarity of worlds are
many and varied. In particular, similarities in mat­
ters of particular fact trade off against similarities of
law. The prevailing laws of nature are important to
the character of a world; so similarities of law are
weighty. Weighty, but not sacred. We should not
take it for granted that a world that conforms
perfectly to our actual laws is ipso [acto closer to
actuality than any world where those laws are viol­
ated in any way at all. It depends on the nature and
extent of the violation, on the place of the violated
laws in the total system of laws of nature, and on
the countervailing similarities and differences in
other respects. Likewise, similarities or differences
of particular fact may be more or less weighty,
depending on their nature and extent. Com­
prehensive and exact similarities of particular
fact throughout large spatiotemporal regions seem
to have special weight. It may be worth a small
miracle to prolong or expand a region of perfect
match.
Our relation of comparative similarity should
meet two formal constraints. (I) It should be a
weak ordering of the worlds: an ordering in which
ties are permitted, but any two worlds are compar­
able. (2) Our actual world should be closest to
actuality, resembling itself more than any other
world resembles it. We do not impose the further
constraint that for any set A of worlds there is a
unique closest A-world, or even a set of A-worlds
tied for closest. Why not an infinite sequence of
closer and closer A-worlds, but no closest?
Counterfactuals and Counter factual
Dependence
Given any two propositions A and C, we have their
counterJactual A D--> C: the proposition that if A
were true, then C would also be true. The opera­
tion D--> is defined by a rule of truth, as follows.
A D--> C is true (at a world w) iff either (1) there
are no possible A-worlds (in which case A D--> Cis
vacuous), or (2) some A-world where C holds is
closer (to w) than is any A-world where C does
not hold. In other words, a counterfactual is non­
vacuously true iff it takes less of a departure from
actuality to make the consequent true along with
the antecedent than it does to make the antecedent
true without the consequent.
We did not assume that there must always be one
or more closest A-worlds. But if there are, we can
simplify: A D--> Cis non vacuously true iff C holds
at all the closest A-worlds.
We have not presupposed that A is false. If A is
true, then our actual world is the closest A-world,
so A D--> C is true iff C is. Hence A D--> C implies
the material conditional A: :: ) C; and A and C
jointly imply A D--> C.
Let Al, Az, .. . be a family of possible proposi­
tions, no two of which are compossible; let
C I, Cz, .. . be another such family (of equal size).
Then if all the counterfactuals Al D--> C I,
A z D--> C z, .. . between corresponding proposi­
tions in the two families are true, we shall say that \nthe C's depend counterfactually on the A's. We can
say it like this in ordinary language: whether C I or
C z or. .. depends (counterfactually) on whether Al
or A z or. .. .
Counterfactual dependence between large
families of alternatives is characteristic of processes
of measurement, perception, or control. Let
R I, R z, .. . be propositions specifying the altern­
ative readings of a certain barometer at a certain
time. Let PI, P z, .. . specify the corresponding
pressures of the surrounding air. Then, if the baro­
meter is working properly to measure the pressure,
the R's must depend counterfactually on the P's.
As we say it: the reading depends on the pressure.
Likewise, if I am seeing at a certain time, then my
visual impressions must depend counterfactually,
over a wide range of alternative possibilities, on the
scene before my eyes. And if I am in control over
what happens in some respect, then there must be a
double counter factual dependence, again over
some fairly wide range of alternatives. The out­
come depends on what I do, and that in turn
depends on which outcome I want. 8
Causal Dependence among Events
If a family C I, C z, .. . depends counterfactually on a
family AI, Az, .. . in the sense just explained, we
will ordinarily be willing to speak also of causal
dependence. We say, for instance, that the baro­
meter reading depends causally on the pressure,
that my visual impressions depend causally on the
scene before my eyes, or that the outcome of some­
thing under my control depends causally on what I
do. But there are exceptions. Let G I, G z, .. . be
alternative possible laws of gravitation, differing
in the value of some numerical constant. Let MI
M z, .. . be suitable alternative laws of planetary
motion. Then the M's may depend counter­
factually on the G's, but we would not call this
dependence causal. Such exceptions as this,
however, do not involve any sort of dependence
among distinct particular events. The hope
remains that causal dependence among events, at
least, may be analyzed simply as counterfactual
dependence.
We have spoken thus far of counterfactual
dependence among propositions, not among
events. Whatever particular events may be, pre­
sumably they are not propositions. But that is no
problem, since they can at least be paired with
propositions. To any possible event e, there corres-
Causation
ponds the proposition O(e) that holds at all and
only those worlds where e occurs. This O(e) is the
proposition that e occurs. 9 (If no two events occur
at exactly the same worlds ~ if, that is, there are no
absolutely necessary connections between distinct
events ~ we may add that this correspondence of
events and propositions is one to one. ) Counter­
factual dependence among events is simply coun­
terfactual dependence among the corresponding
propositions.
Let CI, CZ, .. . and el, ez, .. . be distinct possible
events such that no two of the c's and no two of
the e's are compossible. Then I say that the family
el, ez, .. . of events depends causally on the family
CI, cz, .. . iff the family O(ed, O(ez), .. . of proposi-
tions depends counter factually on the family O( C]),
O( cz), .. .. As we say it: whether el or ez or. ..
occurs depends on whether CI or Cz or. .. occurs.
We can also define a relation of dependence
among single events rather than families. Let c
and e be two distinct possible particular events.
Then e depends causally on c iff the family O(e),
~ O(e) depends counterfactually on the family
O(c), ~ O(c). As we say it: whether e occurs or
not depends on whether c occurs or not. The
dependence consists in the truth of two counter­
factuals: O(c)->O(e) and ~ O(c)-> ~ O(e). There
are two cases. If c and e do not actually occur, then
the second counterfactual is automatically true
because its antecedent and consequent are true: so
e depends causally on c iff the first counterfactual
holds. That is, iff e would have occurred if chad
occurred. But if c and e are actual events, then it is
the first counterfactual that is automatically true.
Then e depends causally on c iff, if c had not been, e
never had existed. I take Hume's second definition
as my definition not of causation itself, but of
causal dependence among actual events.
Causation
Causal dependence among actual events implies
causation. If c and e are two actual events such
that e would not have occurred without c, then c
is a cause of e. But I reject the converse. Causation
must always be transitive; causal dependence may
not be; so there can be causation without causal
dependence. Let c, d, and e be three actual events
such that d would not have occurred without c, and
e would not have occurred without d. Then c is a
cause of e even if e would still have occurred (other­
wise caused) without c. \nDavid Lewis
We extend causal dependence to a transItive
relation in the usual way. Let c, d, e, .. . be a finite
sequence of actual particular events such that d
depends causally on c, eon d, and so on throughout.
Then this sequence is a causal chain. Finally, one
event is a cause of another iff there exists a causal
chain leading from the first to the second. This
completes my counterfactual analysis of causation.
Counter factual versus Nomic
Dependence
It is essential to distinguish counter factual and
causal dependence from what I shall call nomic
dependence. The family C l, C z, .. . of propositions
depends nomically on the family A I, Az, .. . iff
there are a nonempty set E of true law-propositions
and a set IY of true propositions of particular fact
such that £. I and IY jointly imply (but IY alone does
not imply) all the material conditionals Al: J C l,
Az: J Cz, .. . between the corresponding proposi­
tions in the two families. (Recall that these same
material conditionals are implied by the counter­
factuals that would comprise a counterfactual
dependence. ) We shall say also that the nomic
dependence holds in virtue of the premise sets £. I
and IY.
Nomic and counterfactual dependence are
related as follows. Say that a proposition B is coun­
terfactually independent of the family AI, A z, .. . of
alternatives iff B would hold no matter which of
the A's were true - that is, iff the counterfactuals
Al D--> B, A z D--> B, .. . all hold. If the C's
depend nomically on the A's in virtue of the pre­
mise sets E and IY, and ifin addition (all members
of) £. I and ~ are counterfactually independent of the
A's, then it follows that the C's depend counter­
factually on the A's. In that case, we may regard the
nomic dependence in virtue of £. I and IY as explain­
ing the counterfactual dependence. Often, perhaps
always, counter factual dependences may be thus
explained. But the requirement of counterfactual
independence is indispensable. Unless E and ~
meet that requirement, nomic dependence in vir­
tue of £. I and ~ does not imply counterfactual
dependence, and, if there is counterfactual depend­
ence anyway, does not explain it.
Nomic dependence is reversible, in the following
sense. If the family C l, C z, .. . depends nomically
on the family AI, A z, .. . in virtue of £. I and ~, then
also AI, Az, .. . depends nomically on the family
AC I, AC z, .. ., in virtue of E and ~, where A is
• • @ ••
Figure 34. 1
the disjunction A I V A z V. .. . Is counterfactual
dependence likewise reversible? That does not fol­
low. For, even if E and ~ are independent of
AI, A z, .. . and hence establish the counterfactual
dependence of the C's on the A's, still they may
fail to be independent of AC I, ACz, .. ., and hence
may fail to establish the reverse counterfactual
dependence of the A's on the AC's. Irreversible
counterfactual dependence is shown in figure 34. 1:
@ is our actual world, the dots are the other
worlds, and distance on the page represents sim­
ilarity "distance. "
The counterfactuals Al D--> C l, A z D--> C z,
and A3 D--> C 3 hold at the actual world; wherefore
the C's depend on the A's. But we do not have the
reverse dependence of the A's on the AC's, since
instead of the needed AC z D--> A z and AC] D-->
A] we have AC z D--> Al and AC 3 D--> AI.
Just such irreversibility is commonplace. The
barometer reading depends counterfactually on
the pressure - that is as clear-cut as counterfactuals
ever get - but does the pressure depend counter­
factually on the reading? If the reading had been
higher, would the pressure have been higher? Or
would the barometer have been malfunctioning?
The second sounds better: a higher reading would
have been an incorrect reading. To be sure, there
are actual laws and circumstances that imply and
explain the actual accuracy of the barometer, but
these are no more sacred than the actual laws and
circumstances that imply and explain the actual
pressure. Less sacred, in fact. When something
must give way to permit a higher reading, we find
it less of a departure from actuality to hold the
pressure fixed and sacrifice the accuracy, rather
than vice versa. It is not hard to see why. The
barometer, being more localized and more delicate
than the weather, is more vulnerable to slight
departures from actuality. 10
We can now explain why regularity analyses of
causation (among events, under determinism) work
as well as they do. Suppose that event c causes
event e according to the sample regularity analysis
that I gave at the beginning of this paper, in virtue \nof premise sets £! and ~. It follows that £! , ~, and
~ O(c) jointly do not imply O(e). Strengthen this:
suppose further that they do imply ~ O(e). If so,
the family O(e), ~ O(e) depends nomically on the
family O(c), ~ O(c) in virtue of £! and! 3'. Add one
more supposition: that £! and! 3' are counterfac­
tually independent of O(c), ~ O(c). Then it fol­
lows according to my counterfactual analysis that e
depends counterfactually and causally on c, and
hence that c causes e. If I am right, the regularity
analysis gives conditions that are almost but not
quite sufficient for explicable causal dependence.
That is not quite the same thing as causation; but
causation without causal dependence is scarce, and
if there is inexplicable causal dependence we are
(understandably! ) unaware of it. 11
Effects and Epiphenomena
I return now to the problems I raised against reg­
ularity analyses, hoping to show that my counter­
factual analysis can overcome them.
The problem oj ~fJats, as it confronts a counter­
factual analysis, is as follows. Suppose that c causes
a subsequent event e, and that e does not also cause
c. (I do not rule out closed causal loops a priori, but
this case is not to be one. ) Suppose further that,
given the laws and some of the actual circum­
stances, c could not have failed to cause e. It
seems to follow that if the effect e had not occurred,
then its cause c would not have occurred. We have a
spurious reverse causal dependence of con e, con­
tradicting our supposition that e did not cause c.
The problem oj epiphenomena, for a counterfac­
tual analysis, is similar. Suppose that e is an epi­
phenomenal effect of a genuine cause c of an effect! That is, c causes first e and then! , but e does not
cause! Suppose further that, given the laws and
some of the actual circumstances, c could not have
failed to cause e; and that, given the laws and others
of the circumstances, Jcould not have been caused
otherwise than by c. It seems to follow that if the
epiphenomenon e had not occurred, then its cause c
would not have occurred and the further effectJof
that same cause would not have occurred either.
We have a spurious causal dependence of Jon e,
contradicting our supposition that e did not cause!
One might be tempted to solve the problem of
effects by brute force: insert into the analysis a
stipulation that a cause must always precede its
effect (and perhaps a parallel stipulation for causal
dependence). I reject this solution. (1) It is worth-
Causation
less against the closely related problem of epiphe­
nomena, since the epiphenomenon e does precede
its spurious effect! (2) It rejects a priori certain
legitimate physical hypotheses that posit backward
or simultaneous causation. (3) It trivializes any
theory that seeks to define the forward direction
of time as the predominant direction of causation.
The proper solution to both problems, I think, is
flatly to deny the counterfactuals that cause the
trouble. If e had been absent, it is not that c
would have been absent (and with it! , in the second
case). Rather, c would have occurred just as it did
but would have failed to cause e. It is less of a
departure from actuality to get rid of e by holding
c fixed and giving up some or other of the laws and
circumstances in virtue of which c could not have
failed to cause e, rather than to hold those laws and
circumstances fixed and get rid of e by going back
and abolishing its cause c. (In the second case, it
would of course be pointless not to hold J fixed
along with c. ) The causal dependence of e on c
is the same sort of irreversible counterfactual
dependence that we have considered already.
To get rid of an actual event e with the least
overall departure from actuality, it will normally be
best not to diverge at all from the actual course of
events until just before the time of e. The longer we
wait, the more we prolong the spatiotemporal
region of perfect match between our actual world
and the selected alternative. Why diverge sooner
rather than later? Not to avoid violations oflaws of
nature. Under determinism any divergence, soon
or late, requires some violation of the actual laws. If
the laws were held sacred, there would be no way to
get rid of e without changing all of the past; and
nothing guarantees that the change could be kept
negligible except in the recent past. That would
mean that if the present were ever so slightly dif­
ferent, then all of the past would have been differ­
ent - which is absurd. So the laws are not sacred.
Violation oflaws is a matter of degree. Until we get
up to the time immediately before e is to occur,
there is no general reason why a later divergence to
avert e should need a more severe violation than an
earlier one. Perhaps there are special reasons III
special cases - but then these may be cases of
backward causal dependence.
Preemption
Suppose that C! occurs and causes e; and that C2 also
occurs and does not cause e, but would have caused \nDavid Lewis
e if CI had been absent. Thus C2 is a potential
alternate cause of e, but is preempted by the actual
cause CI. We may say that CI and C2 overdetermine
e, but they do so asymmetrically. lZ In virtue of
what difference does C] but not Cz cause e?
As far as causal dependence goes, there is no
difference: e depends neither on C] nor on C2. If
either one had not occurred, the other would have
sufficed to cause e. So the difference must be that,
thanks to CI there is no causal chain from C2 to e;
whereas there is a causal chain of two or more steps
from CI to e. Assume for simplicity that two steps
are enough. Then e depends causally on some
intermediate event d, and d in turn depends on CI.
Causal dependence is here intransitive: CI causes e
Notes
I thank the American Council of Learned Societies,
Princeton University, and the National Science Founda­
tion for research support.
David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning Human Under­
standing, sec. 7.
2 Not one that has been proposed by any actual author
in just this form, so far as I know.
3 I identify a proposition, as is becoming usual, with the
set of possible worlds where it is true. It is not a
linguistic entity. Truth-functional operations on pro­
positions are the appropriate Boolean operations on
sets of worlds; logical relations among propositions
are relations of inclusion, overlap, etc. among sets.
A sentence of a language expresses a proposition iff
the sentence and the proposition are true at exactly
the same worlds. No ordinary language will provide
sentences to express all propositions; there will not be
enough sentences to go around.
4 One exception: Ardon Lyon, "Causality, " British
Journal for the Philosophy oj Science, 18/1 (May
1967), pp. 1-20.
S See, for instance, Robert Stalnaker, "A theory of
conditionals, " in Nicholas Rescher (ed. ), Studies in
Logical Theory (Oxford: Blackwell, 1968); and my
Counter[actuals (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973).
6 Except that Morton G. White's discussion of causal
selection, in Foundations oJHistorical Knowledge (New
York: Harper & Row, 1965), pp. 105-81, would meet
my needs, despite the fact that it is based on a regu­
larity analysis.
7 That this ought to be allowed is argued in G. E. M.
Anscombe, Causality and Determination: An Inaugural
Lecture (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1971); and in Fred Dretske and Aaron Snyder, "Cau­
sal irregularity, " Philosophy oj Science, 39/1 (Mar.
1972), pp. 69-71.
via d even though e would still have occurred with­
out CI.
SO far, so good. It remains only to deal with the
objection that e does not depend causally on d,
because if d had been absent, then C] would have
been absent, and C2, no longer preempted, would
have caused e. We may reply by denying the
claim that if d had been absent, then CI would
have been absent. That is the very same sort of
spurious reverse dependence of cause on effect that
we have just rejected in simpler cases. I rather
claim that if d had been absent, C] would somehow
have failed to cause d. But CI would still have been
there to interfere with Cz so e would not have
occurred.
8 Analyses in terms of counterfactual dependence are
found in two papers of Alvin I. Goldman: "Toward a
theory of social power, " Philosophical Studies 23
(1972), pp. 221-68; and "Discrimination and percep­
tual knowledge, " presented at the 1972 Chapel Hill
Colloquium.
9 Beware: if we refer to a particular event e by means of
SOme description that e satisfies, then we must take
care not to confuse O(e), the proposition that e itself
occurs, with the different proposition that some event
or other occurs which satisfies the description. It is a
contingent matter, in general, what events satisfy
what descriptions. Let e be the death of Socrates -
the death he actually died, to be distinguished from all
the different deaths he might have died instead. Sup­
pose that Socrates had fled, only to be eaten by a lion.
Then e would not have occurred, and O(e) would
have been false; but a different event would have
satisfied the description "the death of Socrates" that
I used to refer to e. Or suppose that Socrates had lived
and died just as he actually did, and afterwards was
resurrected and killed again and resurrected again,
and finally became immortal. Then no event would
have satisfied the description. (Even if the temporary
deaths are real deaths, neither of the two can be the
death. ) But e would have occurred, and O(e) would
have been true. Call a description of an event e rigid iff
(I) nothing but e could possibly satisfy it, and (2) e
could not possibly occur without satisfying it. I have
claimed that even such commonplace descriptions as
"the death of Socrates" are nonrigid, and in fact I
think that rigid descriptions of events are hard to find.
That would be a problem for anyone who needed to
associate with every possible event e a sentence <I> ( e)
true at all and only those worlds where e occurs. But
we need no such sentences - only propositions, which
mayor may not have expressions in our language. \n10 Granted, there are contexts or changes of wording
that would incline us the other way. For some reason,
"If the reading had been higher, that would have been
because the pressure was higher" invites my assent
more than "If the reading had been higher, the pres­
sure would have been higher. " The counterfactuals
from readings to pressures are much less clear-cut
than those from pressures to readings. But it is
enough that some legitimate resolutions of vagueness
give an irreversible dependence of readings on pres­
sures. Those are the resolutions we want at present,
even if they are not favored in all contexts.
Causation
II I am not here proposing a repaired regularity analysis.
The repaired analysis would gratuitously rule out
inexplicable causal dependence, which seems bad.
Nor would it be squarely in the tradition of regularity
analyses any more. Too much else would have been
added.
12 I shall not discuss symmetrical cases of overdeter­
mination, in which two overdetermining factors
have equal claim to count as causes. For me these
are useless as test cases because I lack firm naive
opinions about them. \n35
Wesley C. Salmon
Basic Problellls
As a point of departure for the discussion of caus­
ality, it is appropriate for us to take a look at the
reasons that have led philosophers to develop the­
ories of explanation that do not require causal
components. To Aristotle and Laplace it must
have seemed evident that scientific explanations
are inevitably causal in character. Laplacian deter­
minism is causal determinism, and I know of no
reason to suppose that Laplace made any distinc­
tion between causal and noncausallaws.
It might be initially tempting to suppose that all
laws of nature are causal laws, and that explanation
in terms of laws is ipso facto causal explanation. It
is, however, quite easy to find law-statements that
do not express causal relations. Many regularities
in nature are not direct cause--effect relations.
Night follows day, and day follows night; never­
theless, day does not cause night, and night does
not cause day. Kepler's laws of planetary motion
describe the orbits of the planets, but they offer no
causal account of these motions. ! Similarly, the
ideal gas law
PV = nRT
relates pressure (P), volume (V), and temperature
(7) for a given sample of gas, and it tells how these
Originally published in Scientific Explanation and the
Causal Structure of the World (1984). Copyright \0 by
Princeton University Press. Reprinted by permission
of Princeton University Press.
quantities vary as functions of one another, but it
says nothing whatever about causal relations
among them. An increase in pressure might be
brought about by moving a piston so as to decrease
the volume, or it might be caused by an increase in
temperature. The law itself is entirely noncommit­
tal concerning such causal considerations. Each of
these regularities - the alternation of night with
day; the regular motions of the planets; and the
functional relationship among temperature, pres­
sure, and volume of an ideal gas - can be explained
causally, but they do not express causal relations.
Moreover, they do not afford causal explanations of
the events subsumed under them. For this reason,
it seems to me, their value in providing scientific
explanations of particular events is, at best,
severely limited. These are regularities that need
to be explained, but that do not, by themselves, do
much in the way of explaining other phenomena.
To untutored common sense, and to many
scientists uncorrupted by philosophical training,
it is evident that causality plays a central role in
scientific explanation. An appropriate answer to an
explanation-seeking why-question normally begins
with the word "because, " and the causal involve­
ments of the answer arc usually not hard to find. 2
The concept of causality has, however, been philo­
sophically suspect ever since David Humc's
devastating critique, first published in 1739 in his
Treatise of Human Nature. In the "Abstract" of that
work, Hume wrote:
Here is a billiard ball lying on the table, and
another ball moving toward it with rapidity. \nThey strike; the ball which was formerly at rest
now acquires a motion. This is as perfect an
instance of the relations of cause and effect as
any which we know either by sensation or
reflection. Let us therefore examine it. It is
evident that the two balls touched one another
before the motion was communicated, and that
there was no interval betwixt the shock and the
motion. ContiguiZy in time and place is therefore
a requisite circumstance to the operation of all
causes. It is evident, likewise, that the motion
which was the cause is prior to the motion
which was the effect. Priority in time is, there­
fore, another requisite circumstance in every
cause. But this is not all. Let us try any other
balls of the same kind in a like situation, and we
shall always find that the impulse of the one
produces motion in the other. Here, therefore,
is a third circumstance, viz. , that of constant
conjunction betwixt the cause and the effect.
Every object like the cause produces always
some object like the effect. Beyond these three
circumstances of contiguity, priority, and con­
stant conjunction I can discover nothing in this
3 cause.
This discussion is, of course, more notable for
factors Hume was unable to find than for those he
enumerated. In particular, he could not discover
any 'necessary connections' relating causes to
effects, or any 'hidden powers' by which the
cause 'brings about' the effect. This classic account
of causation is rightly regarded as a landmark in
philosophy.
In an oft-quoted remark that stands at the begin­
ning of a famous 1913 essay, Bertrand Russell
warns philosophers about the appeal to causality:
All philosophers, of every school, imagine that
causation is one of the fundamental axioms or
postulates of science, yet, oddly enough, in
advanced sciences such as gravitational astro­
nomy, the word "cause" never occurs. .. . To
me it seems that. .. the reason why physics has
ceased to look for causes is that, in fact, there
are no such things. The law of causality, I
believe, like much that passes muster among
philosophers, is a relic of a bygone age, surviv­
ing, like the monarchy, only because it is erron­
eously supposed to do no harm. 4
It is hardly surprising that, in the light of Hume's
critique and Russell's resounding condemnation,
Causal Connections
philosophers with an empiricist bent have been
rather wary of the use of causal concepts. By
1927, however, when he wrote The Analysis oj
Matter, 5 Russell recognized that causality plays a
fundamental role in physics; in Human Knowledge,
four of the five postulates he advanced as a basis for
all scientific knowledge make explicit reference to
causal relations. 6 It should be noted, however, that
the causal concepts he invokes are not the same as
the traditional philosophical ones he had rejected
earlier. 7 In contemporary physics, causality is a
pervasive ingredient. s
Two Basic Concepts
A standard picture of causality has been around at
least since the time of Hume. The general idea is
that we have two (or more) distinct events that bear
some sort of cause - effect relations to one another.
There has, of course, been considerable contro­
versy regarding the nature of both the relation
and the relata. It has sometimes been maintained,
for instance, that facts or propositions (rather than
events) are the sorts of entities that can constitute
relata. It has long been disputed whether causal
relations can be said to obtain among individual
events, or whether statements about cause--effect
relations implicitly involve assertions about classes
of events. The relation itself has sometimes been
taken to be that of sufficient condition, sometimes
necessary condition, or perhaps a combination of
the two. 9 Some authors have even proposed that
certain sorts of statistical relations constitute causal
relations.
The foregoing characterization obviously fits
J. L. Mackie's sophisticated account in terms of
IN U s conditions - that is, insufficient but nonredun­
dant parts of unnecessa~y but sufficient conditions. 10
The idea is this. There are several different causes
that might account for the burning down of a
house: careless smoking in bed, an electrical short
circuit, arson, being struck by lightning. With cer­
tain obvious qualifications, each of these may be
taken as a sufficient condition for the fire, but none
of them can be considered necessary. Moreover,
each of the sufficient conditions cited involves a
fairly complex combination of conditions, each of
which constitutes a nonredundant part of the par­
ticular sufficient condition under consideration.
The careless smoker, for example, must fall asleep
with his cigarette, and it must fall upon something
flammable. It must not awaken the smoker by \nWesley C. Salmon
burning him before it falls from his hand. When
the smoker does become aware of the fire, it must
have progressed beyond the stage at which he can
extinguish it. Anyone of these necessary compon­
ents of some complex sufficient condition can,
under certain circumstances, qualify as a cause.
According to this standard approach, events enjoy
the status of fundamental entities, and these entit­
ies are 'connected' to one another by cause-effect
relations.
It is my conviction that this standard view, in all
of its well-known variations, is profoundly mista­
ken, and that a radically different notion should be
developed. I shall not, at this juncture, attempt to
mount arguments against the standard conception.
Instead, I shall present a rather different approach
for purposes of comparison. I hope that the altern­
ative will stand on its own merits.
There are, I believe, two fundamental causal
concepts that need to be explicated, and if that
can be achieved, we will be in a position to deal
with the problems of causality in general. The two
basic concepts are propagation and production, and
both are familiar to common sense. When we say
that the blow of a hammer drives a nail, we
mean that the impact produces penetration of the
nail into the wood. When we say that a horse pulls a
cart, we mean that the force exerted by the horse
produces the motion of the cart. When we say that
lightning ignites a forest, we mean that the elec­
trical discharge produces a fire. When we say that a
person's embarrassment was due to a thoughtless
remark, we mean that an inappropriate comment
produced psychological discomfort. Such ex­
amples of causal production occur frequently in
everyday contexts.
Causal propagation (or transmission) is equally
familiar. Experiences that we had earlier in our
lives affect our current behavior. By means of
memory, the influence of these past events is trans­
mitted to the present. I I A sonic boom makes us
aware of the passage of a jet airplane overhead; a
disturbance in the air is propagated from the upper
atmosphere to our location on the ground. Signals
transmitted from a broadcasting station are
received by the radio in our home. News or music
reaches us because electromagnetic waves are pro­
pagated from the transmitter to the receiver. In
177 5, some Massachusetts farmers - in initiating
the American Revolutionary War - "fired the shot
heard 'round the world. ,, 12 As all of these examples
show, what happens at one place and time can have
significant influence upon what happens at other
places and times. This is possible because causal
influence can be propagated through time and
space. Although causal production and causal pro­
pagation are intimately related to one another, we
should, I believe, resist any temptation to try to
reduce one to the other.
Processes
One of the fundamental changes that I propose in
approaching causality is to take processes rather
than events as basic entities. I shall not attempt
any rigorous definition of processes; rather, I shall
cite examples and make some very informal
remarks. The main difference between events and
processes is that events are relatively localized in
space and time, while processes have much greater
temporal duration, and in many cases, much
greater spatial extent. In space-time diagrams,
events are represented by points, while processes
are represented by lines. A baseball colliding with a
window would count as an event; the baseball,
traveling from the bat to the window, would con­
stitute a process. The activation of a photocell by a
pulse of light would be an event; the pulse of light,
traveling, perhaps from a distant star, would be a
process. A sneeze is an event. The shadow of a
cloud moving across the landscape is a process.
Although I shall deny that all processes qualify as
causal processes, what I mean by a process is sim­
ilar to what Russell characterized as a causal line:
A causal line may always be regarded as the
persistence of something - a person, a table, a
photon, or what not. Throughout a given causal
line, there may be constancy of quality, con­
stancy of structure, or a gradual change of
either, but not sudden changes of any consider­
able magnitudeY
Among the physically important processes are
waves and material objects that persist through
time. As I shall use these terms, even a material
object at rest will qualify as a process.
Before attempting to develop a theory of caus­
ality in which processes, rather than events, are
taken as fundamental, I should consider briefly
the scientific legitimacy of this approach. In New­
tonian mechanics, both spatial extent and temporal
duration were absolute quantities. The length of a
rigid rod did not depend upon a choice of frame of
reference, nor did the duration of a process (such as \nthe length of time between the creation and
destruction of a material object). Given two events,
in Newtonian mechanics, both the spatial distance
and the temporal separation between them were
absolute magnitudes. A 'physical thing ontology'
was thus appropriate to classical physics. As every­
one knows, Einstein's special theory of relativity
changed all that. Both the spatial distance and the
temporal separation were relativized to frames of
reference. The length of a rigid rod and the dura­
tion of a temporal process varied from one frame of
reference to another. However, as Minkowski
showed, there is an invariant quantity - the
space-time interval between two events. This
quantity is independent of the frame of reference;
for any two events, it has the same value in each and
every inertial frame of reference. Since there are
good reasons for according a fundamental physical
status to invariants, it was a natural consequence of
the special theory of relativity to regard the world
as a collection of events that bear space-time rela­
tions to one another. These considerations offer
support for what is sometimes called an 'event
ontology'.
There is, however, another way (originally
developed by A. A. Robb) of approaching the spe­
cial theory of relativity; it is done entirely with
paths of light pulses. At any point in space-time,
we can construct the Minkowski light cone - a two­
sheeted cone whose surface is generated by the
paths of all possible light pulses that converge
upon the point (past light cone) and the paths of
all possible light pulses that could be emitted from
the point (future light cone). When all of the light
cones are given, the entire space-time structure of
the world is determined. 14 But light pulses, travel­
ing through space and time, are processes. We can,
therefore, base special relativity upon a 'process
ontology'. Moreover, this approach can be
extended in a natural way to general relativity by
taking into account the paths of freely falling
material particles; these moving gravitational test
particles are also processes. IS It is, consequently,
entirely legitimate to approach the space-time
structure of the physical world by regarding
physical processes as the basic types of physical
entities. The theory of relativity does not mandate
an 'event ontology'.
Whether one adopts the event-based approach
or the process-based approach, causal relations
must be accorded a fundamental place in the spe­
cial theory of relativity. As we have seen, any given
event Eo occurring at a particular space-time point
Causal Connections
Po, has an associated double-sheeted light cone. All
events that could have a causal influence upon Eo
are located in the interior or on the surface of the
past light cone, and all events upon which Eo could
have any causal influence are located in the interior
or on the surface of the future light cone. All such
events are causally connectable with Eo. Those
events that lie on the surface of either sheet of the
light cone are said to have a lightlike separation from
Eo those that lie within either part of the cone are
said to have a time/ike separation from Eo, and those
that are outside of the cone are said to have a
space/ike separation from Eo. The Minkowski light
cone can, with complete propriety, be called "the
cone of causal relevance, " and the entire space­
time structure of special relativity can be developed
on the basis of causal concepts. 16
Special relativity demands that we make a dis­
tinction between causal processes and pseudo-pro­
cesses. It is a fundamental principle of that theory
that light is a first signal - that is, no signal can be
transmitted at a velocity greater than the velocity of
light in a vacuum. There are, however, certain
processes that can transpire at arbitrarily high velo­
cities - at velocities vastly exceeding that of light.
This fact does not violate the basic relativistic
principle, however, for these 'processes' are incap­
able of serving as signals or of transmitting infor­
mation. Causal processes are those that are capable
of transmitting signals; pseudo-processes are
incapable of doing so.
Consider a simple example. Suppose that we
have a very large circular building - a sort of
super-Astrodome, if you will - with a spotlight
mounted at its center. When the light is turned
on in the otherwise darkened building, it casts a
spot of light upon the wall. If we turn the light on
for a brief moment, and then off again, a light pulse
travels from the light to the wall. This pulse of
light, traveling from the spotlight to the wall, is a
paradigm of what we mean by a causal process.
Suppose, further, that the spotlight is mounted
on a mechanism that makes it rotate. If the light
is turned on and set into rotation, the spot of light
that it casts upon the wall will move around the
outer wall in a highly regular fashion. This 'pro­
cess' - the moving spot oflight - seems to fulfill the
conditions Russell used to characterize causal lines,
but it is not a causal process. It is a paradigm of
what we mean by a pseudo-process.
The basic method for distinguishing causal pro­
cesses from pseudo-processes is the criterion of
mark transmission. A causal process is capable of \nWesley C. Salmon
transmitting a mark; a pseudo-process is not. Con­
sider, first, a pulse of light that travels from the
spotlight to the wall. If we place a piece of red glass
in its path at any point between the spotlight and
the wall, the light pulse, which was white, becomes
and remains red until it reaches the wall. A single
intervention at one point in the process transforms
it in a way that persists from that point on. If we
had not intervened, the light pulse would have
remained white during its entire journey from the
spotlight to the wall. If we do intervene locally at a
single place, we can produce a change that is trans­
mitted from the point of intervention onward. We
shall say, therefore, that the light pulse constitutes
a causal process whether it is modified or not, since
in either case it is capable of transmitting a mark.
Clearly, light pulses can serve as signals and can
transmit messages; remember Paul Revere, "One if
by land and two if by sea. "
Now, let us consider the spot oflight that moves
around the wall as the spotlight rotates. There are a
number of ways in which we can intervene to
change the spot at some point; for example, we
can place a red filter at the wall with the result
that the spot oflight becomes red at that point. But
if we make such a modification in the traveling
spot, it will not be transmitted beyond the point
of interaction. As soon as the light spot moves
beyond the point at which the red filter was placed,
it will become white again. The mark can be made,
but it will not be transmitted. We have a 'process',
which, in the absence of any intervention, consists
of a white spot moving regularly along the wall of
the building. If we intervene at some point, the
'process' will be modified at that point, but it will
continue on beyond that point just as if no inter­
vention had occurred. We can, of course, make the
spot red at other places if we wish. We can install a
red lens in the spotlight, but that does not consti­
tute a local intervention at an isolated point in the
process itself. We can put red filters at many places
along the wall, but that would involve many inter­
ventions rather than a single one. We could get
someone to run around the wall holding a red filter
in front of the spot continuously, but that would
not constitute an intervention at a single point in the
'process'.
This last suggestion brings us back to the subject
of velocity. If the spot oflight is moving rapidly, no
runner could keep up with it, but perhaps a
mechanical device could be set up. If, however,
the spot moves too rapidly, it would be physically
impossible to make the filter travel fast enough to
keep pace. No material object, such as the filter,
can travel at a velocity greater than that oflight, but
no such limitation is placed upon the spot on the
wall. This can easily be seen as follows. If
the spotlight rotates at a fixed rate, then it takes
the spot oflight a fixed amount of time to make one
entire circuit around the wall. If the spotlight
rotates once per second, the spot oflight will travel
around the wall in one second. This fact is indep­
endent of the size of the building. We can imagine
that without making any change in the spotlight or
its rate of rotation, the outer walls are expanded
indefinitely. At a certain point, when the radius of
the building is a little less than 50, 000 kilometers,
the spot will be traveling at the speed of light
(300, 000 km/sec). As the walls are moved still
farther out, the velocity of the spot exceeds the
speed of light.
To make this point more vivid, consider an
actual example that is quite analogous to the rotat­
ing spotlight. There is a pulsar in the Crab nebula
that is about 6, 500 light-years away. This pulsar is
thought to be a rapidly rotating neutron star that
sends out a beam of radiation. When the beam is
directed toward us, it sends out radiation that we
detect later as a pulse. The pulses arrive at the rate
of 30 per second; that is the rate at which the
neutron star rotates. Now, imagine a circle drawn
with the pulsar at its center, and with a radius equal
to the distance from the pulsar to the earth. The
electromagnetic radiation from the pulsar (which
travels at the speed of light) takes 6, 500 years to
traverse the radius of this circle, but the 'spot'
of radiation sweeps around the circumference of
this circle in 1/30th of a second; at that rate, it is
traveling at about 4 x 1013 times the speed oflight.
There is no upper limit on the speed of pseudo­
processes. 17
Another example may help to clarify this distinc­
tion. Consider a car traveling along a road on a
sunny day. As the car moves at 100 km/hr, its
shadow moves along the shoulder at the same
speed. The moving car, like any material object,
constitutes a causal process; the shadow is a
pseudo-process. If the car collides with a stone
wall, it will carry the marks of that collision --the
dents and scratches - along with it long after
the collision has taken place. If, however, only the
shadow of the car collides with the stone wall, it will
be deformed momentarily, but it will resume its
normal shape just as soon as it has passed beyond
the wall. Indeed, if the car passes a tall building that
cuts it off from the sunlight, the shadow will be \nobliterated, but it will pop right back into existence
as soon as the car has returned to the direct sun­
light. If, however, the car is totally obliterated -
say, by an atomic bomb blast - it will not pop back
into existence as soon as the blast has subsided.
A given process, whether it be causal or pseudo,
has a certain degree of uniformity - we may say,
somewhat loosely, that it exhibits a certain struc­
ture. The difference between a causal process and a
pseudo-process, I am suggesting, is that the causal
process transmits its own structure, while the
pseudo-process does not. The distinction between
processes that do and those that do not transmit
their own structures is revealed by the mark criter­
ion. If a process - a causal process - is transmitting
its own structure, then it will be capable of trans­
mitting certain modifications in that structure.
In Human Knowledge, Russell placed great
emphasis upon what he called "causal lines, "
which he characterized in the following terms:
A "causal line, " as I wish to define the term, is a
temporal series of events so related that, given
some of them, something can be inferred about
the others whatever may be happening else­
where. A causal line may always be regarded
as the persistence of something - a person,
table, a photon, or what not. Throughout a
given causal line, there may be constancy of
quality, constancy of structure, or gradual
change in either, but not sudden change of
any considerable magnitude. IS
He then goes on to comment upon the significance
of causal lines:
That there are such more or less self-deter­
mined causal processes is in no degree logically
necessary, but is, I think, one of the fundamen­
tal postulates of science. It is in virtue of the
truth of this postulate - if it is true - that we are
able to acquire partial knowledge in spite of our. 19 enormous Ignorance.
Although Russell seems clearly to intend his
causal lines to be what we have called causal pro­
cesses, his characterization may appear to allow
pseudo-processes to qualify as well. Pseudo-pro­
cesses, such as the spot oflight traveling around the
wall of our Astrodome, sometimes exhibit great
uniformity, and their regular behavior can serve
as a basis for inferring the nature of certain parts
of the pseudo-process on the basis of observation of
Causal Connections
other parts. But pseudo-processes are not self­
determined; the spot of light is determined by the
behavior of the beacon and the beam it sends out.
Moreover, the inference from one part of the
pseudo-process to another is not reliable regardless
of what may be happening elsewhere, for if the spot­
light is switched off or covered with an opaque
hood, the inference will go wrong. We may say,
therefore, that our observations of the various phe­
nomena going on in the world around us reveal
processes that exhibit considerable regularity, but
some of these are genuine causal processes and
others are pseudo-processes. The causal processes
are, as Russell says, self-determined; they transmit
their own uniformities of qualitative and structural
features. The regularities exhibited by the pseudo­
processes, in contrast, are parasitic upon causal
regularities exterior to the 'process' itself - in the
case of the Astrodome, the behavior of the beacon;
in the case of the shadow traveling along the road­
side, the behavior of the car and the sun. The
ability to transmit a mark is the criterion that
distinguishes causal processes from pseudo-pro­
cesses, for if the modification represented by the
mark is propagated, the process is transmitting its
own characteristics. Otherwise, the 'process' is not
self-determined, and is not independent of what
goes on elsewhere.
Although Russell's characterization of causal
lines is heuristically useful, it cannot serve as a
fundamental criterion for their identification for
two reasons. First, it is formulated in terms of our
ability to infer the nature of some portions from a
knowledge of other portions. We need a criterion
that does not rest upon such epistemic notions as
knowledge and inference, for the existence of the
vast majority of causal processes in the history of
the universe is quite independent of human
knowers. This aspect of the characterization
could, perhaps, be restated nonanthropocentrically
in terms of the persistence of objective regularities
in the process. The second reason is more serious.
To suggest that processes have regularities that
persist "whatever may be happening elsewhere"
is surely an overstatement. If an extremely massive
object should happen to be located in the neighbor­
hood of a light pulse, its path will be significantly
altered. If a nuclear blast should occur in the vicin­
ity of a mail truck, the letters that it carries will be
totally destroyed. If sunspot activity reaches a high
level, radio communication is affected. Notice that,
in each of these cases, the factor cited does not
occur or exist on the world line of the process in \nWesley C. Salmon
question. In each instance, of course, the disrupt­
ing factor initiates processes that intersect with the
process in question, but that does not undermine
the objection to the claim that causal processes
transpire in their self-determined fashion regard­
less of what is happening elsewhere. A more
acceptable statement might be that a causal process
would persist even if it were isolated from external
causal influences. This formulation, unfortunately,
seems at the very least to flirt with circularity, for
external causal influences must be transmitted to
the locus of the process in question by means of
other processes. We shall certainly want to keep
clearly in mind the notion that causal processes are
not parasitic upon other processes, but it does not
seem likely that this rough idea could be trans­
formed into a useful basic criterion.
It has often been suggested that the principal
characteristic of causal processes is that they trans­
mit energy. While I believe it is true that all and
only causal processes transmit energy, there is, I
think, a fundamental problem involved in employ­
ing this fact as a basic criterion - namely, we must
have some basis for distinguishing situations in
which energy is transmitted from those in which
it merely appears in some regular fashion. The
difficulty is easily seen in the' Astrodome' example.
As a light pulse travels from the central spotlight to
the wall, it carries radiant energy; this energy is
present in the various stages of the process as the
pulse travels from the lamp to the wall. As the spot
of light travels around the wall, energy appears at
the places occupied by the spot, but we do not want
to say that this energy is transmitted. The problem
is to distinguish the cases in which a given bundle
of energy is transmitted through a process from
those in which different bundles of energy are
appearing in some regular fashion. The key to
this distinction is, I believe, the mark method.
Just as the detective makes his mark on the murder
weapon for purposes of later identification, so also
do we make marks in processes so that the energy
present at one space-time locale can be identified
when it appears at other times and places.
A causal process is one that is self-determined
and not parasitic upon other causal influences. A
causal process is one that transmits energy, as well
as information and causal influence. The funda­
mental criterion for distinguishing self-determined
energy-transmitting processes from pseudo-pro­
cesses is the capability of such processes of trans­
mitting marks. In the next section, we shall deal
with the concept of transmission in greater detail.
Our main concern with causal processes is their
role in the propagation of causal influences; radio
broadcasting presents a clear example. The trans­
mitting station sends a carrier wave that has a
certain structure - characterized by amplitude
and frequency, among other things - and modifi­
cations of this wave, in the form of modulations of
amplitude (AM) or frequency (FM), are imposed
for the purpose of broadcasting. Processes that
transmit their own structures are capable of trans­
mitting marks, signals, information, energy, and
causal influence. Such processes are the means by
which causal influence is propagated in our world.
Causal influences, transmitted by radio, may set
your foot to tapping, or induce someone to pur­
chase a different brand of soap, or point a television
camera aboard a spacecraft toward the rings of
Saturn. A causal influence transmitted by a flying
arrow can pierce an apple on the head of William
Tell's son. A causal influence transmitted by sound
waves can make your dog come running. A causal
influence transmitted by ink marks on a piece of
paper can gladden one's day or break someone's
heart.
It is evident, I think, that the propagation or
transmission of causal influence from one place
and time to another must playa fundamental role
in the causal structure of the world. As I shall argue
next, causal processes constitute precisely the cau­
sal connections that Hume sought, but was unable
to find.
The 'At-At' Theory of Causal
Propagation
In the preceding section, I invoked Reichenbach's
mark criterion to make the crucial distinction
between causal processes and pseudo-processes.
Causal processes are distinguished from pseudo­
processes in terms of their ability to transmit
marks. In order to qualify as causal, a process
need not actually be transmitting a mark; the
requirement is that it be capable of doing so.
When we characterize causal processes partly in
terms of their ability to transmit marks, we must
deal explicitly with the question of whether we
have violated the kinds of strictures Hume so
emphatically expounded. He warned against the
uncritical use of such concepts as 'power' and
'necessary connection'. Is not the abili~y to transmit
a mark an example of just such a mysterious power?
Kenneth Sayre expressed his misgivings on this \nscore when, after acknowledging the distinction
between causal interactions and causal processes,
he wrote:
The causal process, continuous though it may
be, is made up of individual events related to
others in a causal nexus. .. . it is by virtue of the
relations among the members of causal series
that we are enabled to make the inferences by
which causal processes are characterized. .. . if
we do not have an adequate conception of the
relatedness between individual members in a
causal series, there is a sense in which our
conception of the causal process itself remains
deficient. 20
The 'at-at' theory of causal transmission IS an
attempt to remedy this deficiency.
Does this remedy illicitly invoke the sort of
concept Hume proscribed? I think not. Ability to
transmit a mark can be viewed as a particularly
important species of constant conjunction - the
sort of thing Hume recognized as observable and
admissible. It is a matter of performing certain
kinds of experiments. If we place a red filter in a
light beam near its source, we can observe that the
mark - redness - appears at all places to which the
beam is subsequently propagated. This fact can be
verified by experiments as often as we wish to per­
form them. If, contrariwise (returning to our
Astrodome example of the preceding section), we
make the spot on the wall red by placing a filter in
the beam at one point just before the light strikes
the wall (or by any other means we may devise), we
will see that the mark - redness - is not present at
all other places in which the moving spot sub­
sequently appears on the wall. This, too, can be
verified by repeated experimentation. Such facts
are straightforwardly observable.
The question can still be reformulated. What do
we mean when we speak of transmission? How does
the process make the mark appear elsewhere within
it? There is, I believe, an astonishingly simple
answer. The transmission of a mark from point A
in a causal process to point B in the same process is
the fact that it appears at each point between A and
B without further interactions. If A is the point at
which the red filter is inserted into the beam going
from the spotlight to the wall, and B is the point at
which the beam strikes the wall, then only the
interaction at A is required. If we place a white
card in the beam at any point between A and B, we
will find the beam red at that point.
Causal Connections
The basic thesis about mark transmission can
now be stated (in a principle I shall designate MT
for "mark transmission") as follows:
MT: Let P be a process that, in the absence of
interactions with other processes, would remain
uniform with respect to a characteristic Q
which it would manifest consistently over an
interval that includes both of the space-time
points A and B (A i= B). Then, a mark (con­
sisting of a modification of Q into Q'), which
has been introduced into process P by means of
a single local interaction at point A, is trans­
mitted to point B if P manifests the modifica­
tion Q' at B and at all stages of the process
between A and B without additional interven­
tions.
This principle is clearly counterfactual, for it states
explicitly that the process P would have continued
to manifest the characteristic Q if the specific
marking interaction had not occurred. This sub­
junctive formulation is required, I believe, to over­
come an objection posed by Nancy Cartwright (in
conversation) to previous formulations. The prob­
lem is this. Suppose our rotating beacon is casting a
white spot that moves around the wall, and that we
mark the spot by interposing a red filter at the wall.
Suppose further, however, that a red lens has been
installed in the beacon just a tiny fraction of a
second earlier, so that the spot on the wall becomes
red at the moment we mark it with our red filter,
but it remains red from that point on because of the
red lens. Under these circumstances, were it not for
the counterfactual condition, it would appear that
we had satisfied the requirement formulated in
MT, for we have marked the spot by a single
interaction at point A, and the spot remains red
from that point on to any other point B we care to
designate, without any additional interactions. As
we have just mentioned, the installation of the red
lens on the spotlight does not constitute a marking
of the spot on the wall. The counterfactual stipula­
tion given in the first sentence of MT blocks situ­
ations, of the sort mentioned by Cartwright, in
which we would most certainly want to deny that
any mark transmission occurred via the spot mov­
ing around the wall. In this case, the moving spot
would have turned red because of the lens even
if no marking interaction had occurred locally at
the wall.
A serious misgiving arises from the use of
counterfactual formulations to characterize the \nWesley C. Salmon
distinction between causal processes and pseudo­
processes; it concerns the question of objectivity.
The distinction is fully objective. It is a matter of
fact that a light pulse constitutes a causal process,
while a shadow is a pseudo-process. Philosophers
have often maintained, however, that counterfac­
tual conditionals involve unavoidably pragmatic
aspects. Consider the famous example about
Verdi and Bizet. One person might say, "If Verdi
had been a compatriot of Bizet, then Verdi would
have been French, " whereas another might main­
tain, "If Bizet had been a compatriot of Verdi, then
Bizet would have been Italian. " These two state­
ments seem incompatible with one another. Their
antecedents are logically equivalent; if, however,
we accept both conditionals, we wind up with the
conclusion that Verdi would be French, that Bizet
would be Italian, and they would still not be com­
patriots. Yet both statements can be true. The first
person could be making an unstated presupposition
that the nationality of Bizet is fixed in this context,
while the second presupposes that the nationality
of Verdi is fixed. What remains fixed and what is
subject to change - which are established by
pragmatic features of the context in which the
counterfactual is uttered - determine whether
a counterfactual is true or false. It is concluded
that counterfactual conditional statements do not
express objective facts of nature; indeed, van Fraas­
sen21 goes so far as to assert that science contains no
counterfactuals. If that sweeping claim were true
(which I seriously doubt), 22 the foregoing criterion
MT would be in serious trouble.
Although MT involves an explicit counterfac­
tual, I do not believe that the foregoing difficulty is
insurmountable. Science has a direct way of deal­
ing with the kinds of counterfactual assertions we
require: namely, the experimental approach. In a
well-designed controlled experiment, the experi­
menter determines which conditions are to be
fixed for purposes of the experiment and which
allowed to vary. The result of the experiment
establishes some counterfactual statements as true
and others as false under well-specified conditions.
Consider the kinds of cases that concern us; such
counterfactuals can readily be tested experiment­
ally. Suppose we want to see whether the beam
traveling from the spotlight to the wall is capable
of transmitting the red mark. We set up the follow­
ing experiment. The light will be turned on and off
one hundred times. At a point midway between the
spotlight and the wall, we station an experimenter
with a random number generator. Without com-
municating with the experimenter who turns the
light on and off, this second experimenter uses his
device to make a random selection of fifty trials in
which he will make a mark and fifty in which he will
not. If all and only the fifty instances in which the
marking interaction occurs are those in which
the spot on the wall is red, as well as all the inter­
vening stages in the process, then we may conclude
with reasonable certainty that the fifty cases in
which the beam was red subsequent to the marking
interaction are cases in which the beam would not
have been red if the marking interaction had not
occurred. On any satisfactory analysis of counter­
factuals, it seems to me, we would be justified in
drawing such a conclusion. It should be carefully
noted that I am not offering the foregoing experi­
mental procedure as an analysis of counterfactuals;
it is, indeed, a result that we should expect any
analysis to yield.
A similar experimental approach could
obviously be taken with respect to the spot traver­
sing the wall. We design an experiment in which
the beacon will rotate one hundred times, and each
traversal will be taken as a separate process. We
station an experimenter with a random number
generator at the wall. Without communicating
with the experimenter operating the beacon, the
one at the wall makes a random selection of fifty
trials in which to make the mark and fifty in which
to refrain. If it turns out that some or all of the trials
in which no interaction occurs are, nevertheless,
cases in which the spot on the wall turns red as it
passes the second experimenter, then we know that
we are not dealing with cases in which the process
will not turn from white to red if no interaction
occurs. Hence, if in some cases the spot turns red
and remains red after the mark is imposed, we
know we are not entitled to conclude that the
mark has actually been transmitted.
The account of mark transmission embodied in
principle MT - which is the proposed foundation
for the concept of propagation of causal influence -
may seem too trivial to be taken seriously. I believe
such a judgment would be mistaken. My reason lies
in the close parallel that can be drawn between the
foregoing solution to the problem of mark trans­
mission and the solution of an ancient philosoph­
ical puzzle.
About 2, 500 years ago, Zeno of Elea enunciated
some famous paradoxes of motion, including the
well-known paradox of the flying arrow. This para­
dox was not adequately resolved until the early part
of the twentieth century. To establish an intimate \nconnection between this problem and our problem
of causal transmission, two observations are in
order. First, a physical object (such as the arrow)
moving from one place to another constitutes a
causal process, as can be demonstrated easily by
application of the mark method - for example,
initials carved on the shaft of the arrow before it
is shot are present on the shaft after it hits its target.
And there can be no doubt that the arrow prop­
agates causal influence. The hunter kills his prey by
releasing the appropriately aimed arrow; the flying
arrow constitutes the causal connection between
the cause (release of the arrow from the bow
under tension) and the effect (death of a deer).
Second, Zeno's paradoxes were designed to prove
the absurdity not only of motion, but also of every
kind of process or change. Henri Bergson
expressed this point eloquently in his discussion
of what he called "the cinematographic view of
becoming. " He invites us to consider any process,
such as the motion of a regiment of soldiers passing
in review. We can take many snapshots - static
views - of different stages of the process, but, he
argues, we cannot really capture the movement in
this way, for,
every attempt to reconstitute change out of
states implies the absurd proposition, that
movement is made out of immobilities.
Philosophy perceived this as soon as it
opened its eyes. The arguments of Zeno of
Elea, although formulated with a very different
intention, have no other meaning.
Take the flying arrow. 2. 1
Let us have a look at this paradox. At any given
instant, Zeno seems to have argued, the arrow is
where it is, occupying a portion of space equal to
itself. During the instant it cannot move, for that
would require the instant to have parts, and an
instant is kv definition a minimal and indivisible
element of time. If the arrow did move during the
instant, it would have to be in one place at one part
of the instant and in a different place at another
part of the instant. Moreover, for the arrow to
move during the instant would require that during
that instant it must occupy a space larger than
itself, for otherwise it has no room to move. As
Russell said:
It is never moving, but in some miraculous way
the change of position has to occur between the
instants, that is to say, not at any time whatever.
Causal Connections
This is what M. Bergson calls the cinemato­
graphic representation of reality. The more the
difficulty is meditated, the more real it
becomes. 24
There is a strong temptation to respond to this
paradox by pointing out that the differential calcu­
lus provides us with a perfectly meaningful defini­
tion of instantaneous velocity, and that this
quantity can assume values other than zero. Velo­
city is change of position with respect to time, and
the derivative dxl dt furnishes an expression that
can be evaluated for particular values of t. Thus
an arrow can be at rest at a given moment - that is,
dxl dt may equal 0 for that particular value of t. Or it
can be in motion at a given moment - that is, dxl dt
might be 100 km/hr for another particular value
of t. Once we recognize this elementary result of
the infinitesimal calculus, it is often suggested, the
paradox of the flying arrow vanishes.
This appealing attempt to resolve the paradox is,
however, unsatisfactory, as Russell clearly realized.
The problem lies in the definition of the derivative;
dxl dt is defined as the limit as Llt approaches 0 of
Llx/ Llt, where Llt represents a nonzero interval of
time and Llx may be a nonzero spatial distance. In
other words, instantaneous velocity is defined as
the limit, as we take decreasing time intervals, of the
noninstantaneous average velocity with which the
object traverses what is - in the case of nonzero
values - a nonzero stretch of space. Thus in the
definition of instantaneous velocity, we employ the
concept of noninstantaneous velocity, which is pre­
cisely the problematic concept from which the
paradox arises. To put the same point in a different
way, the concept of instantaneous velocity does not
genuinely characterize the motion of an object at an
isolated instant all by itself, for the very definition
of instantaneous velocity makes reference to neigh­
boring instants of time and neighboring points of
space. To find an adequate resolution of the flying
arrow paradox, we must go deeper.
To describe the motion of a body, we express the
relation between its position and the moments of
time with which we are concerned by means of a
mathematical function; for example, the equation
of motion of a freely falling particle near the surface
of the earth is
(1) x = f(t) = 1/2gt2
where g = 9. 8m/ sec2. We can therefore say that
this equation furnishes a function f(t) that relates \nWesley C. Salmon
the position x to the time t. But what is a mathe­
matical function? It is a set of pairs of numbers; for
each admissible value of t, there is an associated
value of x. To say that an object moves in accord­
ance with equation (I) is simply to say that at any
given moment t it is at point x, where the corres­
pondence between the values of t and of x is given
by the set of pairs of numbers that constitute the
function represented by equation (I). To move
from point A to point B is simply to be at
the appropriate point of space at the appropriate
moment of time - no more, no less. The resulting
theory is therefore known as "the 'at-at' theory of
motion. " To the best of my knowledge, it was first
clearly formulated and applied to the arrow para­
dox by Russell.
According to the 'at-at' theory, to move from A
to B is simply to occupy the intervening points at
the intervening instants. It consists in being at
particular points of space at corresponding
moments. There is no additional question as to
how the arrow gets from point A to point B; the
answer has already been given - by being at the
intervening points at the intervening moments.
The answer is emphatically not that it gets from A
to B by zipping through the intermediate points at
high speed. Moreover, there is no additional ques­
tion about how the arrow gets from one intervening
point to another - the answer is the same, namely,
by being at the points between them at the corres­
ponding moments. And clearly, there can be no
question about how the arrow gets from one point
to the next, for in a continuum there is no next
point. I am convinced that Zeno's arrow paradox is
a profound problem concerning the nature of
change and motion, and that its resolution by Rus­
sell in terms of the 'at-at' theory of motion repres­
ents a distinctly nontrivial achievement. 25 The fact
that this solution can - if I am right - be extended
in a direct fashion to provide a resolution of the
problem of mark transmission is an additional
laurel.
The 'at-at' theory of mark transmission pro­
vides, I believe, an acceptable basis for the mark
method, which can in turn serve as the means to
distinguish causal processes from pseudo-pro­
cesses. The world contains a great many types of
causal processes - transmission of light waves,
motion of material objects, transmissions of sound
waves, persistence of crystalline structure, and so
forth. Processes of any of these types may occur
without having any mark imposed. In such
instances, the processes still qualify as causal. Abil-
ity to transmit a mark is the criterion of causal
processes; processes that are actual~y unmarked
may be causal. Unmarked processes exhibit some
sort of persistent structure, as Russell pointed out
in his characterization of causal lines; in such cases,
we say that the structure is transmitted within the
causal process. Pseudo-processes may also exhibit
persistent structure; in these cases, we maintain
that the structure is not transmitted by means of
the 'process' itself, but by some other external
agency.
The basis for saying that the regularity in the
causal process is transmitted via the process itself
lies in the ability of the causal process to transmit a
modification in its structure - a mark - resulting
from an interaction. Consider a brief pulse of white
light; it consists of a collection of photons of var­
ious frequencies, and if it is not polarized, the
waves will have various spatial orientations. If we
place a red filter in the path of this pulse, it will
absorb all photons with frequencies falling outside
of the red range, allowing only those within that
range to pass. The resulting pulse has its structure
modified in a rather precisely specifiable way, and
the fact that this modification persists is precisely
what we mean by claiming that the mark is trans­
mitted. The counterfactual clause in our principle
MT is designed to rule out structural changes
brought about by anything other than the marking
interaction. The light pulse could, alternatively,
have been passed through a polarizer. The result­
ing pulse would consist of photons having a speci­
fied spatial orientation instead of the miscellaneous
assortment of orientations it contained before
encountering the polarizer. The principle of struc­
ture transmission (ST) may be formulated as fol­
lows:
ST: If a process is capable o. ftransmitting changes in
structure due to marking interactions, then that
process can be said to transmit its own structure.
The fact that a process does not transmit a
particular type of mark, however, does not mean
that it is not a causal process. A ball of putty
constitutes a causal process, and one kind of mark
it will transmit is a change in shape imposed by
indenting it with the thumb. However, a hard
rubber ball is equally a causal process, but it will
not transmit the same sort of mark, because of its
elastic properties. The fact that a particular sort of
structural modification does not persist, because of
some inherent tendency of the process to resume \nits earlier structure, does not mean it is not trans­
mitting its own structure; it means only that we
have not found the appropriate sort of mark for that
kind of process. A hard rubber ball can be marked
by painting a spot on it, and that mark will persist
for a while.
Marking methods are sometimes used in prac­
tice for the identification of causal processes. As
fans of Perry Mason are aware, Lieutenant Tragg
always placed 'his mark' upon the murder weapon
found at the scene of the crime in order to be able to
identify it later at the trial of the suspect. Radio­
active traces are used in the investigation of phy­
siological processes - for example, to determine the
course taken by a particular substance ingested by a
subject. Malodorous substances are added to nat­
ural gas used for heating and cooking in order to
ascertain the presence of leaks; in fact, one large
chemical manufacturer published full-page color
advertisements in scientific magazines for its pro­
duct "La Stink. "
One of the main reasons for devoting our atten­
tion to causal processes is to show how they can
transmit causal influence. In the case of causal
processes used to transmit signals, the point is
obvious. Paul Revere was caused to start out on
his famous night ride by a light signal sent from the
tower of the Old North Church. A drug, placed
surreptitiously in a drink, can cause a person to lose
consciousness because it retains its chemical struc­
ture as it is ingested, absorbed, and circulated
through the body of the victim. A loud sound can
produce a painful sensation in the ears because the
disturbance of the air is transmitted from the origin
to the hearer. Radio signals sent to orbiting satel­
lites can activate devices aboard because the wave
retains its form as it travels from earth through
space. The principle of propagation of causal influ­
ence (PCI) may be formulated as follows:
PCI: A process that transmits its own structure IS
capable oj propagating a causal influence from
one space-time locale to another.
The propagation of causal influence by means of
causal processes constitutes, I believe, the myster­
ious connection between cause and effect which
Hume sought.
In offering the 'at-at' theory of mark transmis­
sion as a basis for distinguishing causal processes
from pseudo-processes, we have furnished an
account of the transmission of information and
propagation of causal influence without appealing
Causal Connections
to any of the 'secret powers' which Hume's account
of causation soundly proscribed. With this account
we see that the mysterious connection between
causes and effects is not very mysterious after all.
Our task is by no means finished, however, for
this account of transmission of marks and propaga­
tion of causal influence has used the unanalyzed
notion of a causal interaction that produces a mark.
Unless a satisfactory account of causal interaction
and mark production can be provided, our theory
of causality will contain a severe lacuna. 26 Never­
theless, we have made significant progress in
explicating the fundamental concept, introduced
at the beginning of the chapter, of causal propaga­
tion (or transmission).
This chapter is entitled "Causal Connections, "
but little has actually been said about the way in
which causal processes provide the connection
between cause and effect. Nevertheless, in many
common-sense situations, we talk about causal
relations between pairs of spatiotemporally separ­
ated events. We might say, for instance, that turn­
ing the key causes the car to start. In this context
we assume, of course, that the electrical circuitry is
intact, that the various parts are in good working
order, that there is gasoline in the tank, and so
forth, but I think we can make sense of a cause­
effect relation only if we can provide a causal con­
nection between the cause and the effect. This
involves tracing out the causal processes that lead
from the turning of the key and the closing of an
electrical circuit to various occurrences that even­
tuate in the turning over of the engine and the
ignition of fuel in the cylinders. We say, for another
example, that a tap on the knee causes the foot to
jerk. Again, we believe that there are neutral
impulses traveling from the place at which the tap
occurred to the muscles that control the movement
of the foot, and processes in those muscles that lead
to movement of the foot itself. The genetic rela­
tionship between parents and offspring provides a
further example. In this case, the molecular bio­
logist refers to the actual process of information
transmission via the DNA molecule employing the
'genetic code'.
In each of these situations, we analyze the cause­
effect relations in terms of three components - an
event that constitutes the cause, another event that
constitutes the effect, and a causal process that
connects the two events. In some cases, such as
the starting of the car, there are many intermediate
events, but in such cases, the successive intermedi­
ate events are connected to one another by \nWesley C. Salmon
spatiotemporally continuous causal processes. A
splendid example of multiple causal connections
was provided by David Kaplan. Several years ago,
he paid a visit to Tucson, just after completing a boat
trip through the Grand Canyon with his family. The
best time to take such a trip, he remarked, is when it
is very hot in Phoenix. What is the causal connection
to the weather in Phoenix, which is about 200 miles
away? At such times, the air-conditioners in Phoenix
are used more heavily, which places a greater load on
the generators at the Glen Canyon Dam (above the
Grand Canyon). Under these circumstances, more
water is allowed to pass through the turbines to meet
the increased demand for power, which produces a
greater flow of water down the Colorado River. This
results in a more exciting ride through the rapids in
the Canyon.
In the next chapter, 27 we shall consider events­
especially causal interactions - more explicitly. It
will then be easier to see how causal processes
constitute precisely the physical connections
between causes and effects that Hume sought -
what he called "the cement of the universe. "
These causal connections will playa vital role in
our account of scientific explanation.
It is tempting, of course, to try to reduce causal
processes to chains of events; indeed, people fre-
Notes
It might be objected that the alternation of night with
day, and perhaps Kepler's "laws, " do not constitute
genuine lawful regularities. This consideration does
not really affect the present argument, for there are
plenty of regularities, lawful and nonlawful, that do
not have explanatory force, but that stand in need of
causal explanation.
2 Indeed, in Italian, there is one word, perche, which
means both "why" and "because. " In interrogative
sentences it means "why, " and in indicative sentences
it means "because. " No confusion is engendered as
a result of the fact that Italian lacks two distinct
words.
3 David Hume, An Inquiry Concerning Human Under­
standing (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1955), which
also contains "An abstract of A Treatise of Human
Nature, " pp. 186-7.
4 Bertrand Russell, Mysticism and Logic (New York:
W. W. Norton, 1929), p. 180.
Bertrand Russell, The Analysis of Matter (London:
George Allen and Unwin, 1927).
6 Bertrand Russell, Human Knowledge, Its Scope and
Limits (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1948),
pp. 487-96.
quently speak of causal chains. Such talk can be
seriously misleading if it is taken to mean that
causal processes are composed of discrete events
that are serially ordered so that any given event has
an immediate successor. If, however, the continu­
ous character of causal processes is kept clearly in
mind, I would not argue that it is philosophically
incorrect to regard processes as collections of
events. At the same time, it does seem heuristically
disadvantageous to do so, for this practice seems
almost inevitably to lead to the puzzle (articulated
by Sayre in the quotation given previously) of how
these events, which make up a given process, are
causally related to one another. The point of the
'at-at' theory, it seems to me, is to show that no
such question about the causal relations among the
constituents of the process need arise - for the same
reason that, aside from occupying intermediate
positions at the appropriate times, there is no
further question about how the flying arrow gets
from one place to another. With the aid of the 'at­
at' theory, we have a complete answer to Hume's
penetrating question about the nature of causal
connections. For this heuristic reason, then, I con­
sider it advisable to resist the temptation always to
return to formulations in terms of events.
7 In ibid. , regrettably, Russell felt compelled to relin­
quish empiricism. I shall attempt to avoid such
extreme measures.
8 Patrick Suppes, A Probabilistic Theory of Causality
(Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1970), pp. 5-6.
9 See]. L. Mackie, The Cement of the Universe (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1974), for an excellent historical and
systematic survey of the various approaches.
10 Ibid. , p. 62.
11 Deborah A. Rosen, "An argument for the logical
notion of a memory trace, " Philosophy ~r Science 42
(1975), pp. 1-10.
12 Ralph Waldo Emerson, "Hymn sung at the comple­
tion of the battle monument, Concord. "
13 Russell, Human Knowledge, p. 459.
14 See John Winnie, "The causal theory of space-time, "
in John Earman, Clark Glymour, and John Stachel
(eds), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
vol. 8 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1977), pp. 134-205.
15 See Adolf Grunbaum, Philosophical Problems of Space
and Time, 2nd edn (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1973),
pp. 735-50.
16 Winnie, "Causal theory. " \n17 Milton A. Rothman, "Things that go faster than
light, " Scientific American 203/1 (July 1960), pp.
142-52, contains a lively discussion of pseudo­
processes.
18 Russell, Human Knowledge, p. 459.
19 Ibid.
20 Kenneth M. Sayre, "Statistical models of causal rela­
tions, " Philosophy of Science 44 (1977), pp. 203-14, at
p. 206.
21 Bas C. van Fraassen, The Scientific Image (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1980), p. 118.
22 For example, our discussion of the Minkowski light
cone made reference to paths of possible light rays;
such a path is one that would be taken by a light pulse
if it were emitted from a given space-time point in a
given direction. Special relativity seems to be perme­
ated with reference to possible light rays and possible
causal connections, and these involve counterfactuals
quite directly. See Wesley C. Salmon, "Foreword, "
in Hans Reichenbach, Laws, Modalities, and Counter­
factuals (Berkeley/Los Angeles/London: University
of California Press, 1976), pp. vii-xlii, for further
Causal Connections
elaboration of this issue, not only with respect to
special relativity but also in relation to other domains
of physics. A strong case can be made, I believe, for
the thesis that counterfactuals are scientifically indis­
pensable.
23 Henri Bergson, Creative Evolution (New York: Holt,
Reinhart and Winston, 1911), p. 308.
24 Russell, Mysticism and Logic, p. 187.
25 Zeno's arrow paradox and its resolution by means of
the 'at-at' theory of motion are discussed in Wesley C.
Salmon, Space, Time, and Motion (Encino, Calif. :
Dickenson, 1975; 2nd edn, Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1980), ch. 2. Relevant writings by
Bergson and Russell are reprinted in idem, Zeno '. I
Paradoxes (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1970); the
introduction to this anthology also contains a discus­
sion of the arrow paradox.
26 Salmon offers an account of these notions in his
Scientific Explanation and the Causal Structure of the
World (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984),
ch. 6.
27 Ibid. \n36
Michael Tooley
Is a singularist conception of causation coherent?
That is to say, is it possible for two events to be
causally related, without that relationship being an
instance of some causal law, either basic or derived,
and either probabilistic or non-probabilistic? Since
the time of Hume, the overwhelmingly dominant
philosophical view has been that such a conception
of causation is not coherent. In this paper, I shall
attempt to show that that view is incorrect.
The paper has three main sections. In the first, I
argue that, although some traditional arguments in
support of a singularist conception of causation are
problematic, there are good reasons for trying to
develop a singularist account.
Then, in the second section, I consider a
Humean objection to a singularist conception of
causation. My central contention there is that
while the argument has considerable force against
any reductionist account, it leaves untouched the
possibility of a realist approach according to which
causal relations are neither observable, nor redu­
cible to observable properties and relations.
Finally, in the third section, I turn to the task of
actually setting out a satisfactory singularist
account of the nature of causation. There I shall
offer both a general recipe for constructing a
singularist account, and a specific version that
incorporates my own views on the direction of
causation.
Originally published in Canadian Journal of Philosophy,
suppl. vol. 16 (1990), pp. 271-322. Reprinted by per­
mission of University of Calgary Press.
1 Arguments in Support of a
Singularist Conception of Causation
A. Two problematic arguments in support of a
singularist account
What grounds might be offered for thinking that it
is possible for one event to cause another, without
the causal relation being an instance of any causal
law? There are, I think, at least six lines of argu­
ment that are worth mentioning. Two of these I
shall set aside as dubious. The other four, however,
appear to be sound.
Immediate knowledge of causal relations? One con­
sideration that might be advanced starts out by
appealing to the possibility of knowledge that two
events are causally related, which is based upon
nothing beyond perception of the two events and
their more or less immediate surroundings. The
thrust of the argument is then that, since experi­
ence of such a very limited sort can surely not
provide one with any knowledge of the existence
of a law, it must be possible to know that two events
are causally related without knowing that there is
any law of which that relation is an instance. But if
that is possible, then is it not also reasonable to
suppose that it is possible for two events to be
causally related, even if there is no corresponding
law?
This general line of argument comes in different
versions, corresponding to four slightly differ­
ent claims concerning knowledge of causal rela­
tions. First, there is the claim that causal relations \ncan be given in immediate experience, in the strong
sense of actually being part of an experience itself.
Second, there is the claim that, even if causal rela­
tions are not given in immediate experience, one
can certainly have non-inferential knowledge that
states of affairs are causally related. Third, there is
the claim that causal relations are at least observ­
able in many cases. Finally, there is the claim that
there are situations where observation of a single
case can provide one with grounds for believing
that two events are causally related, and that it can
do so even in the absence of any prior knowledge of
causal laws. These four claims give rise to different
arguments. But, while I shall not attempt to estab­
lish it here, I think that it is very doubtful that any
of them can be sustained.
The appeal to intuition A second line of thought
involves the claim that if one simply examines one's
ordinary concept of causation ~ of one event's
bringing about, or giving rise to, another ~ one
does not find any reference to the idea of a law.
One's ordinary concept of causation is simply that
of a relation between two events ~ that is to say, a
relation that involves only two events, together
with whatever causal intermediaries there may be,
and nothing else. It cannot matter, therefore, what
is the case in other parts of the universe, or what
laws obtain.
Is there anything in this argument? Perhaps. For
if it is true that, no matter how carefully one
inspects one's ordinary concept of causation, one
cannot see any reason why only events that fall
under laws can be causally related, then that may
provide some support for a singularist conception.
But it would seem that that support must be, at
best, very limited. For, given the great difficulty,
not only in arriving at a satisfactory analysis of the
concept of causation, but even in determining the
correct direction in which to look, the fact that no
connection with laws is immediately apparent
when one introspectively examines one's ordinary
concept of causation can hardly provide much of a
basis for concluding that no such connection exists.
B. More promising lines of argument
In this section, I want to mention four considera­
tions that, though by no means compelling, con­
stitute much more substantial reasons for accepting
a singularist conception of causation. The four
arguments consist of three that I have set out else­
where, in a detailed way, 1 plus a natural variant.
The Nature of Causation
My discussion of them here, consequently, will be
comparatively brief.
The four arguments all attempt to establish a
singularist conception of causation by offering rea­
sons for rejecting the alternatives. We need to
consider, therefore, just what the alternatives are.
The place to begin, clearly, is with the dominant,
supervenience view. According to it, events cannot
be causally related unless that relation is an
instance of some law. Moreover, whether or not
two events are causally related is logically deter­
mined by the non-causal properties of the two
events, and the non-causal relations between
them, together with the causal laws that there are
in the world. The supervemence view of causal
relations involves, in short, the following two
theses:
Causal relations presuppose corresponding
causal laws;
2 Causal relations are logically supervenient
upon causal laws plus the non-causal properties
of, and relations between, events.
Traditionally, the supervenience view and the
singularist view have been treated as the only
alternatives on offer with respect to the question
of the relation between causal relations and causal
laws. It is clear, however, that there is a third
alternative, since the first of the above theses is
compatible with the denial of the second. There
is, accordingly, a view that is intermediate between
the singularist position and the supervenience posi­
tion ~ the view, namely, that causal relations pre­
suppose corresponding causal laws, even though
causal relations are not logically supervenient
upon causal laws together with the non-causal
properties of, and relations between, events.
The relevance of this for the present arguments
is that each argument involves two distinct parts ~
one directed against the supervenience view and
the other directed against the intermediate view. In
the case of the supervenience alternative, the strat­
egy is to describe a logically possible situation that
is a counterexample to the supervenience account.
The counterexamples have no force, however,
against the intermediate view, so some other line
of argument is called for, and what I shall argue is
that the singularist view is to be preferred to the
intermediate view on grounds of simplicity.
The argument from the possibility of indeterministic
laws The first argument starts out from the
plausible ~ though by no means indubitable ~ \nMichael Tooley
assumption that indeterministic causal laws are
logically possible. Granted that assumption, con­
sider a world with only two basic causal laws:
For any x, x's having property P is causally
sufficient to bring it about that either x has
property Q or x has property R;
For any x, x's having property S is causally
sufficient to bring it about that either x has
property Q or x has property R.
In such a world, if an object has property P, but not
property S, and then acquires property Q, but
not property R, it must be the case that the ac­
quisition of property Q was caused by the posses­
sion of property P. Similarly, if an object has
property S, but not property P, and then acquires
property Q, but not property R, it must be the
case that the acquisition of property Q was caused
by the possession of property S. But what if an
object has both property P and property S? If the
object acquires only property Q, there will be no
problem: it will simply be a case of causal over­
determination. Similarly, if it acquires only prop­
erty R. But what if it acquires both property Q and
property R? Was it the possession of property P
that caused the acquisition of property Q, and the
possession of property S that caused the possession
of property R, or was it the other way around?
Given a supervenience view of causation, no
answer is possible, for the causal laws in question,
together with the non-causal properties of the
objects, do not entail that it was one way rather
than the other.
Can an advocate of a supervenience view argue
successfully that this case is not really a counter­
example? One try would be to say that in the case
where an object has both property P and property
S, and then acquires properties Qand R, there are
no causal relations at all involved. But that won't
do, since the first law, for example, implies that the
possession of property P always causes something.
Another attempted escape would be to argue
that there are causal relations in the situation, but
they are not quite as determinate as one might
initially assume. Thus it is not the case either that
the possession of property P causes the possession
of property Q, or that it causes the possession of
property R. What is true is that the possession
of property P causes the state of affairs which
involves either the possession of property Q, or
the possession of property R.
But this, I believe, will not do either. The reason
is that causal relations hold between states of
affairs, and, while one may use disjunctive expres­
sions to pick out states of affairs, states of affairs in
themselves can never be disjunctive in nature.
Accordingly, if the situation described is to involve
causal relations falling under the relevant laws, it
must be the case either that the possession of prop­
erty P caused the acquisition of property Q, or that
it caused the acquisition of property R, and sim­
ilarly for property S.
It would seem, then, that the possibility of inde­
terministic causal laws gives rise to a very strong
objection to the supervenience view of causal rela­
tions. But what of the intermediate view?
Obviously, the above argument leaves it unscathed,
since, in the situation being considered, all of the
causal relations fall under causal laws. So if the
intermediate view is to be rejected, some other
argument is needed.
The only possibility that I can see here is a
somewhat modest argument which turns upon the
fact that the intermediate view involves a somewhat
richer ontology than the other views. For consider,
first, the supervenience view. Given that, accord­
ing to it, causal relations between states of affairs
are logically supervenient upon causal laws plus
non-causal states of affairs, the only basic causal
facts that need to be postulated are those that
correspond to causal laws. (According to the view
of causal laws that I have defended elsewhere, such
facts are to be identified with certain contingent
relations between universals. 2)
Second, consider the singularist view. According
to it, it is causal relations that are in some sense
primary, rather than causal laws. So the singularist
view is certainly committed to postulating basic
causal facts which involve states of affairs standing
in causal relations. But what account is to be offered
of causal laws? If a regularity view of laws were
tenable, nothing would be needed beyond regular­
ities involving the relation of causation. However,
as a number of philosophers have argued, regularity
accounts of the nature of laws are exposed to very
strong objections. 3 Let us suppose, therefore, that a
singularist account of causation is combined with
the view that laws are relations among universals.
The result will be that a singularist approach
involves, in the case of any world that contains
causal laws, the postulation of two sorts of basic
causal facts - consisting, on the one hand, of rela­
tions between particular states of affairs, and, on
the other, of relations between universals. \nAt first glance, then, the singularist approach
might seem to have a more luxuriant ontology
than the supervenience approach, since the latter
postulates only one type of causal fact, whereas the
former postulates two. But I think that further
reflection undermines that conclusion. The reason
is that both approaches need to leave room for the
possibility of non-causal laws. When this is taken
into account, it can be seen that both approaches
need to postulate exactly two fundamental sorts of
facts, in the general area oflaws and causation. For,
on the one hand, the supervenience view needs to
postulate two special types of facts in order to
distinguish between causal laws and non-causal
laws, while, on the other, the singularist approach
can also account for everything while postulating
only two special sorts of facts. For although it
cannot reduce causal laws to causal relations
between states of affairs, it can analyse the concept
of a causal law in terms of the concept of a law -
causal or otherwise - together with the concept of
causal relations.
In short, the situation is this. Both approaches
need an account of the nature of laws. Given that,
the supervenience view then goes on to explain
what it is that distinguishes causal laws from non­
casual laws, and then uses the notion of a causal law
to offer an analysis of what it is for two states of
affairs to be causally related. The singularist view,
on the other hand, has to explain what it is for two
states of affairs to be causally related, and it then
uses that concept, in conjunction with that of a law,
to explain what a causal law is. The two approaches
would seem, therefore, to be on par with respect to
overall simplicity.
But what of the intermediate account? The
answer is that it is necessarily more complex.
Since it denies that causal relations between events
are logically supervenient upon causal laws
together with the totality of non-causal facts, it is
committed, like the singularist approach, to
postulating a special relation that holds between
states of affairs. But, unlike the singularist
approach, it cannot go on to analyse causal laws as
laws that involve the relation of causation. For the
latter sort of analysis makes it impossible to offer
any reason why it should be the case that events can
be causally related only if they fall under some law.
Accordingly, if the exclusion of anomic causation is
to be comprehensible, given an intermediate view,
one needs to offer a separate account of the nature
of causallaws. 4 The upshot is that an intermediate
account needs to postulate three special sorts of
The Nature of Causation
facts: those corresponding to non-causal laws,
those corresponding to causal laws, and those cor­
responding to causal relations between states of
affairs. An intermediate account therefore involves
a somewhat richer ontology than either a singular­
ist approach or a supervenience approach.
This completes the argument. For we have seen,
first, that there are only two alternatives to a sin­
gularist conception of causation - namely, the
supervenience view and the intermediate view.
Second, one of the alternatives - the supervenience
view - is ruled out by certain logically possible
cases involving indeterministic causal laws.
Third, the other alternative - the intermediate
view - is ontologically less economical than the
singularist view. Other things being equal, there­
fore, the singularist approach is to be preferred.
The argument from the possibility of uncaused events
and probabilistic laws The second argument is, in a
sense, a simpler version of the previous one. It does
involve however, two additional assumptions -
namely, that both probabilistic laws and uncaused
events are possible.
Given those two assumptions, the argument
runs as follows. Imagine a world where objects
sometimes acquire property Q without there
being any cause of that occurrence. Suppose,
further, that the following is a law:
For any x, x's having property P causally brings
it about, with probability 0. 75, that x has prop­
erty Q.
If objects sometimes acquire property Q even
though there is no cause of their doing so, then
why shouldn't this also be possible in cases where
an object happens to have property P? Indeed,
might there not be an excellent reason for thinking
that there were such cases? For suppose that
objects having property P went on to acquire prop­
erty Q 76 per cent of the time, rather than 75 per
cent of the time. That would not necessarily be
grounds for entertaining doubts concerning the
above law, since that law might be derived from a
very powerful, simple, and well-confirmed theory.
In that situation, one would have reason for
believing that, over the long term, of the 76 out of
100 cases when an object with property P acquires
property Q, 75 will be ones where the acquisition
of property Q is caused by the possession of prop­
erty P, while the other will be one where property
Q is spontaneously acquired. But if one adopts a \nMichael Tooley
supervenience view, what state of affairs serves to
differentiate the two sorts of cases? No answer can
be forthcoming, since, by hypothesis, there are no
differences with respect to non-causal properties or
relations. The above possibility is a counter­
example, therefore, to a supervenience view of
causal relations.
The argument from the possibility of exact replicas of
causal situations The third argument runs as fol­
lows. Suppose that event P causes event M. There
will, in general, be nothing impossible about there
also being an event M* which has precisely the
same properties5 as M, both intrinsic and rela­
tional, but which is not caused by P. But is it
logically possible for it to be the case that, in addi­
tion, either (I) the only relation between P and M
is that of causation, or else (2) any other relation
that holds between P and M also holds between P
and M*?
If either of these situations can obtain, we have a
counterexample to the supervenience view. For
assume that the supervenience approach is correct.
That means that P's causing M is logically super­
venient upon the non-causal properties of, and the
non-causal relations between, P and M, together
with the causal laws. But if M* has precisely the
same non-causal properties as M, and also stands to
P in the same non-causal relations as M does, then
the supervenience thesis entails that P must also
cause M*, contrary to our hypothesis.
An advocate of the supervenience view might
well challenge, of course, the assumption that
situations of the above sort are possible. But I
believe that the assumption can be sustained, and
elsewhere I have advanced three sorts of cases in
support of it, 6 two of which I shall mention here.
The first involves two assumptions; first, that there
could be immaterial minds that were not located in
space, but which could be causally linked - say, by
'telepathy'; second, that there could also be two
such minds that were in precisely the same state
at every instant. Granted these assumptions, one
has a counterexample of the desired sort to the
supervenience view: a case, namely, where a mind
P is causally linked to a mind, M, but not to a
qualitatively indistinguishable mind, M*.
A second sort of case involves the following
three assumptions: first, that it is logically possible
for there to be worlds that exhibit, at least some of
the time, rotational symmetry; second, that endur­
ing objects have temporal parts, and that it is causal
relations between those parts that unite them into
enduring objects; third, that the only external rela­
tions that hold between complete temporal slices of
a universe, or between parts of diffe; ent complete
temporal slices, are causal and temporal ones.
Given those assumptions, consider, for example, a
Newtonian world that contains only two neutrons,
endlessly rotating in the same direction around
their centre of gravity. Choose any time, t, and let
U be the temporal part that contains events at t,
together with all prior events, while V contains all
later events. The thrust of the argument is then
that the rotational symmetry that characterizes
such a world at every moment means that a super­
venience view cannot give a satisfactory account of
the causal connections between the two temporal
parts. For if P and P* are the earlier temporal parts
of the two neutrons, and M and M* the later
temporal parts, it will be impossible, given a super­
venience view, to hold that P is causally linked to
M, but not to M*, since M and M* have the same
properties, both intrinsic and relational, and there
is no non-causal relation that holds between P and
M, but not between P and M*.
If the subsidiary assumptions can be defended in
either or both of these cases - and I believe that
they can7 - then one has another sort of counter­
example to the supervenience view.
The argument from the possibility of inverted univer­
ses Let us say that two possible worlds are inverted
twins if they are exactly the same except for the
direction of time and for any properties or relations
that involve the direction of time. Whether a poss­
ible world has an inverted twin depends upon what
the laws of nature are. Some laws will exclude
inversion; others will not.
Consider, for example, any world that is gov­
erned by the laws of Newtonian physics. For any
instantaneous temporal slice, S, of that world,
there will be another possible Newtonian world
that contains an instantaneous temporal slice, T
such that Tinvolves precisely the same distribution
of particles as S, but with velocities that are exactly
reversed. Given that the laws of Newtonian physics
are symmetric with respect to time, the course of
events in the one world will be exactly the opposite
of that in the other world. Any Newtonian world
necessarily has, therefore, an inverted twin.
Imagine, then, for purposes of illustration, that
our world is a Newtonian world. There will then be
a possible world that is just like our world, except
that the direction of time, and the direction of
causation, are, so to speak, reversed. That is to \nsay, if we let A and B be any two complete temporal
slices of our world, such that A is causally and
temporally prior to B, then the other world will
contain temporal slices A* and B* such that, first,
A* and B* are indistinguishable from A and B,
respectively, except with respect to properties
that involve the direction of time, and second, B*
is causally and temporally prior to A*. So there will
be, for example, a complete temporal slice of the
twin world that is just like a temporal slice of our
own world in the year AD 1600 except that all
properties that involve the direction of time -
such as velocity - will be reversed. Similarly,
there will be a complete temporal slice that corres­
ponds, in the same way, to a temporal slice of our
own world in the year AD 1700. But both the causal
and the temporal orderings will be flipped over,
with the l700-style slice both causally prior to, and
earlier than, the l600-style slice.
The question now is this. What makes it the case
that, in our world, A causes B, whereas in the
inverted twin world, B* causes A*? If one adopts
a supervenience account, then, in view of the fact
that the two worlds have, by hypothesis, the same
laws, the difference must be a matter either of some
difference between A and A*, or between Band B*,
with respect to non-causal properties, or else of
some non-causal relation that holds between A
and B, but not between A* and B*. Can such a
difference be found?
One difference is that while A is earlier than B,
A* is later than B*, rather than earlier. But is this a
non-causal difference? The answer depends upon
the correct theory of the nature of time. In part­
icular' it depends upon whether the direction of
time is to be analysed in terms of the direction of
causation. If, as I am inclined to believe, it is, then
the causal difference between the two worlds can­
not be grounded upon the temporal difference. But
this, in turn, also means that A and A* cannot differ
with respect to their non-causal properties, and
similarly for Band B*. For, by hypothesis, A
differs from A* only with respect to those proper­
ties that involve the direction of time, and those
differences will not be non-causal differences if the
direction of time is to be defined in terms of
the direction of causation.
The crux of this fourth and final argument, in
short, is the assumption that the direction of time is
to be analysed in terms of the direction of causa­
tion. If that assumption cannot be sustained, the
argument collapses. But if it can be sustained, the
argument appears to go through, since A will not
The Nature of Causation
then differ from A* with respect to any non-causal
properties, nor B from B*, nor will there be any
non-causal relation that holds between A and B but
not between A* and B*. The possibility of inverted
universes will thus constitute another counter­
example to the supervenience view of causation.
To sum up, the four arguments that I have set
out in this section constitute, I believe, a very
strong case against the supervenience view. As we
have seen, however, this is not to say that there is
an equally strong case for the singularist concep­
tion of causation. For there is a third alternative -
the intermediate view - which escapes the objec­
tions to which the supervenience account is
exposed. Nevertheless, with the field thus nar­
rowed, there is at least some reason for preferring
the singularist view, since it involves a more eco­
nomical ontology.
2 Arguments against a Singularist
Account?
I have argued that, other things being equal, the
singularist view is to be preferred. But are other
things equal, or are there, on the contrary, strong
objections to a singularist conception of causation?
Given that very few philosophers indeed have
embraced a singularist view, it is natural to suppose
that very strong objections, if not out and about,
must at least be lurking on the sidelines. But is that
so? Perhaps, instead, it has simply been taken for
granted that a singularist view cannot be right, that
causal relations must fall under laws? That cer­
tainly seem to have been the feeling of Elizabeth
Anscombe, as the following, somewhat caustic
comment on Davidson, and others, testifies:
Meanwhile in non-experimental philosophy it
is clear enough what are the dogmatic slumbers
of the day. It is over and over again assumed
that any singular causal proposition implies a
universal statement running 'Always when this,
then that'; often assumed that true singular
causal statements are derived from such 'induc­
tively believed' universalities. Examples indeed
are recalcitrant, but that does not seem to dis­
turb. Even a philosopher acute enough to be
conscious of this, such as Davidson, will say,
without offering any reason at all for saying it,
that a singular causal statement implies that
there is such a true universal statement - though
perhaps we can never have knowledge of it. \nMichael Tooley
Such a thesis needs some reason for believing
it! s
Such a thesis does indeed need support. How­
ever, I believe that Anscombe is wrong in suggest­
ing that the widespread philosophical acceptance of
the view that causal relations presuppose laws does
not rest upon any argument. For it seems to me
that the reason that one rarely encounters any
arguments bearing upon this thesis is that most
philosophers have generally been convinced by
Hume's argumentation on the matter, regardless
of whether they have accepted or rejected his pos­
itive account of the nature of causation.
We need to consider, therefore, the Humean line
of argument. It has, in effect, two parts. The first
involves the claim that causal relations are not
observable in the relevant technical sense of being
immediately given in experience. The second
involves the claim that causal relations are not
analytically reducible to observable properties and
relations unless one looks beyond the individual
case.
How might it be argued that causal relations are
not immediately given in experience? A standard
empiricist argument might run as follows. First, to
say that a property or relation is immediately given
in an experience is to say that it is part of the
experience itself, and where the latter is so under­
stood that a property or relation can be part of an
experience E only if it would also have to be part of
any experience that was qualitatively indistinguish­
able from E. Second, given any experience E what­
ever - be it a perception of external events, or an
introspective awareness of some mental occur­
rence, such as an act of willing, or a process of
thinking - it is logically possible that appropriate,
direct stimulation of the brain might produce an
experience, E*, which was qualitatively indistin­
guishable from E, but which did not involve any
causally related elements. So, for example, it might
seem to one that one was engaging in a process of
deductive reasoning, when, in fact, there was not
really any direct connection at all between the
thoughts themselves - all of them being caused
instead by something outside of oneself. It then
follows, from these two premisses, that causal rela­
tions cannot be immediately given in experience in
the sense indicated.
But what is the significance of this conclusion?
The answer is that it then follows, according to
traditional empiricism, that the concept of causa­
tion cannot be analytically basic. For one of the
central tenets of empiricism is that not all ideas can
be treated as primitive. In particular, an idea can be
treated as analytically basic only if it serves to pick
out some property or relation with which one is
directly acquainted. But what properties and rela­
tions can be objects of direct acquaintance? Within
traditional empiricism, the answer is that one can
be directly acquainted only with properties and
relations that can be given within immediate
experience. It therefore follows that if traditional
empiricist views concerning what concepts can be
treated as analytically basic are sound, the concept
of causation cannot be treated as analytically basic.
It stands in need of analysis.
Is traditional empiricism right on these matters?
I believe that it is. Arguing for that view would,
however, take us rather far afield. For the way that
I would want to proceed is by showing, first, that,
pace Wittgenstein, a private language is unproble­
matic, and second, that while concepts that involve
the ascription of secondary qualities to external
objects can be analysed in terms of concepts that
involve the ascription of qualia to experiences,
analysis in the opposite direction is impossible.
This brings us to the second stage of the
Humean argument - the part which is directed to
showing that a singularist conception of causation
makes it impossible to analyse causation in terms of
observable properties and relations. Hume's argu­
ment here involves asking one to try to identify, in
any case where one event causes another, what it is
that constitutes the causal connection. He suggests
that when we do so, we will see, first, that the effect
comes after the cause, and second, that cause and
effect are contiguous, both temporally and spat­
ically. But these two relations, surely, are not
enough. Something more is needed, if events are
to be causally related. But what can that something
more possibly be?
In response to this question, Hume argues that,
regardless of what sort of instance one considers -
be it a case of one object's colliding with another, or
a case of a person's performing some action - one
will find that there is neither any further property,
either of the cause or of the effect, nor any further
relation between the two events, to which one can
point. Hume therefore concludes that if one is to
find something that answers to our concept of
causation, one has to look beyond any single
instance, and he then goes on to argue that if one
has to look beyond single instances, the only situ­
ations that could possibly be relevant are ones in­
volving events of similar sorts, similarly conjoined. \nThus one is led, in the end, to the conclusion that
our idea of causation is in some way necessarily
linked with the idea of regularities, of constant
conjunctions of events. 9
How might one attempt to rebut this argument?
One line, which appears to be embraced by
Anscombe, 1O involves the attempt to move from
the claim that causation is observable to the con­
clusion that the concept of causation can be treated
as basic, and thus as not in need of any analysis in
terms of other ideas. But it seems very unlikely that
this response can be sustained. For, on the one
hand, the fact that something is observable in the
ordinary, non-technical sense of that term provides
no reason at all for concluding that the relevant
concept can be taken as analytically basic: electrons
are, for example, observable in cloud chambers, but
that does not mean that the term 'electron' does not
stand in need of analysis. And, on the other hand, if
one shifts to a technical sense of 'observation' that
does license that inference ~ namely, that according
to which a property or relation is observable only if
it can be given in immediate experience ~ then, as
was argued above, causation is not observable in
that sense.
Another possible singularist response is that
advanced by C. J. Ducasse, who attempted to
show that causation could be analysed in terms of
relations which Hume granted are observable in the
individual instance ~ the relations, namely, of spa­
tial and temporal contiguity, and of temporal prior­
ity. Thus, according to Ducasse, to say that C
caused K, where C and K are changes, is just to say:
The change C occurred during a time and
through a space terminating at the instant I at
the surface S.
2 The change K occurred during a time and
through a space beginning at the instant I at
the surface S.
3 No change other than C occurred during the
time and through the space of C, and no change
other than K during the time and through the
space of K. 11
But this proposal cannot be sustained. One
problem with it, which Ducasse himself discusses,
is that causation is not just a relation between the
totality of states of affairs existing during some
interval, and terminating at some surface at some
instant, and the totality of states of affairs begin­
ning at that surface and at that instant, and existing
throughout some interval. Causation is a relation
that holds between different parts of two such
The Nature of Causation
totalities. Thus, to use Ducasse's own illustration,
if a brick strikes a window at the same time that
sound waves emanating from a canary do so, one
wants to be able to say that it is the brick's striking
the window that causes it to shatter. But this is
precluded by Ducasse's analysis. 12
Ducasse's account is open to a number of other
objections. Is it not logically possible, for example,
for there to be spatio-temporal events which are
uncaused? And is it not possible for there to be
immaterial minds that have no spatial location, but
who can communicate with one another 'telepath­
ically'? Ducasse's account appears to exclude such
possibilities. The objection that I wish to focus
upon here, however, concerns the question of
whether there can be causal action at a distance ~
i. e. , whether two events that are separated, either
spatially, or temporally, or both, can be causally
related even if there is no intervening causal pro­
cess that bridges the spatial and/or temporal gap
between the two events. Ducasse's account implies
that causal action at a distance is logically imposs­
ible. But is that really so?
Ducasse's account is by no means the only one
which entails that causal action at a distance is
logically impossible, since Hume's own account,
for example, has precisely the same implication.
But other, more recent accounts of the concept of
causation ~ such as Wesley Salmon's ~ also involve
the idea that gappy causal processes are logically
impossible.
13
But though this idea has been
embraced by various philosophers, it seems clearly
untenable. For, as I have argued elsewhere, one can
surely imagine, for example, a world where the
laws governing the transmission of light waves
entail that light particles will exist only at some of
the places along the line of travel. Insert a mirror at
certain points, and the light ray would be reflected.
Insert it at other points, and there would be no
effect at all. Nor would there be any other ways of
intervening at those points which would interfere
in any way with the transmission of the wave. 14
My reason for mentioning this objection to
Ducasse's analysis is that the fact that discontinu­
ous causal processes are logically possible adds
force to Hume's objection to a singularist concep­
tion of causation. To see why, consider the
responses that can be made to Hume's argument.
Two possible replies have already been mentioned,
and rejected ~ the response, namely, that causation
is itself a directly observable relation, so that the
whole idea that an analysis is needed is wrong, and
the response that causation is just succession plus \nMichael Tooley
continguity, contrary to what Hume contends. But
if neither of these replies is satisfactory, what, then,
is left?
One idea is to uncover what Hume himself failed
to find - that is, some further observable property
or relation. It is at this point that the possibility of
discontinuous causal processes is relevant. For
while the situation does not seem very promising
if one assumes, with Hume, that there cannot be
any spatial or temporal gap between a cause and its
effect, it surely looks desperate indeed if an event at
one time can cause an event at a much later time, in
a remote part of the universe, with no intervening
causal process. If causal situations can be as uncon­
strained as this, what observable relation - beyond
that of temporal priority - can possibly hold
between two causally related events?
The prospects for a singularist account of causa­
tion may well seem hopeless at this point. It may
seem that, if one is to find an account of causation,
one must look beyond a given pair of causally
related events. But if causation is simply a relation
between two individual events, this possibility is
precluded. It would seem, therefore, that a singul­
arist conception of causation must be rejected.
This conclusion is, however, mistaken. To see
why, one needs only to get clear about precisely
what the Humean argument establishes. In the first
place, then, it shows, I believe, that causation is not
directly observable in the relevant technical sense,
and therefore that it cannot be a primitive, unana­
lysable relation between events. In the second
place, it makes it at least immensely plausible -
especially when one considers the possibility of
radical causal gaps - that causation cannot be
reduced to observable properties of, and relations
between, individual pairs of events. These two
conclusions, however, do not suffice to rule out a
singularist conception of causation. For one poss­
ibility remains: the possibility, namely, that causa­
tion is simply a relation between individual events,
but one that is neither observable, nor reducible to
observable properties and relations.
Hume's line of argument therefore requires sup­
plementation, if a singularist conception of causa­
tion is to be refuted. Specifically, one must either
show that there is something special about causa­
tion which makes it the case that only a reductionist
account will do, or else one must defend the com­
pletely general thesis that all properties and rela­
tions are either observable or else reducible to
observable properties and relations. But neither
route seems at all promising. For as regards the
former, the problem is that there just do not seem
to be any arguments of that sort, while, as regards
the latter, the thesis that there are no theoretical
properties or relations at all is not tremendously
plausible in itself, and the arguments that have been
offered in support of it all seem to appeal, either
openly or covertly, to some form of verification ism.
The conclusion, accordingly, is that a Humean
argument does not refute a singularist approach to
causation. It shows at most that a singularist
account needs to be combined with the view that
causation is a theoretical relation between events.
Should an advocate of a singularist account of
causation be troubled by this conclusion? Not if the
arguments advanced in section I. B are correct. For
those arguments are not only arguments in support
of a singularist conception of causation: they are
also arguments against any reductionist approach
to causation, and indeed, more powerful ones, since
a reductionist approach to causation is incompat­
ible with both singularist accounts and intermediate
accounts of causal relations.
The case against a reductionist approach to cau­
sation does not rest, however, simply upon the
arguments advanced in section LB. For, as I have
argued elsewhere, there are other very strong rea­
sons for holding that no reductionist account of
causation can be tenable, and reasons that are com­
pletely independent of whether a singularist account
of causation is correct. 15
In a passage quoted earlier, Anscombe says that
contemporary philosophers, in holding that causal
relations presuppose laws, are guilty of dogmatic
slumber. Now even if she were right in thinking
that philosophers were slumbering here, the char­
acterization of that as 'dogmatic' would not be fair,
since the most that would be involved would be an
assumption which philosophers had not in fact
examined, rather than one which they were unwill­
ing to examine. But, as the discussion in the pres­
ent section has shown, Anscombe is not right on
this matter. For the idea that a singularist account
of causation is untenable is not an assumption that
philosophers have made without any supporting
argument. There is an argument, and one that
goes back to Hume's discussion. It is, moreover,
an argument that is very difficult to resist, unless
one has a viable account of the meaning of theor­
etical terms - something that, in addition to being
unavailable to Hume, has become available only in
this century.
It is true, nevertheless, that there is an unexam­
ined assumption that is endemic in the philosophy \nof causation, but Anscombe has misdiagnosed its
location. For, rather than its being the idea that
causal relations presuppose causal laws, it is,
instead, an assumption that Anscombe herself
shares with those whom she criticizes - the
assumption, namely, that causal relations, rather
than being theoretical relations, are either them­
selves observable, or else reducible to other proper­
ties and relations that are.
3 The Positive Theory
In the first part of this paper, I have tried to do two
main things: first, to show that a singularist
account of causation is preferable to the alternat­
ives; second, to determine in what general direction
one should look in attempting to develop such an
account.
My argument in support of the preferability of a
singularist account involved three main points.
First, supervenience accounts of causation must
be set aside, since they are exposed to decisive
counterexamples. Second, other things being
equal, singularist accounts of causation are prefer­
able to intermediate accounts, since the latter
necessarily involve a more complicated ontology.
Third, the Humean objection to singularist
accounts - an objection that may initially appear
very strong indeed - turns out to rest upon an
unexamined assumption, and one which, I have
argued elsewhere, will not stand up under critical
scrutiny - the assumption, namely, that causal
relations are reducible to non-causal properties
and relations.
What form should a singularist account take?
The main points that emerged with respect to
this question were these. First, causation cannot
be treated as a primitive relation, for it is not
directly observable in the relevant sense. Second,
a singularist theory of causation cannot attempt
to reduce causation to non-causal properties and
relations, since, although the Humean argument is
not successful in ruling out a singularist account, it
is, I believe, a very plausible argument for the
conclusion that if causation is conceived of in
singularist terms, then no reductionist account is
possible. Therefore, third, the only hope for a
viable singularist account of causation involves
treating causal relations as theoretical relations
between events. But, fourth, there is nothing
disturbing about this conclusion, since there
are independent grounds for holding that no
The Nature of Causation
reductionist account of causation can be satis­
factory.
A. The basic strategy, and the underlying ideas
How is the concept of causation to be analysed? If
causal relations are theoretical relations, then the
starting point must be some theory that can plaus­
ibly be viewed as implicitly defining the concept of
causation. Given such a theory, the next task will
then be to convert the implicit definition that the
theory provides into an explicit analysis.
Exactly how the latter task is best carried out
need not concern us at this point. What is relevant
is simply that no method of analysing any theor­
etical term can be employed until a relevant theory
involving that term is at hand. We need to develop,
accordingly, a theory of causation.
The relevant theory of causation must, in addi­
tion, be analytically true. For the goal is to set out
an analysis of the concept of causation, and not
merely to offer an account that is true of causation
as it is in the actual world. The theory must be true
of causation in all possible worlds. So none of the
statements in the theory can be merely contin­
gently true.
The remainder of the present section will be
concerned with isolating the basic ideas that can
be used to construct an appropriate, analytically
true theory of causation. The material is organized
as follows. I begin by raising the question of pre­
cisely which causal relation, or relations, one
should focus upon. Is there a single, basic causal
relation, to which all other causal relations can be
reduced? Or does one have to recognize distinct
causal relations that are equally basic?
Having determined which causal relation (or
relations) one should focus upon, I then go on to
consider the formal properties of the basic causal
relation (or relations) in question. That might
appear, initially, to be a relatively straightforward
task, but we shall see that that is not entirely so. In
any case, given a decision as to the formal proper­
ties possessed by some basic causal relation, the
idea is that the analytically true statements in ques­
tion can form part of the desired theory of that
relation.
Those formal properties will not suffice, how­
ever, to differentiate the causal relation in question
from a number of non-causal relations. Nor, if it
turns out that there is more than one basic causal
relation, will the formal properties provide one
with any account of what it is that makes all of \nMichael Tooley
those distinct relations causal relations. Something
more is needed, then, before one has a theory that
suffices to capture the concept of a causal relation,
and the crucial question is what that something
more IS.
If one were setting out a non-singularist account
of causation, a natural move at this point would be
to appeal to the idea that events cannot be causally
related unless the relation is an instance of some
law, and then to try to exploit this connection
between causal relations and causal laws in order
to construct a sufficiently strong theory. But this
avenue is closed if it is a singularist account that
one is after. So what can one appeal to at this point?
The more one reflects upon this problem of
developing a theory of causation for the singularist
case, the more intractable it is likely to seem. But
there is, I believe, a possible solution. Suppose that
a singularist view of causation is correct, so that it is
logically possible for there to be causally related
events that do not fall under any law. It is then very
tempting to think that it must be possible to char­
acterize causation as it is in itself, without any
reference to laws of nature. But perhaps this is a
mistake. Perhaps our grasp of causation is inextric­
ably tied to the distinction between causal laws and
non-causal laws, so that causal relations just are
those relations which are such that any laws invol­
ving them have certain properties - properties not
possessed by non-causal laws.
The idea, in short, is that it may be that the only
way we have of characterizing causal relations is an
indirect one, and one that involves the concept of a
law of nature. If so, then the concept of causation is
parasitic upon the concept of a law of nature. But
this sort of conceptual dependence need not entail
any ontological dependence. Events could still be
causally related without falling under any relevant
law.
To implement this general idea, one needs to be
able to point to a difference between laws that
involve causal relations and laws that do not. One
needs to find some further condition, T - beyond
that of involving causal relations - such that it is an
analytic truth that a law is a causal law if and only if
it satisfies T. For given such a condition, one would
then be able to characterize causal relations as those
relations such that any laws involving them must
satisfy condition T. Moreover, such a characteriza­
tion would be perfectly compatible with the poss­
ibility of there being events that were causally
related, even though the relation was not an
instance of any law, since the fact that the intrinsic
nature of some relation is such that any laws invol­
ving it would necessarily have certain properties
does not entail that, in order for the relation to be
instantiated, there need be any laws involving it.
Given this general strategy, the basic challenge is
to come up with a plausible candidate for condition
T. The specific suggestion that I shall advance is
one that I have defended elsewhere, in connection
with supervenience and intermediate accounts of
causal laws.
Fundamental causal relations Before attempting to
set out a theory of causation, one needs to get clear
about which causal relation or relations should
feature in the theory. Is there a single basic causal
relation, to which all causal relations, in all possible
worlds, can be reduced? Or is it necessary to recog­
nize distinct causal relations that are equally basic?
How might one attempt to reduce all causal
relations to a single, basic, causal relation? Two
possibilities immediately come to mind. One
involves treating direct causation as the basic rela­
tion, and then defining other causal relations - such
as indirect causation, and causation in general - in
terms of it. The other involves treating causation
in general as the basic relation, and then defining
both direct causation and indirect causation in
terms of it.
Would either of these reductions be satisfactory?
I think not. In the case of the first, the problem is
that any acceptable account of causation must
apply to continuous causal processes, and this will
not be the case for any theory in which all causal
relations are to be reduced to direct causation. For
in a continuous causal process, there are no events
standing in the relation of direct causation, and
therefore no relation that is definable in terms
of direct causation can be instantiated in such a
process.
But what about the reduction of all causal rela­
tions to the relation of causation in general? Initi­
ally, this programme may seem more promising,
since it might seem to be a straightforward matter
to define both the concept of a continuous causal
process and the concept of direct causation, given
the concept of causation in general. But this, I
think, is a mistake. One way of seeing the problem
is by noticing that there are two rather different
concepts of direct causation. According to one, a
sufficient condition of A's being a direct cause of B
is that A is a cause of B and there is no causally
intermediate event. Direct causation, so conceived,
can be reduced to the relation of causation in \ngeneral. But there is another possibility. Causation
might, so to speak, be quantized, so that there were
cases where A caused B, and where, rather than its
merely happening to be the case that there was no
causal intermediary between A and B, the causal
relationship that obtained between A and B was
itself such as to preclude there being any causally
intermediate event. 16 This latter situation involves
a stronger type of direct causation, and one that is
not, it would seem, reducible to the relation of
causation in general. For suppose that one offered
the following account: A causes B directly if and
only if the general relation of causation obtains
between A and B, and the world is such that it is
a law that if the general relation of causation holds
between events X and Y, there is no event Z such
that the general relation of causation holds both
between X and Z and between Z and Y. That
definition would secure the right formal properties
for the relation of direct causation, but it would
suffer from two defects. First, the relation of cau­
sation in general is necessarily transitive, whereas
in the above definition of direct causation one is
postulating a law which entails that causation in
general is not transitive. Second, this definition of
direct causation entails that in a world where some
events are directly caused by others, absolutely all
causal relations must be quantized. It therefore
would preclude the possibility of a world where
some causal relations were quantized, and others
not.
Given that the strong relation of direct causation
- which precludes the existence of causally inter­
mediate events - cannot be reduced to the relation
of causation in general, or vice versa, the prospects
for reducing all causal relations to some single,
basic causal relation do not seem promising. It
seems to me that one must recognize the possibility
of at least two basic causal relations: first, that of
direct causation, of the strong, quantized sort, and
second, that of causation of the sort involved in
continuous causal processes - what might be
referred to as non-discrete causation.
The approach that I shall adopt, accordingly,
will be to set out a theory of causation that, rather
than focusing upon some specific causal relation,
functions simply to explain what it is to be a causal
relation. Any specific causal relation can then be
defined in terms of the additional properties that
serve to distinguish it from other causal relations.
Formal properties of causal relations What proper­
ties distinguish one causal relation from another? A
The Nature of Causation
natural answer is that certain formal properties do
so. Thus, it might seem to be true by definition, for
example, that the relation of non-discrete causation
is a dense relation, whereas the relation of direct,
quantized causation is not. That is to say, for any
states of affairs X and Y, if X stands in the relation
of non-discrete causation to Y, then there must be
some state of affairs, Z, such that X stands in that
relation to Z, and similarly for Z and Y. Similarly,
it might also seem to be a necessary truth that non­
discrete causation is transitive, while direct, quant­
ized causation is not.
The idea that different causal relations are to be
individuated by reference to their differing formal
properties may seem plausible. Some care is
needed, however, on this matter. Consider, first,
the question of transitivity. Is it really the case that
non-discrete causation is transitive? Initially, an
affirmative answer may seem obviously correct.
But there is a somewhat subtle objection that can
be directed against the proposition that non­
discrete causation is transitive - an objection that
is perhaps best developed by considering an analo­
gous case. Suppose that the correct account oflaws
is in terms of relations among universals, and that,
in particular, there is some second-order relation N
such that if N holds between properties P and Q
then it is a law that anything with property P has
property Q Suppose, further, that N holds
between P and Q and between Q and R. Then it
will be a law that everything with property P has
property Q and also that everything with property
Q has property R. But if so, it must also be a law
that everything with property P has property R.
Does this mean that properties P and R must also
stand in relation N? It is not easy to see any reason
why this need be so. The conjunctive state of affairs
consisting of P and Qs standing in relation N,
together with Q and R's standing in relation N,
would seem perfectly sufficient to make it a law
that anything with property P has property R.
This view may very well be correct in the case of
laws. But if so, should not one adopt the same view
in the case of the relation of non-discrete causation?
That is to say, assume that that relation holds
between events P and Q and also between Q and
R. Is not that conjunctive fact sufficient to make it
true to say that P caused R, without one's having to
postulate that events P and R are themselves united
by the relevant causal relation?
This objection, though initially plausible, cannot
be sustained. For, first of all, notice that one cannot
maintain that whenever P causes R via some other \nMichael Tooley
event Q, the relevant causal relation cannot hold
between P and R. For that would entail that in a
continuous causal process there would be no events
that were causally related. There must, accord­
ingly, be cases of three events - P, Q, and R -
where there is a causal relation that holds between
P and Q, between Q and R, and also between P
and R.
Second, in such a case, how is one to think of the
three instances of the causal relation? As three
states of affairs that are unrelated except as invol­
ving the same individuals, and the same causal
relation? This is not, I suggest, plausible, for it
fails to capture the fact that the third state of affairs
is logically supervenient upon the other two. A
much more natural view, and one that does capture
that supervenience, is to view the third state of
affairs as containing the other two states of affairs
as parts.
An analogy may be helpful. Consider the rela­
tion between two points when there is some path­
way connecting them, and suppose that points A
and C are connected because, and only because, A
is connected to B, and B to C. Then the path from
A to C can be broken down into two parts, one of
which is the path from A to B, and the other the
path from B to C. In similar fashion, I am suggest­
ing that when P causes R because, and only
because, P causes Q, and Q causes R, the right
way to think of the situation is to view the causal
connection between P and R as decomposable into
two parts - the causal connection of P to Q, and
that of Q to R.
But if, in a given case, the relation of non-dis­
crete causation is thus decomposable into parts,
then it would seem that composition of appropri­
ately related parts should also result in an instance
of the relation in question. That is to say, if the
relation of non-discrete causation holds between P
and Q, and between Q and R, then it must also hold
between P and R, since the latter state of affairs
need be nothing over and above the combination of
the other two states of affairs. Non-discrete causa­
tion, considered as a real relation, as a genuine
universal, must therefore be transitive.
The relation of direct causation, on the other
hand, obviously need not be transitive. But is it
also true that it cannot be transitive? The problem
with the latter claim is that there does not seem to
be any reason why P's being a direct cause of Q,
together with Q's being a direct cause of R, should
be incompatible with P's also being a direct cause
of R. For why might not one event cause another
event both directly and indirectly? But if this can
sometimes be the case, then it would seem that
there must be possible worlds in which it is always
the case, and in which, therefore, direct causation is
transitive. So transitivity will not always serve to
distinguish between non-discrete causation and
direct causation.
But while transitivity itself will not do, the idea
of there being, so to speak, different causal path­
ways connecting two states of affairs suggests that a
slightly different property will serve to distinguish
between direct causation and non-discrete causa­
tion. Consider some state of affairs in virtue of
which event X stands in the relation of non-dis­
crete causation to event Y, and where the state of
affairs has no proper part that has that property,
and similarly, a minimal state of affairs in virtue of
which event Y stands in the relation of non-dis­
crete causation to event Z. Then the combination
of those two states of affairs necessarily makes it the
case that event X stands in the relation of non­
discrete causation to event Z. The relation of
non-discrete causation has what I shall refer to as
the property of being intrinsically transitive. Direct
causation, by contrast, lacks this property: the
combination of a minimal state of affairs in virtue
of which X directly causes Y with one in virtue of
which Y directly causes Z is never in itself a state
of affairs in virtue of which X directly causes
Z. Direct causation can never be intrinsically
transitive.
What about the other property mentioned above
- namely, that of being a dense relation? Will it
serve to distinguish between the two causal rela­
tions? That non-discrete causation is necessarily
dense seems unproblematic. But what about direct,
quantized causation? Does it necessarily lack that
property?
The situation appears to be the same as with
transitivity. That is to say, it would seem that
while direct causation need not be a dense relation,
one can describe possible worlds in which it would,
as a matter of fact, have that property. But here,
too, one can shift to a slightly different notion -
that of being intrinsical~y dense - where to say that a
relation R is intrinsically dense is to say that any
state of affairs, S, in virtue of which X stands in
relation R to Y, can always be divided into proper
parts, S1 and S2, such that, for some Z, X stands in
relation R to Z, and Z in relation R to Y, in virtue
of S1 and S2, respectively. One can then say that
non-discrete causation is an intrinsically dense
relation, whereas direct causation is not. \nIt seems plausible, then, that different causal
relations can be distinguished by reference to
their different formal properties. But can a consid­
eration of formal properties also playa role in the
construction of the general account of what it is to
be a causal relation? If this is to be so, there will
presumably have to be formal properties that are
common to all causal relations.
That there are certain formal properties that
any causal relation must necessarily possess is, I
think, both a rather natural view, and one quite
widely accepted in philosophical discussions of
causation. In particular, I think that it is tempting
to hold that all causal relations must have the
following three formal properties. First, causal
relations are irreflexive: no state of affairs can
ever be the cause of itself. Second, causal relations
are asymmetric: if A causes B, then it cannot be the
case that B causes A. Third, causal loops are im­
possible. There cannot, for example, be three
events, A, B, and C such that A causes B, B causes
C, and C causes A.
But this view can certainly be challenged. One
way of doing so is by arguing that time-travel into
the past is logically possible, and that if it is, then
local causal loops must also be logically possible.
For if Mary can travel back into the past, what
prevents her from, say, marrying her maternal
grandfather, and then later giving birth to her
own mother? 17 Alternatively, one can argue that
global causal loops are possible - that is to say, that
there could be a world where the total state of the
universe at one time - call it A - would causally
give rise to a sequence of total states which, though
all qualitatively distinct for perhaps a very long
time indeed, would lead, in the end, to a state that
was not only qualitatively indistinguishable from
A, but identical to it. 18
On the other hand, a number of philosophers,
such as Antony Flew, Max Black, David Pears,
Richard Swinburne, Hugh Mellor and others,
have tried to show either that the idea of backwards
causation is not coherent - thus ruling out the
possibility of local causal loops - or, alternatively,
that no causal loops at all are possible, be they local
or global. 19 Some of the arguments appear either to
be question-begging or to depend upon the
assumption that a tensed view of time is correct,
but others are both neutral on the question of the
nature of time and more promising. Nevertheless,
I think it is very doubtful whether any of the
arguments succeeds in establishing the desired
conclusion.
The Nature of Causation
I cannot defend that judgement here, but let me
illustrate it by reference to one of the more inter­
esting arguments - that advanced by Hugh Mellor.
The thrust of Mellor's argument is that the impos­
sibility of backwards causation can be established
by appealing to the proposition that a cause must
raise the probability of its effect. An initial objec­
tion to this argument is that there are counter­
examples to the general thesis that causes raise
the probabilities of their effects. 2o This first objec­
tion, however, can be gotten around, since it is
possible to set out postulates for causal laws that
will enable one to derive modified versions of the
claim that causes are positively relevant to their
effects - versions which will not be exposed to
any straightforward counterexamples, and which
will still provide the basis for a proof that causal
loops are impossible. 21 But now another objection
can be pressed, for it can be argued that, if causal
loops are possible, then one of the crucial postu­
lates that is needed to establish the probability
claim is not acceptable. 22 So the issue then becomes
whether it is possible to offer grounds for accepting
that postulate which will not beg the question of
the possibility of causal loops.
I shall not pursue this issue here. For while I
think that the question of the possibility of causal
loops is a fundamental one, it does not seem crucial
with respect to the theory of causation that I am
setting out here. For my general approach can, I
believe, be tailored to either view.
What I shall do, accordingly, is to adopt the
position that seems to me most plausible - namely,
the view that causal loops are not possible - and set
out the account that is appropriate, given that
assumption. I shall then indicate how the account
would need to be modified, if it turned out that that
assumption was incorrect.
The problem o/completing the theory In what follows
it will be assumed, then, that all causal relations are
irreflexive, asymmetric, and such as cannot enter
into causal loops. These formal properties do not
suffice, of course, to distinguish causal relations
from a number of other relations. Consider, for
example, the relation of temporal priority. If causal
relations have the above formal properties, then I
think it is plausible to hold that temporal priority
does so as well. Or consider the inverse of any
causal relation - such as the relation of being
caused by. Since the inverse of any relation poss­
essing the above properties must also possess those
properties, the relation of being caused by must \nMichael Tooley
also be irreflexive, asymmetric, and such as cannot
enter into loops.
What, then, can we add to the theory of causa­
tion so that it is satisfied by causal relations, but not
by their inverses, or by any other relation? This is
not an easy question, but one way of approaching it
is by asking what account is to be given of the
direction of causation, since, in distinguishing
between causal relations and their inverses, the
theory must necessarily incorporate some explana­
tion of the direction of causation.
Elsewhere, I have surveyed the main accounts
that have been offered of the direction of causation,
and I have argued that none of them is tenable. 23
But there is another account that can be offered -
an account to which I shall be turning shortly -
which is, I believe, satisfactory. For in addition to
escaping the objections to which other accounts fall
prey, it rests upon an underlying idea which has a
strong intuitive basis, it can generate the desired
formal properties for causal relations and causal
laws, and it provides the basis for a satisfactory
account of the epistemological justification of our
causal claims.
In Causation, I was only able to show how the
alternative approach to the direction of causation
could be carried through for the supervenience and
intermediate views, for none of the avenues that I
explored in an attempt to develop a singularist
account proved successful. The problem was, how­
ever, that I was implicitly assuming that if causal
relations do not presuppose causal laws, then an
analysis of what it is to be a causal relation should
not involve the concept of a law. But while this is a
rather natural assumption, it is in fact false, and
once it is set aside, there is no longer any barrier to
developing a singularist account.
Causal relations and causal laws: exploiting the con­
ceptuallink The objective is to find a set of analy­
tical truths involving the concept of causation that,
taken together, will constitute a theory which
implicitly defines what it is to be a causal relation.
Some analytical truths are already at hand -
namely, those concerning the formal properties of
causation. But as they are obviously not sufficient,
the problem is how to supplement them.
As I indicated earlier, the solution that I am
proposing is as follows. First, if a singularist
account of causation is correct, then there is a
connection between the concept of a causal law
and that of causal relations. For on a singularist
view, causal laws are nothing more than laws that
involve causal relations. As a consequence, given a
singularist view, one can characterize causal rela­
tions as those relations whose presence in a law
makes that law a causal one.
Such a characterization will not, of course, shed
any light upon causal relations if one cannot say
anything about causal laws beyond the fact that
they are laws involving causal relations. My second
point, however, is that that is not the case. For one
can specify an independent constraint T, such that
something is a causal law if and only if it satisfies T.
If the latter point can be sustained, then it will be
possible to set out an analysis of the concept of
causation. For causal relations will simply be
those relations that have certain formal properties,
and which are such that any laws involving them
must satisfy condition T.
Causal laws: the underlying intuition The problem
of setting out a singularist analysis of causation
reduces, therefore, to that of finding an appropriate
constraint upon causal laws. But if that is right,
then the prospects for a singularist account of
causation would seem promising. For once one is
dealing with causal laws, it would appear to be
a straightforward matter to modify the basic
account that I have offered elsewhere in the case
of supervenience and intermediate approaches to
causation.
What is it that makes something a causal law?
Reflection upon certain simplified situations sug­
gests, I believe, a very plausible answer. Imagine,
for example, the following possible world. It con­
tains two radioactive elements, P and Q, that, in
every sort of situation but one, exhibit half-lives of
five minutes and ten minutes respectively. How­
ever, in one special sort of environment - charac­
terized by some property R - an atom of type P
undergoes radioactive decay when and on(y when
one of type Q also decays. Now, given such facts,
a natural hypothesis would be that the events in
question are causally connected. Either (I) the
decay of an atom of type P is, in the presence of
property R, both causally sufficient and causally
necessary for the decay of an atom of type Q, or (2)
the decay of an atom of type Q, in the presence of
property R, is both causally sufficient and causally
necessary for the decay of an atom of type P, or (3)
there is some property S which is, given property
R, causally sufficient and causally necessary both
for the decay of an atom of type P and for the decay
of one of type Q. But which of these causal con­
nections obtains? Given only the above informa-\ntion, there is no reason for preferring one causal
hypothesis to the others. But suppose that the
following is also the case: in the presence of prop­
erty R, both clement P and element Qhave a half­
life of five minutes. Then surely one has good
grounds for thinking that, given the presence of
property R, it is the decay of an atom of type P that
is both causally sufficient and causally necessary for
the decay of an atom of type Q, rather than vice
versa, and rather than there being some other
property that is involved. Conversely, if it turned
out that, in the special situation, each element had a
half-life of ten minutes, one would have good
grounds for thinking instead that it was the decay
of an atom of type Q that, given the presence of
property R, was both causally sufficient and cau­
sally necessary for the decay of an atom of type P.
In the former case, the observed facts suggest
that atoms of type P have the same probability of
decaying in a given time period in the special
situation that they have in all other situations,
while atoms of type Q do not. On the contrary,
atoms of type Q appear to have, in the special
situation, precisely the same probability of decay
as atoms of type P. So the probability of decay has,
so to speak, been transferred from atoms of type P
to atoms of type Q It is this, I suggest, that makes it
natural to say, in that case, that it is the decay of
atoms of type P that is, in the presence of property
R, both causally sufficient and causally necessary
for the decay of atoms of type Q The direction of
causation coincides, therefore, with the direction of
transmission of probabilities.
The basic idea, accordingly, is to characterize
causal laws in terms of the transmission of prob­
abilities. Talk about the 'transmission of probabil­
ities' is, of course, a metaphor, and one needs to
show that that metaphor can be cashed out in
precise terms. I shall turn to that task in the next
section.
B. The theory
A brief recap may be helpful at this point, so that
the overall structure of my approach is clear. If a
singularist account of causation is to succeed, cau­
sation must be treated as a theoretical relation
between events. We need, accordingly, a theory of
causation. That theory, moreover, must consist of
analytically true statements, if it is to provide the
basis for an analysis of the concept of causation.
The basic theory which I shall be proposing - at
least in its initial formulation - will involve two
The Nature of Causation
sorts of elements: first, statements concerning the
formal properties of causal relations; second, state­
ments that place constraints upon causal laws, by
connecting causal laws with probabilities. Causal
relations can then be defined as those relations that
satisfy the theory question.
Causal laws: capturing the intuition How can we
express, in a precise way, the intuitive idea pres­
ented in the previous section concerning the rela­
tion between causal laws and relevant probabilities?
The answer is provided, I believe, by the postulates
described below. 24
In setting out those postulates, I think it will be
best to proceed in two steps. First, I shall formulate
a set of postulates that captures, in a simple and
natural way, the fundamental intuition concerning
causal laws. Second, I shall show how those postul­
ates can be modified slightly to produce postulates
that are equally natural, but more powerful.
The first set of postulates would appear to be
adequate for our purposes. For when combined
with appropriate statements concerning the formal
properties of causal relations, the result is a theory
that can be used to explain what it is to be a causal
relation. But the second set of postulates provides,
I believe, an account that is in a certain respect
more satisfying, since it allows one to dispense
with any explicit reference to the formal properties
that are shared by all causal relations.
In order to set out the postulates in a more
perspicuous fashion, it will be helpful to use a little
notation. First, we need a way of representing the
fact that two states of affairs (or events) are causally
related. I shall use the term 'C' as the relevant
predicate, and, to represent a state of affairs, I
shall place square brackets around a sentence
describing that state of affairs. 25 So, for example,
the sentence 'C[Pa][Qb], will say that the state of
affairs (or event) that consists of a's having prop­
erty P causes the state of affairs (or event) that
consists of b's having property Q
Next, we need to have a perspicuous way of
representing causal laws. Now on a singularist
approach to causation, in contrast to a superven­
ience one, statements expressing causal laws involve
reference to some causal relation, so that a typical
statement of a causal law might be: 'It is a law that if
anything, x, has property P, then x's having P
causes it to be the case that there is some other
thing, y, such thaty stands in relation R to x, andy
has the intrinsic property I. ' If we use standard
logical notation, plus '0' as an abbreviation for \nMichael Tooley
'it is a law that', together with the notation just
introduced for the representation of causal rela­
tions between states of affairs, the preceding state­
ment could be expressed as:
o (x)(Px: J C[Px][3y)(y # x & Ryx & Iy)]).
But this is still very cumbersome. One way of
improving things is to introduce predicates that
attribute relational properties to individuals.
Thus, if one defines 'Qx' as equivalent to
(3y)(y # x & Ryx & Iy),
the above statement can be rewritten as:
o (x)(Px: J C[Px][Qx]).
Even with this simplification, however, the pos­
tulates needed for causal laws will still be rather
messy. But further simplification is obviously pos­
sible, since all that the relevant expression really
needs to do is to indicate that we are dealing with a
statement of a causal law, and to refer to the intrin­
sic property P, and to the relational property Q I
shall, accordingly, employ the expression 'P -> Q'
as an abbreviation of the above statement. This will
enable me to set out the postulates for causal laws
in a considerably more perspicuous fashion.
Not all causal laws need have the same fine­
grained logical structure as that of the above.
There can, for example, be causal laws where the
state of affairs that is the cause involves a number of
individuals, having various intrinsic properties,
and standing in various relations to one another.
But statements of such laws can easily be viewed as
having the same basic logical form as the above. For
the individuals over which the variable, 'x', ranges
need not, of course, be simple entities. They may,
instead, be complex individuals, consisting of a
large number of simpler individuals.
Another possibility is that of causal laws of the
following form:
D(x)(Px: J C[Px] (3y) (y # x & Iy)]).
Here, in contrast to the type of causal law consid­
ered above, there is no specification of how x and y
are related. But this does not make any difference
with respect to the basic logical form of the state­
ment, since by defining 'Qx' as equivalent to
(3y)(y # x & Iy),
the above statement can be seen to have the form:
D(x)(Px: J C[Px][Qx]).
A final possibility worth mentioning is that of
causal laws of the following form:
D(x)(Px: J C[Px][Ix]).
Here, in contrast to the previous cases, the same
individual is involved in the effect as in the cause:
an individual's having property P causes it to have
property I. But this, too, does not affect the basic
logical form. For in the first place, one could sim­
ply allow property Q to be either a relational prop­
erty or an intrinsic one. Alternatively - and this is
the approach that I favour - one can argue that,
properly viewed, laws of the present sort also
involve relational properties. For, although I can­
not defend these claims here, I believe that it can be
shown, first, that a cause can never be simultaneous
with its effect, and second, that enduring indivi­
duals are reducible to causally related, momentary
individuals. If these two claims can be sustained,
then causal relations between states of affairs invol­
ving a single enduring individual are, at bottom,
causal relations between states of affairs that
involve different temporal parts of that individual.
A third thing that is needed is a way of referring
to relations of logical probability. I shall use the
expression 'Prob(Px, E) = k' to do that. It is to be
interpreted as saying that the logical probability
that x has property P, given only evidence E, is
equal to k.
Finally, we need to refer to information of a
certain restricted sort - specifically, information
that is either tautological, or that concerns only
what causal laws there are. I shall use the term 'L'
for that purpose.
Given the above notation, one natural formula­
tion of the desired postulates for causal laws is this:
(C1): Prob(Px, P -> Q & L) = Prob(Px, L)
(C2): Prob(Qx, P -> Q & L)
= Prob(Px, L) + Prob(~ Px, L)
x Prob(Qx, ~ Px & P -> Q & L)
(C3 ): Prob(Qx, ~ Px & P -> Q & L)
= Prob(Qx, ~ Px & L)
(C4): Prob(Qx, P -> Q & L)
= Prob(Px, L) + Prob(~ Px, L)
x Prob(Qx, ~ Px & L) \nThese postulates are essentially somewhat sim­
plified versions of ones that I set out elsewhere in
developing a supervenience account of causation.
There I discussed, in a fairly detailed way, the line
of thinking that leads to the specific postulates in
question. 26 So perhaps it will suffice here simply to
note the central considerations.
Postulate (C1) states that if the prior probability
that some individual will have property P, given
only information that is restricted to logical truths
and statements of causal laws, has a certain value,
then the posterior probability of that individual's
having property P, given the additional informa­
tion that the possession of property P causally gives
rise to the possession of property Q, must have
precisely the same value. Postulate (C1) therefore
asserts, in effect, that the posterior probability of a
state of affairs of a given type is, in the situation
described, not a function of the prior probability of
any state of affairs of a type to which states of affairs
of the first type causally give rise.
Postulates (C2), (C3), and (C4) deal with the
posterior probability of a state of affairs, given
information to the effect that it is a state of affairs
of a type that is causally brought about by states of
affairs of some other type, together with prior
information that is restricted in the way indicated
above. The first of these three postulates asserts
that, given the additional information that the pos­
session of property P causally gives rise to the
possession of property Q, the posterior probability
that some individual has property Q is, in the way
indicated, a function of the prior probability that
that individual has property P.
Postulate (C2) does not, however, express that
dependence in the clearest way, since it involves,
on the right-hand side, a probability that is also
conditional upon the information that the posses­
sion of property P gives rise to the possession of
property Q It is for this reason that postulate (C3)
is part of the theory, for it makes it possible to
derive a statement in which the relevant posterior
probability is expressed in terms of prior probabil­
ities alone.
Postulate (C3 ) asserts that if the prior probabil­
ity that some individual will have property Q, given
only information that is either tautologous or else
restricted to statements of causal laws, has a certain
value, then the posterior probability of that indivi­
dual's having property Q - given the additional
information both that the possession of property
P causally gives rise to the possession of property
Q, and that the individual does not have property P
The Nature of Causation
- must have precisely the same value as the prior
probability. (C3), together with (C2 ), then entails
(C4), which does express the posterior probability
that an individual will have property Q in a way
that involves only prior probabilities.
The crucial content of the above theory of causal
laws is expressed, accordingly, by postulates (C 1)
and (C4 ). For (C 1) expresses the fact that the
logical probability that a given state of affairs will
obtain, given information about the types of states
of affairs that are caused by states of affairs of that
type, does not differ from the prior probability,
upon evidence of a certain restricted sort, that the
state of affairs in question will obtain. Its posterior
logical probability cannot, therefore, be a function
of the prior logical probabilities of states to which it
causally gives rise. But by contrast, as is indicated
by postulate (C4), the posterior logical probability
of a given state of affairs is a function of the prior
logical probability of any state of affairs of such a
type that states of affairs of that type causally give
rise to states of affairs of the first type. The relation
between posterior probabilities and prior probabil­
ities is, in short, different for causes than for
effects.
The above theory of causal laws could be for­
mulated more economically. For not only does
(C4 ) follow from (C2) and (C3), as was noted
above, but, in addition, (C2) is not an independent
postulate either, since it follows from (C1) by
means of the probability calculus. One could,
therefore, cut back to postulates (Cl) and (C3 ) if
one wanted a more succinct formulation. However,
it seems to me that, in the present context, explicit
expression of the basic ideas is more important than
economy.
I have attempted to motivate postulates (Cd
through (C4) by appealing to the idea that there
is a connection between the direction of causation
and what I have referred to as the direction of
transmission of probabilities. But as I mentioned
earlier, the case for those postulates does not rest
upon that intuition alone, for there are at least three
other grounds of support. First, reductionist
accounts of the direction of causation are open to
decisive objections - objections that an account
based on postulates (Cd through (C4) totally
avoids. Second, those postulates - or, rather, the
strengthened versions of them that I shall be set­
ting out shortly - generate the desired formal prop­
erties for causal relations. Third, the above
postulates also serve to explain how justified beliefs
concerning causal relations are possible. \nMichael Tooley
It will not be possible here to discuss these con­
siderations in a detailed way. I shall, however, touch
upon the second and third points in later sections. 27
I mentioned earlier that, although the postulates
just set out appear to provide a perfectly sound
basis for an account of causal relations, a strength­
ening of those postulates makes possible an analysis
that is in a certain respect more satisfying. In addi­
tion, the strengthened postulates will help to make
it clearer precisely how the theory that I am setting
out would need to be modified if one decided that,
contrary to what I am assuming, causal relations
need not be asymmetrical. So let me indicate, very
briefly, how the postulates can be strengthened.
The basic idea is simply this. Postulates (C1)
through (C4 ) all refer to laws expressed by state­
ments of the following form:
o (x)(Px =: J C[Px][Qx]).
Suppose, however, that one considers, instead,
laws expressed by statements ofthe following form:
It seems clear that postulates that are comparable to
(C1) through (C4 ) should hold when references
to laws of the former sort are replaced by references
to laws of the latter sort. For after all, in a world
where causal processes exhibit continuity, the con­
nection between x's having property P and x's
having the relational property Q will involve cau­
sally intermediate states of affairs. But if the exist­
ence of causal intermediaries does not, in the case
of laws of the simpler sort, block the transmission
of probabilities, then it would seem that law-state­
ments of the slightly more complex sort, where
there is an explicit reference to a two-step causal
chain, should also enter into corresponding postul­
ates dealing with the relation between posterior
probabilities and prior probabilities.
Granted this, the next point is that there is, of
course, nothing special about two-step causal pro­
cesses. If the appeal to continuity in the case of the
simplest laws justifies the conclusion that there
must be corresponding postulates for law-state­
ments that involve explicit reference to a two-link
causal chain, then it must equally justify the cor­
responding conclusion for law-statements that
involve explicit reference to causal chains contain­
ing an indefinite number of links.
The natural way of representing laws of the
latter sort is by introducing a predicate - say, 'C*'
- associated with the ancestral of the causal relation
in question. The idea then is that there should be
postulates that are comparable to (Cd through (C4)
except that they concern laws expressed by state­
ments of the following form:
D(x)(Px =: J C*[Px][Qx]).
Here, as before, it will make the postulates more
perspicuous if we have an abbreviated way of
expressing the law-statements in question. I shall
use the expression 'P ->*Q' to do so. The required
postulates can then be formulated as follows:
(C~): Prob(Px, P ->*Q & L) = Prob(Px, L)
(C; ): Prob(Qx, P ->*Q & L)
= Prob(Px, L) + Prob( ~ Px, L)
x Prob(Qx, ~ Px & P ->*Q & L)
(C; ): Prob(Qx, ~ Px & P ->*Q & L)
= Prob(Qx, ~ Px & L)
(C~): Prob(Qx, P ->*Q & L)
= Prob(Px, L) + Prob(~ Px, L)
x Prob(Qx, ~ Px & L)
Though (Cj) through (C~) are stronger than (Cd
through (C4), it seems to me that the case for
accepting them, if one accepts (Cd through (C4),
is very strong indeed. For expressed very briefly, it
is simply this. If all causal relations must satisfy
(C1) through (C4), then the ancestral of a given
causal relation could fail to satisfy (Cd through
(C4) only if the ancestral was not itself a causal
relation. But if the ancestral of a given causal rela­
tion satisfies (Cd through (C4), then (Cj) through
(C~) must be true of the relation in question.
Therefore, if all causal relations must satisfy (Cd
through (C4), the only way that any of them can fail
to satisfy (Cj) through (C~) as well is if there are
causal relations whose ancestrals are not causal
relations.
An analysis or the concept of causation It is now a
straightforward matter to set out an analysis of the
concept of causation. For by combining statements
concerning the formal properties of causal relations
with, for example, the first set of postulates for
causal laws set out above, one has a theory of
causation that consists entirely of analytically true
statements, and, given such a theory, one need
merely appeal to whatever one takes to be the
correct method of defining theoretical terms in \norder to generate an analytical account of what it is
to be a causal relation.
The method of analysing theoretical terms that
seems to me correct is that suggested by F. P.
Ramsey's approach to theories, and later developed
in detail by David Lewis. 28 Let me briefly indicate,
therefore, how things proceed if one adopts a Ram­
sey/Lewis approach. 29
The basic idea is to define causal relations as
those relations that satisfy a certain open sentence.
We need, therefore, to transform the above theory
of causation into a single sentence, containing
occurrences of an appropriate variable. Doing so
involves three steps. First, the individual sentences
of the theory are all conjoined, so that one has a
single sentence. Second, wherever the theory
involves an expression of the form 'Cst' - which
says that a certain causal relation holds between
state of affairs s and state of affairs t - one replaces
the expression by an onto logically more explicit
one that contains some term - say, 'c' - that denotes
the causal relation in question. The new expression
will thus say that the causal relation in question
obtains between sand t. This shift to terms that
refer to the causal relation then makes possible the
third and final step, which involves replacing all
the occurrences of' c' by occurrences of some vari­
able - say, 'v'. With that replacement, one has
arrived at the open formula that one needs, and
one can then define a causal relation as any relation
that satisfies that open formula.
The open formula depends, of course, on pre­
cisely what one incorporates into the theory of
causation. One possibility is to include statements
expressing all of the formal properties that are
common to all causal relations, together with the
first set of postulates for causal laws. In that case, if
we let Tbe the open sentence that results when the
above procedure is applied only to the relevant
postulates for causal laws - that is, to statements
(Cd through (C4) - we would have the following
account of what it is to be a causal relation:
A causal relation is any relation between states
of affairs which is irreflexive and asymmetric,
which excludes loops, and which satisfies the
open sentence, T.
But this account can obviously be simplified,
since if a relation cannot enter into loops, then it
must be asymmetric and irreflexive. So the above
analysis can be expressed more succinctly as
follows:
The Nature of Causation
A causal relation is any relation between states
of affairs which cannot enter into loops, and
which satisfies the open sentence, T.
Can the analysis be condensed even more? The
answer is that it can be, provided that one shifts to
the second, and stronger set of postulates, (Cj)
through (C: ). For, then, if T* is the open sentence
that results when the above procedure is applied to
postulates (Cj) through (C'; ), all reference to the
formal properties that are shared by all causal rela­
tions can be dropped, and the following analysis
can be offered:
A causal relation is any relation between states
of affairs which satisfies the open sentence, T*.
How does the shift to postulates (CD through (C'; )
make possible this simplified formulation? The
answer lies in an argument whose structure is as
follows. First, it can be argued that any genuine
relation is necesarily 'directly irreflexive'. Second,
assume that there is some causal relation that is not
asymmetric. Since any relation is directly irreflex­
ive, it follows that there is some causal relation that
is not anti-symmetric - where a relation R is anti­
symmetric just in case one cannot have both xRy
and yRx unless x is identical with y. But third, if
there is some causal relation that is not anti-sym­
metric, then it must be possible for there to be
causal laws that are not anti-symmetric. However,
it can be shown, fourth, that any laws that satisfy
postulates (Cj) through (C: ) must be anti-sym­
metric. So the assumption that there is some causal
relation that is not asymmetric leads to a contra­
diction, and hence must be rejected. Fifth, a pre­
cisely parallel argument can be used to show that no
causal relation can enter into loops. That is to say,
the assumption that some causal relation can enter
into loops leads to the conclusion that causal laws
can enter into loops - something which is also ruled
out by postulates (Cj) through (C: ). In short, it
follows from the above account of what it is to be a
causal relation that causal relations must be asym­
metric, and that they cannot enter into causal loops.
I shall not attempt to develop this argument in a
detailed way, but let me comment briefly on some
of the steps involved. The first one involves the
claim that any genuine relation is necessarily
directly irreflexive. What does this claim come to,
and what reason is there for accepting it? As
regards the content, I need to explain what is
meant by a genuine relation, and what it is for \nMichael Tooley
a relation to be directly irreflexive. First, then, the
concept of a genuine relation. This is tied up with a
distinction between concepts and universals -
where the latter, rather than being mind-depend­
ent entities, are features of the world which are the
basis of objective, qualitative identity. Given this
distinction, one can ask whether it need be the case
that, corresponding to any given concept, there is a
single universal. The answer, surely, is that this
need not be so: a given concept may be applicable
to something in virtue of any number of distinct
properties. But if this is so, then, in some of the
cases where one speaks of a relation, there will be a
relational concept, but no single universal corres­
ponding to that concept. When I refer to a genuine
relation, I am referring to something which is a
universal, and not to a relational concept.
Now it is sometimes claimed that all genuine
relations are necessarily irreflexive30 - a contention
that might be supported by an argument along the
following lines. Consider a relational concept that is
reflexive, such as that of simultaneity. If E and F
are distinct events, and if E is simultaneous with F,
then the latter state of affairs may well involve a
dyadic universal. By contrast, the state of affairs
that consists of E's being simultaneous with itself
surely does not involve the instantiation of any
dyadic universal: the mere existence of E itself is
sufficient to guarantee that it is simultaneous with
itself.
But this argument, tempting though it is, is
flawed, as can be shown by a simple example.
Consider the relation - call it spatial accessibility
- that obtains between two locations, A and B,
when there is a path along which one can move
from A to B. Now every location, of course, is
trivially accessible from itself, in virtue of the path
of zero length consisting of the location in question.
But a location may also be spatially accessible from
itself in virtue of a path leading to some other point,
together with a path - possibly the same one, pos­
sibly a different one - leading back to the original
point. So a point may be accessible from itself in a
way that is not trivial, and which might well involve
the instantiation of a dyadic universal.
In general, the objection to the thesis that all
genuine relations are necessarily irreflexive is that
it would seem that there could well be genuine
relations that are transitive but not asymmetric,
and in such cases something could well stand in a
genuine relation to itself.
But while this refutes the original thesis, it also
points towards a revision that avoids the objection.
What one needs to do is to draw a distinction
between a relation's being irreflexive and its being
directly irreflexive, where to say that a relation R is
directly irreflexive is to say that it can be the case
that xRx only if xRx holds in virtue of the fact that
R is transitive, together with the fact that there is
somey such that both xRy andyRx. It can then be
claimed - plausibly, I believe - that genuine rela­
tions are, necessarily, directly irreflexive.
The second step in the argument involves
assuming that there can be a causal relation that is
not necessarily asymmetric - the intention being to
show that that assumption leads to a contradiction.
Given this assumption, it immediately follows, in
view of the thesis that all genuine relations are
directly irreflexive, that there can be a causal rela­
tion that is not necessarily anti-symmetric. For if
state of affairs S causes state of affairs U, and vice
versa, it will follow, unless S is identical with U,
that the relation is not anti-symmetric. But if S is
identical with U, then in virtue of the property of
direct irreflexivity, there must be a state of affairs T
that is distinct from S, such that S causes Tand T
causes S. So regardless of whether S is identical
with U or not, the causal relation in question will
be anti-symmetric.
To assume that some causal relation is not neces­
sarily asymmetric forces one to assume, therefore,
that there can be distinct properties, P and Q, and
an individual, a, such that the state of affairs EPa]
causes the state of affairs [Qa], and vice versa. But
if there can be such a world, then it would seem
that there could be a world where, first, there were
a large number of things with property P, and
second, every state of affairs of the form [Px]
caused a state of affairs [Qx], and vice versa.
If one is a realist about laws, of course, the truth
of a generalization, even one involving a very large
number of instances, does not ensure the existence
of a corresponding law. However, if laws are rela­
tions among universals, then it would seem that if
there can be worlds where certain generalizations
are all true, and where none of the generalizations
involve essential reference to individuals, or 'grue­
some' predicates, etc. , then there can also be worlds
where the same generalizations are not only true,
but true in virtue of underlying relations among
universals, and so express laws.
If this is right, then the possibility of a world
where there are a large number of things with
property P, and where every state of affairs of the
form [Px] causes [Qx], and vice versa, entails the
possibility of a world where it is a causal law that, \nfor all x, x's having property P causes x to have
property Q, and also a causal law that for all x, x's
having property Q causes x to have property P.
What has been shown, therefore, is that the
assumption that there can be a causal relation that
is not asymmetric leads to the conclusion that
causal laws need not be characterized by anti­
symmetry.
But - and this brings me to the fourth step in the
argument - the above theory of causation asserts that
all causal laws must satisfy postulates (Cn through
(C: ). The question then becomes whether those
postulates are compatible with anti-symmetry's not
holding for laws. The answer is that they are not.
For I have shown elsewhere, for a set of postulates
that are weaker than postulates (C~) through (C: )
in all respects that are relevant to the proof, that
any laws satisfying the postulates in question must
be anti-symmetric. 31
The assumption that some causal relation might
not be asymmetric leads, therefore, to a contradic­
tion. Any causal relation that satisfies postulates
(Cn through (C~) must be asymmetric.
A parallel argument can be offered with respect
to the possibility of causal loops. That is to say, if
one assumes that there is some causal relation that
can enter into causal loops, one can argue that it
follows that it must be possible for there to be a
world where there are causal laws that exhibit a
loop structure. It can be shown, however, that
postulates (Cj) through (C: ) entail that such
loops, involving causal laws, are impossible. 32 It
therefore follows that no causal relation which
satisfies postulates (Cj) through (C4) can enter
into causal loops.
Finally, the fact that causal loops are impossible,
together with the fact that all genuine relations are
directly irreflexive, entails that all causal relations
are irreflexive.
The conclusion, accordingly, is that if causal
relations are defined as above, namely,
A causal relation is any relation between states
of affairs which satisfies the open sentence, T*,
then, although all explicit references to the formal
properties of causal relations have been eliminated
from the analysis, it can be shown that causal rela­
tions must possess certain formal properties: they
must be irreflexive and asymmetric, and they can­
not enter into causal loops.
In short, the formal properties shared by all
causal relations follow from the analytical con-
The Nature of Causation
straints upon causal laws, together with the fact
that what distinguishes causal laws from non-causal
laws is that the former involve causal relations. This
is, I think, an appealing result. For if there could be
other relations which satisfied the postulates for
causal laws, but whose formal properties differed
from those that are common to causal relations, one
would be left with the somewhat puzzling question
of what those other relations were.
Earlier, in the first part of section 3, A, I con­
sidered the question of whether all causal relations
are reducible to a single, basic, causal relation, and I
argued that one must allow for the possibility of at
least two distinct, basic causal relations - namely,
the relation of direct, quantized causation and that
of non-discrete causation. I then went on to discuss
what properties serve to distinguish those two rela­
tions, and settled, in the end, upon the properties
of intrinsic transitivity and intrinsic denseness. If
those conclusions are sound, one can offer the
following accounts of those specific, basic causal
relations:
C is the relation of non-discrete causation if and
only if C is a causal relation that is intrinsically
dense and intrinsically transitive.
D is the relation of direct, quantized causation if
and only if D is a causal relation that is neither
intrinsically dense nor intrinsically transitive.
Finally, the above analyses have all been predicated
on the assumption that causal relations are neces­
sarily irreflexive and asymmetric, and such as can­
not enter into loops. How would the above
approach need to be reformulated if it turned out,
as some have contended, that that assumption is
mistaken?
Given that any relation that satisfies the open
sentence, T*, corresponding to postulates (Cj)
through (C4), must, for example, be irreflexive,
those postulates would have to be abandoned.
The basic idea would then be to reformulate the
account in terms of the open sentence, T, that
corresponds to the weaker postulates, (Cj) through
(C4). That in itself will not be sufficient, however,
since, as I indicated earlier, if all causal relations
satisfy T, they must also satisfy T*, provided that
the ancestral of any causal relation is also a causal
relation. But this difficulty can be avoided if one
holds that only basic causal relations need satisfy T.
Given those two modifications, the proofs that
causal relations are irreflexive, asymmetric, and \nMichael Tooley
such as cannot enter into loops will no longer go
through. But on the other hand, the contrast
between postulates (C 1) and (C4) will still capture
the crucial idea of the direction of causation. The
general approach would therefore seem to be com­
patible with different views concerning the formal
properties of causal relations.
C. The epistemological question
A crucial question for any account of causation, and
especially for one that treats causation as a theore­
tical relation, is whether it is compatible with our
everyday views concerning the possibility of causal
knowledge, and concerning the sorts of evidence
that serve to confirm causal claims. The analysis
just offered fares very well, I believe, in those
respects. For, so far as I can see, any evidence
that we normally take to be relevant to causal claims
turns out to be relevant on the present account.
The grounds for this view are as follows. First, I
have argued elsewhere that in the case of both
intermediate and supervenience approaches to cau­
sation which are based upon the idea of relating
causation to the transmission of probabilities, all of
the things that we normally take to be evidence for
causal claims can be shown to be evidence given the
analyses in question. 33 Thus it can be shown, for
example, that such things as the direction of irre­
versible processes, both entropic and non-en tropic,
the direction of open forks, especially those of high
complexity, and the direction of apparent control,
all provide good evidence for claims about causal
relations.
Second, this situation is not altered when one
jettisons the intermediate and supervenience
accounts in favour of a singularist conception
based upon the same idea of the transmission of
probabilities. For it can be shown - though I
have not attempted to do so here - that even if
one adopts a singularist conception of causation,
one is never justified in believing that two events
are causally connected unless one is also justified in
believing that there is some causal law of which the
relation in question is an instance. 34
4 Summing Up
In this paper I have tried to show that there is
a singularist account of the nature of causation
that is not only coherent, but plausible. My
argument in support of this contention involved
the following steps. First, I argued that, other
things being equal, a singularist account is prefer­
able to both intermediate accounts and super­
venience accounts. For intermediate accounts
suffer from greater complexity, while super­
venience accounts are exposed to decisive counter­
examples.
Second, I argued that it is only if causation is
treated as a theoretical relation that there is any
hope of finding a successful singularist account.
For in the first place, the relation of causation
cannot be given in immediate experience. And in
the second place, a Humean-style argument, espe­
cially when supplemented with the idea of possible
worlds where causation is gappy, appears to make it
very unlikely that a reductionist analysis can be
given for causation if causal relations do not pre­
suppose causal laws. But in addition, there appear
to be very strong reasons for thinking that causa­
tion must be treated as a theoretical relation,
regardless of whether a singularist account is
correct.
I then went on to develop a theory which
enables one to provide an account of the nature
of causal relations. That theory involved two
central ideas. The first was that the fact that a
theory of causation involves the concept of a law
of nature does not mean that it cannot provide an
account of causal relations according to which
events can be causally related even in worlds
where there are no causal laws. The second was
that the correct account of causal laws is one
that captures, in a precise way, the idea of the
transmission of probabilities. For, among other
things, such an account both escapes the objections
to which competing accounts of causal laws are
exposed, and it has, in addition, a very plausible
intuitive basis.
The outcome was a characterization of causal
relations as those relations which satisfy the appro­
priate open sentence corresponding to the analyt­
ical theory of causation set out above. Given that
definition, it then follows that causal relations have
the formal properties they are normally taken to
have, that they are epistemologically accessible
relations between events, and that events can be
causally related even in worlds where there are no
causal laws. 35 \nNotes
Michael Tooley, 'Laws and causal relations', in P. A.
French, T. E. Uehling and H. K. Wettstein (eds),
Midwest studies in Philosophy, vol. 9 (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1984), pp. 93-112,
and idem, Causation - A Realist Approach (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1988), ch. 6.
2 Tooley, Causation, ch. 8.
3 Fred I. Dretske, 'Laws of nature', Philosophy of
Science 44 (1977), pp. 248-68; David M. Armstrong,
What L, a Law of Nature? (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1983), esp. chs 1-5; and my own
discussions in 'The nature of Laws', (Canadian Jour­
nal of Philosophy 7/4 (1977), pp. 667-98, and in
Causation, sect. 2. 1. 1.
4 For a more detailed discussion, see Tooley, Causation,
pp. 268-74.
The only restriction upon properties here is that they
must not involve particulars.
6 Tooley, 'Laws and causal relations', pp. 99-107.
7 Some axiomatic formulations of Newtonian space­
time involve the postulate of a generalized between­
ness relation that, rather than being restricted to
locations at a given time, can hold between space­
time points belonging to different temporal slices.
See, e. g. , Hartry Field's Science without Numbers
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1980), pp.
52-3. But the idea that such a spatio-temporal relation
can be basic is, I believe, very dubious.
8 G. E. M. Anscombe, 'Causality and determination',
in E. Sosa (ed. ), Causation and Conditionals (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1975), pp. 63-81, at
p. 81.
9 David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature, pt 2, sect.
14, and An Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding,
sect. 7.
10 Anscombe, 'Causality and determination', pp. 67-9.
11 c. ]. Ducasse, 'The nature and the observability ofthe
causal relation', Journal of Phllosophy 23 (1926), pp.
57-67, repro in Sosa (ed. ), Causation and Conditionals,
pp. 114-25; see p. 116.
12 Ibid. , p. 122. Ducasse thought he could get around
this difficulty, but as Ernest Sosa and others have
shown, Ducasse's response is unsatisfactory. See,
e. g. , Sosa's discussion in the introduction to Causation
and Conditionals, pp. 8-10.
13 Wesley Salmon, 'Theoretical explanation', in S. Kor­
ner (ed. ), Explanation (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1975), pp. 118-43, at pp. 128ff.
14 A more extended discussion can be found in Tooley,
Causation, pp. 235-6.
15 Ibid. , esp. pp. 247-50.
16 I am indebted to David Armstrong for pointing out
the possibility of quantized causal relations.
17 Compare David Lewis's 'The paradoxes of time tra­
vel', American Philosophical Quarterly 13 (1976), pp.
145-52.
The Nature of Causation
18 Adolf Grunbaum, 'Carnap's views on the foundations
of geometry', in Paul A. Schilpp (ed. ), The Philosophy
of RudolfCarnap (La Salle, Ill: Open Court, 1963), pp.
599-684; see pp. 614-15.
19 See, e. g. , Antony Flew, 'Can an effect precede its
cause? ', Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, suppl.
vol. 28 (1954), pp. 45-62; Max Black, 'Why cannot an
effect precede its cause? ', Analysis 16 (1955--6), pp.
49-58; David Pears, 'The priority of causes, ' Analysis
17 (1956-7), pp. 54-63; Richard Swinburne, Space
and Time (London: Macmillan, 1968), p. 109; D. H.
Mellor, Real Time (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1981), ch. 9.
20 See, e. g. , my discussion in Causation, pp. 234-5.
21 The relevant proofs are set out in ibid. , pp. 277-80
and 325-35.
22 The postulate in question is the second of the six
postulates set out in ibid. , p. 262.
23 Ibid. , ch. 7.
24 The intuitive idea set out in the previous section
applies to both probabilistic and non-probabilistic
causal laws. For my purposes here, however, it will
suffice to consider only the case of non-probabilistic
causal laws. The extension to the case of probabilistic
laws is straightforward, and is discussed in ibid. ,
pp. 291-6.
25 Compare the slightly different notation proposed by
Jaegwon Kim in his article 'Causes and events:
Mackie on causation, ' Journal of Philosophy 68
(1971), pp. 426-41, repro in Sosa (ed. ), Causation
and Conditionals, pp. 48-62: 'we shall use the notation
"[x, P, t]" to refer to the event of x's exemplifying
property P at time t' (p. 60).
26 Tooley, Causation, pp. 256-62.
27 The problems that confront reductionist accounts of
the direction of causation are discussed at length in
ibid. , esp. ch. 7 and the first section of ch. 8.
28 F. P. Ramsey, Theories', in R. B. Braithwaite (ed. ),
The Foundations of Mathematics (Paterson, NJ: Little­
field, Adams & Co. , 1960), pp. 212-36; David Lewis,
'How to define theoretical terms', Journal of Philoso­
phy 67 (1970), pp. 427-46.
29 For a fuller discussion of this method, see Tooley,
Causation, pp. 13-25.
30 See, e. g. , David Armstrong's Universals and Scientific
Realism, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1978), pp. 91-3.
31 For the proof, see Tooley, Causation, pp. 278-9.
32 For a proof of a stronger theorem, from comparable
postulates, see ibid. , pp. 328-35.
33 Ibid. , pp. 296-303.
34 This thesis needs to be qualified slightly, since it
assumes that there are no 'confirmation machines',
and if this were false, it would be possible to have
reason to believe that there were causally related
events that did not fall under any law. For the relevant \nMichael Tooley
argument, see Edward Erwin, 'The confirmation
machine', in Boston Studies in the Philosophy of
Science, vol. 8 (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1971), pp.
306--21.
35 I am indebted to David Armstrong, to Evan Fales, to
Ernest Sosa, and to two anonymous referees of the
Canadian Journal of Philosophy for detailed written
comments on an earlier draft, and to John Burgess,
Lloyd Humberstone, Peter Menzies, Robert Parget­
ter, Philip Pettit, Michael Smith, Neil Tennant and
Aubrey Townsend for their comments on earlier ver­
sions which I read at Monash University and at the
Australian National University. \n\n\nIntroduction
Causation perhaps is not the only "cement of the
universe. " There may well be other relations that
generate structure for events, facts, properties, and
things of this world. Consider, for example, the
part-whole ("mereological") relation: the proper­
ties of a whole seem entirely determined by the
properties and relations that characterize its parts
- in that if you build, say, two tables from parts that
are exactly identical and configure them in an
exactly identical structure, you would have two
tables that are indistinguishable - the same shape,
the same weight, the same functionality, and even
the same aesthetic qualities.
Modern science encourages a metaphysical pic­
ture of the world in which the basic building blocks
of all things are unobservable microscopic particles
(atoms, elementary particles, quarks, or whatever),
with everything else - tables and chairs, trees and
animals, the planets and stars - being wholly com­
posed of them. Given that a macro-object is
decomposable into micro-parts without remainder,
what is the relationship between its (the whole's)
properties and the properties and relations holding
for its parts? C. D. Broad, in his "Mechanism and
Emergentism" (chapter 37) discusses two major
alternatives: mechanism, according to which the
properties of a whole can be deduced or predicted
from the properties of its parts, and emergentism,
which affirms that some properties of a whole are
"emergent" in the sense that they cannot be so
deduced or predicted. According to Broad, there
are emergent properties in this sense, and this is a
position that has been, and still is, quite popular
with philosophers and with scientists in many
fields. It is a widely shared view that complex
systems often exhibit characteristics that are irre­
ducible to, and not deducible from, those of their
simpler constituent systems. What Broad calls
"mechanism" is now standardly called "reduction­
ism" or "micro-reductionism. "
Note
In "The nature of mental states, " in Philosophical
Papers, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1975; first pub. 1967).
Introduction
Although the main topic of Quine's "Ontologi­
cal Reduction and the World of Numbers" (chap­
ter 38) is the reduction in the abstract domain of
numbers and other mathematical objects, what he
has to say is directly relevant to broader metaphy­
sical issues of ontological reduction - that is, reduc­
tion of ontological domains.
Jerry Fodor's "Special Sciences" (chapter 39)
deploys the so-called 'multiple realizability' of
higher-level kinds and properties, first explicitly
discussed by Hilary Putnam, 1 as a powerful and
influential argument against their reducibility to
lower-level properties. The Putnam/Fodor argu­
ment has been primarily responsible for the decline
of various reductionisms in philosophy. In "Multi­
ple Realization and the Metaphysics of Reduc­
tion", (chapter 40) Jaegwon Kim subjects the
phenomenon of multiple realization to close scru­
tiny, and reaches conclusions at variance with those
of Putnam and Fodor - in particular, concerning
reductionism and the scientific/nomic status of
multiply realizable properties.
In "Physicalism: Ontology, and Determination,
and Reduction" (chapter 41), Geoffrey Hellman
and Frank Thompson attempt to develop a posi­
tion that is physicalist in its ontology, but which
makes sense of the priority and basicness of physics
without, however, embracing reductionism. They
develop their ideas by the use of formal model
theory, but these ideas turn out to be closely related
to the idea of "supervenience. " Many nonreduct­
ive physicalists look upon supervenience as a rela­
tion that enables a perspicuous formulation of
physicalism that is nonreductive: all the facts
supervene on the physical facts in the sense that
physical facts determine all the facts, but this does
not imply that all facts are reducible to physical
facts. Kim's "Supervenience as a Philosophical
Concept" (chapter 42) surveys the main results in
this area and discusses the controversial and com­
plicated relationship between supervenience and
reduction. \nPart VIII
Further reading
Bonevac, Daniel A. , Reduction in the Abstract Sciences
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1982).
Causey, Robert L. , Unity oj Science (Dordrecht: Reidel,
1977).
Churchland, Patricia, Neurophilosophy (Cambridge,
Mass. : MIT Press, 1986), ch. 7.
Dupre, John, The Disorder oJ Things (Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press, 1993).
Humphreys, Paul W. , "How properties emerge, " Philo­
sophy oJScience 64 (1997), pp. 1-17.
Kim, Jaegwon, "Concepts of supervenience, " in
Supervenience and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, 1993).
--"Making sense of emergence, " Philosophical Studies,
forthcoming.
McLaughlin, Brian, "The rise and fall of British emer­
gentism, " in Ansgar Beckermann, Hans Flohr, and
Jaegwon Kim (eds), Emergence or Reduction (Berlin:
De Gruyter, 1992).
--"Varieties of supervenience", in Savellos and Yal­
cin, Supervenience: New Essays.
Morgan, Lloyd c. , Emergent Evolution (London: William
& Norgate, 1923).
Nagel, Ernest, The Structure oj Science (New York: Har­
court, Brace & World, 1961), ch. II.
Oppenheim, Paul, and Putnam, Hilary "Unity of science
as a working hypothesis, " in H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and
G. Maxwell (eds), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy
oj Science, vol. 2 (Minneapolis: University of Minne­
sota Press, 1958), pp. 3-36.
Paull, Cranston, and Sider, Theodore, "In defense of
global supervenience, " Philosophy and Phenomenolo­
gical Research 32 (1992), pp. 830-45.
Post, John F. , The Faces oj Existence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1987).
Rosenberg, Alexander, Instrumental Biology, or the Disuni~y
oJ Science (Chicago: U ni versity of Chicago Press, 1994).
Savellos, Elias, and Yaicin, Umit (eds), Supervenience:
New Essays (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1995).
Stalnaker, Robert, "Varieties of supervenience, " Philo­
sophical Perspectives 10 (1996), pp. 221-41. \n37
c. D. Broad
I want to consider some of the characteristic differ­
ences which there seem to be among material
objects, and to enquire how far these differences
are ultimate and irreducible. On the face of it, the
world of material objects is divided pretty sharply
into those which are alive and those which are not.
And the latter seem to be of many different kinds,
such as oxygen, silver, etc. The question which is
of the greatest importance for our purpose is the
nature of living organisms, since the only minds
that we know of are bound up with them. But the
famous controversy between Mechanists and Vital­
ists about living organisms is merely a particular
case of the general question: Are the apparently
different kinds of material objects irreducibly dif­
ferent?
It is this general question which I want to discuss
at present. I do not expect to be able to give a
definite answer to it; and I am not certain that the
question can ever be settled conclusively. But we
can at least try to analyse the various alternatives, to
state them clearly, and to see the implications of
each. Once this has been done, it is at least possible
that people with an adequate knowledge of the
relevant facts may be able to answer the question
with a definite Yes or No; and, until it has been
done, all controversy on the subject is very much in
the air. I think one feels that the disputes between
Mechanists and Vitalists are unsatisfactory for two
reasons. (i) One is never quite sure what is meant
From The Mind and its Place in Nature, published by
Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1925.
by 'Mechanism' and by 'Vitalism'; and one sus­
pects that both names cover a multitude of theories
which the protagonists have never distinguished
and put clearly before themselves. And (ii) one
wonders whether the question ought not to have
been raised long before the level of life. Certainly
living beings behave in a very different way from
non-living ones; but it is also true that substances
which interact chemically behave in a very differ­
ent way from those which merely hit each other,
like two billiard-balls. The question: Is chemical
behaviour ultimately different from dynamical
behaviour? seems just as reasonable as the question:
Is vital behaviour ultimately different from non­
vital behaviour? And we are much more likely to
answer the latter question rightly if we see it in
relation to similar questions which might be raised
about other apparent differences of kind in the
material realm.
The Ideal of Pure Mechanism
Let us first ask ourselves what would be the ideal of
a mechanical view of the material realm. I think, in
the first place, that it would suppose that there is
only one fundamental kind of stuff out of which
every material object is made. Next, it would sup­
pose that this stuff has only one intrinsic quality,
over and above its purely spatio-temporal and cau­
sal characteristics. The property ascribed to it
might, e. g. , be inertial mass or electric charge.
Thirdly, it would suppose that there is only one \nc. D. Broad
fundamental kind of change, viz. , change in the
relative positions of the particles of this stuff.
Lastly, it would suppose that there is one funda­
mental law according to which one particle of this
stuff affects the changes of another particle. It
would suppose that this law connects particles by
pairs, and that the action of any two aggregates of
particles as wholes on each other is compounded in
a simple and uniform way from the actions which
the constituent particles taken by pairs would have
on each other. Thus the essence of Pure Mechan­
ism is (a) a single kind of stuff, all of whose parts are
exactly alike except for differences of position and
motion; (b) a single fundamental kind of change,
viz. , change of position. Imposed on this there may
of course be changes of a higher order, e. g. , changes
of velocity, of acceleration, and so on; (c) a single
elementary causal law, according to which particles
influence each other by pairs; and (d) a single and
simple principle of composition, according to
which the behaviour of any aggregate of particles,
or the influence of anyone aggregate on any other,
follows in a uniform way from the mutual influ­
ences of the constituent particles taken by pairs.
A set of gravitating particles, on the classical
theory of gravitation, is an almost perfect example
of the ideal of Pure Mechanism. The single ele­
mentary law is the inverse-square law for any pair
of particles. The single and simple principle of
composition is the rule that the influence of any
set of particles on a single particle is the vector-sum
of the influences that each would exert taken by
itself. An electronic theory of matter departs to
some extent from this ideal. In the first place, it
has to assume at present that there are two ultim­
ately different kinds of particle, viz. , protons and
electrons. Secondly, the laws of electromagnetics
cannot, so far as we know, be reduced to central
forces. Thirdly, gravitational phenomena do not at
present fall within the scheme; and so it is neces­
sary to ascribe masses as well as charges to the
ultimate particles, and to introduce other element­
ary forces beside those of electromagnetics.
On a purely mechanical theory, all the appar­
ently different kinds of matter would be made of
the same stuff. They would differ only in the
number, arrangement and movements of their con­
stituent particles. And their apparently different
kinds of behaviour would not be ultimately differ­
ent. For they would all be deducible by a single
simple principle of composition from the mutual
influences of the particles taken by pairs; and these
mutual influences would all obey a single law which
is quite independent of the configurations and
surroundings in which the particles happen to
find themselves. The ideal which we have been
describing and illustrating may be called 'Pure
Mechanism'.
When a biologist calls himself a 'Mechanist', it
may fairly be doubted whether he means to assert
anything so rigid as this. Probably all that he wishes
to assert is that a living body is composed only of
constituents which do or might occur in non-living
bodies, and that its characteristic behaviour is
wholly deducible from its structure and compon­
ents and from the chemical, physical and dynami­
cal laws which these materials would obey if they
were isolated or were in non-living combinations.
Whether the apparently different kinds of chemical
substance are really just so many different config­
urations of a single kind of particles, and whether
the chemical and physical laws are just the com­
pounded results of the action of a number of similar
particles obeying a single elementary law and a
single principle of composition, he is not compelled
as a biologist to decide. I shall later on discuss this
milder form of 'Mechanism', which is all that is
presupposed in the controversies between mechan­
istic and vitalistic biologists. In the meanwhile I
want to consider how far the ideal of Pure Mechan­
ism could possibly be an adequate account of the
world as we know it.
Limitations of pure mechanism
No one of course pretends that a satisfactory
account even of purely physical processes in
terms of Pure Mechanism has ever been given;
but the question for us is: How far, and in what
sense, could such a theory be adequate to all the
known facts? On the face of it, external objects have
plenty of other characteristics beside mass or elec­
tric charge, e. g. , colour, temperature, etc. And, on
the face of it, many changes take place in the
external world beside changes of position, velocity,
etc. Now of course many different views have been
held about the nature and status of such character­
istics as colour; but the one thing which no ade­
quate theory of the external world can do is to
ignore them altogether. I will state here very
roughly the alternative types of theory, and show
that none of them is compatible with Pure
Mechanism as a complete account of the facts.
(I) There is the naive view that we are III
immediate cognitive contact with parts of the sur-\nfaces of external objects, and that the colours and
temperatures which we perceive quite literally
inhere in those surfaces independently of our
minds and of our bodies. On this view, Pure
Mechanism breaks down at the first move, for
certain parts of the external world would have var­
ious properties different from and irreducible to the
one fundamental property which Pure Mechanism
assumes. This would not mean that what scientists
have discovered about the connection between heat
and molecular motion, or light and periodic motion
of electrons, would be wrong. It might be perfectly
true, so far as it went; but it would certainly not be
the whole truth about the external world. We
should have to begin by distinguishing between
'macroscopic' and 'microscopic' properties, to use
two very convenient terms adopted by Lorentz.
Colours, temperatures, etc. would be macroscopic
properties; i. e. , they would need a certain minimum
area or volume (and perhaps, as Dr Whitehead has
suggested, a certain minimum duration) to inhere
in. Other properties, such as mass or electric
charge, might be able to inhere in volumes smaller
than these minima and even in volumes and dura­
tions of any degree of smallness. Molecular and
electronic theories of heat and light would then
assert that a certain volume is pervaded by such
and such a temperature or such and such a colour if
and only if it contains certain arrangements of par­
ticles moving in certain ways. What we should have
would be laws connecting the macroscopic qualities
which inhere in a volume with the number,
arrangement and motion of the microscopic part­
icles which are contained in this volume.
On such a view, how much would be left of Pure
Mechanism? (i) It would of course not be true of
macroscopic properties. (ii) It might still be true of
the microscopic particles in their interactions with
each other. It might be that there is ultimately only
one kind of particle, that it has only one non-spatio­
temporal quality, that these particles affect each
other by pairs according to a single law, and that
their effects are compounded according to a single
law. (iii) But, even if this were true of the micro­
scopic particles in their relations with each other, it
plainly could not be the whole truth about them.
For there will also be laws connecting the presence
of such and such a configuration of particles, mov­
ing in such and such ways, in a certain region, with
the pervasion of this region by such and such a
determinate value of a certain macroscopic quality,
e. g. , a certain shade of red or a temperature of 57°
C. These will be just as much laws of the external
Mechanism and Emergentism
world as are the laws which connect the motions of
one particle with those of another. And it is per­
fectly clear that the one kind oflaw cannot possibly
be reduced to the other, since colour and tempera­
ture are irreducibly different characteristics from
figure and motion, however close may be the causal
connection between the occurrence of the one kind
of characteristic and that of the other. Moreover,
there will have to be a number of different and
irreducible laws connecting microscopic with
macroscopic characteristics; for there are many
different and irreducible determinable macro­
scopic characteristics, e. g. , colour, temperature,
sound, etc. And each will need its own peculiar law.
(2) A second conceivable view would be that in
perception we are in direct cognitive contact with
parts of the surfaces of external objects, and that, so
long as we are looking at them or feeling them, they
do have the colours or temperatures which they
then seem to us to have; but that the inherence of
colours and temperatures in external bodies is
dependent upon the presence of a suitable bodily
organism, or a suitable mind, or of both, in a
suitable relation to the external object.
On such a view it is plain that Pure Mechanism
cannot be an adequate theory of the external world
of matter. For colours and temperatures would
belong to external objects on this view, though
they would characterize an external object only
when very special conditions are fulfilled. And
evidently the laws according to which, e. g. , a cer­
tain shade of colour inheres in a certain external
region when a suitable organism or mind is in
suitable relations to that region cannot be of the
mechanical type.
(3) A third conceivable view is that physical
objects can seem to have qualities which do not
really belong to any physical object; e. g. , that a
pillar-box can seem to have a certain shade of red,
although really no physical object has any colour at
all. This type of theory divides into two forms. (a)
It might be held that, when a physical object seems
to have a certain shade of red, there really is some­
thing in the world which has this shade of red,
although this something cannot be a physical object
or literally a part of one. Some would say that there
is a red mental state - a 'sensation'; others that the
red colour belongs to something which is neither
mental nor physical. (b) It might be held that
nothing in the world really has colour, though
certain things seem to have certain colours. The \nC. D. Broad
relation of 'seeming to have' is taken as ultimate.
On either of these alternatives it would be conceiv­
able that Pure Mechanism was the whole truth
about matter considered in its relations with mat­
ter. But it would be certain that it is not the whole
truth about matter when this limitation is removed.
Granted that bits of matter only seem to be red or to
be hot, we still claim to know a good deal about the
conditions under which one bit of matter will seem
to be red and another to be blue and about the
conditions under which one bit of matter will
seem to be hot and another to be cold. This know­
ledge belongs partly to physics and partly to the
physiology and anatomy of the brain and nervous
system. We know little or nothing about the mental
conditions which have to be fulfilled if an external
object is to seem red or hot to a percipient; but we
can say that this depends on an unknown mental
factor x and on certain physical conditions a, b, c,
etc. , partly within and partly outside the percip­
ient's body, about which we know a good deal. It is
plain then that, on the present theory, physical
events and objects do not merely interact mechan­
ically with each other; they also play their part,
along with a mental factor, in causing such and
such an external object to seem to such and such
an observer to have a certain quality which really no
physical object has. In fact, for the present purpose,
the difference between theories (2) and (3) is sim­
ply the following. On theory (2) certain events in
the external object, in the observer's body, and
possibly in his mind, cause a certain quality to
inhere in the external object so long as they are
going on. On theory (3) they cause the same quality
to seem to inhere in the same object, so long as they
are going on, though actually it does not inhere in
any physical object. Theory (1), for the present
purpose, differs from theory (2) only in taking the
naive view that the body and mind of the observer
are irrelevant to the occurrence of the sensible qual­
ity in the external object, though of course it would
admit that these factors are relevant to the percep­
tion of this quality by the observer. This last point
is presumably common to all three theories.
I will now sum up the argument. The plain fact is
that the external world, as perceived by us, seems
not to have the homogeneity demanded by Pure
Mechanism. If it really has the various irreducibly
different sensible qualities which it seems to have,
Pure Mechanism cannot be true of the whole of the
external world and cannot be the whole truth about
any part of it. The best that we can do for Pure
Mechanism on this theory is to divide up the
external world first on a macroscopic and then on
a microscopic scale; to suppose that the macro­
scopic qualities which pervade any region are cau­
sally determined by the microscopic events and
objects which exist within it; and to hope that the
latter, in their interactions with each other at any
rate, fulfil the conditions of Pure Mechanism. We
must remember, moreover, that there is no a priori
reason why microscopic events and objects should
answer the demands of Pure Mechanism even in
their interactions with each other; that, so far as
science can tell us at present, they do not; and that,
in any case, the laws connecting them with the
occurrence of macroscopic qualities cannot be
mechanical in the sense defined.
If, on the other hand, we deny that physical
objects have the various sensible qualities which
they seem to us to have, we are still left with the
fact that some things seem to be red, others to be
blue, others to be hot, and so on. And a complete
account of the world must include some explana­
tion of such events as 'seeming red to me', 'seeming
blue to you', etc. We can admit that the ultimate
physical objects may all be exactly alike, may all
have only one non-spatio-temporal and non-causal
property, and may interact with each other in the
way which Pure Mechanism requires. But we must
admit that they are also cause-factors in determin­
ing the appearance, if not the occurrence, of the
various sensible qualities at such and such places
and times. And, in these transactions, the laws
which they obey cannot be mechanical.
We may put the whole matter in a nutshell by
saying that the appearance of a plurality of irredu­
cible sensible qualities forces us, no matter what
theory we adopt about their status, to distinguish
two different kinds of law. One may be called
'intra-physical' and the other 'trans-physical'.
The intra-physical laws may be, though there
seems no positive reason to suppose that they are,
of the kind required by Pure Mechanism. If so,
there is just one ultimate elementary intra-physical
law and one ultimate principle of composition for
intra-physical transactions. But the trans-physical
laws cannot satisfy the demands of Pure Mechan­
ism; and, so far as I can see, there must be at least as
many irreducible trans-physical laws as there are
irreducible determinable sense-qualities. The nat­
ure of the trans-physical laws will of course depend
on the view that we take about the status of sensible
qualities. It will be somewhat different for each of
the three alternative types of theory which I have \nmentioned, and it will differ according to which
form of the third theory we adopt. But it is not
necessary for our present purpose to go into further
detail on this point.
The Three Possible Ways of Accounting
for Characteristic Differences of
Behaviour
So far, we have confined our attention to pure
qualities, such as red, hot, etc. By calling these
'pure qualities' I mean that, when we say 'This is
red', 'This is hot', and so on, it is no part of the
meaning of our predicate that 'this' stands in such
and such a relation to something else. It is logically
possible that this should be red even though 'this'
were the only thing in the world; though it is
probably not physically possible. I have argued so
far that the fact that external objects seem to have a
number of irreducibly different pure qualities
makes it certain that Pure Mechanism cannot be
an adequate account of the external world. I want
now to consider differences of behaviour among
external objects. These are not differences of pure
quality. When I say 'This combines with that',
'This eats and digests', and so on, I am making
statements which would have no meaning if 'this'
were the only thing in the world. Now there are
apparently extremely different kinds of behaviour
to be found among external objects. A bit of gold
and a bit of silver behave quite differently when put
into nitric acid. A cat and an oyster behave quite
differently when put near a mouse. Again, all
bodies which would be said to be 'alive', behave
differently in many ways from all bodies which
would be said not to be 'alive'. And, among non­
living bodies, what we call their 'chemical behav­
iour' is very different from what we call their
'merely physical behaviour'. The question that we
have now to discuss is this: 'Are the differences
between merely physical, chemical and vital behav­
iour ultimate and irreducible or not? And are the
differences in chemical behaviour between oxygen
and hydrogen, or the differences in vital behaviour
between trees and oysters and cats, ultimate and
irreducible or not? ' I do not expect to be able to
give a conclusive answer to this question, as I do
claim to have done to the question about differ­
ences of pure quality. But I hope at least to state the
possible alternatives clearly, so that people with an
adequate knowledge of the relevant empirical facts
may know exactly what we want them to discuss,
Mechanism and Emergentism
and may not beat the air in the regrettable way in
which they too often have done.
We must first notice a difference between vital
behaviour, on the one hand, and chemical behav­
iour, on the other. On the macroscopic scale, i. e. ,
within the limits of what we can perceive with our
unaided senses or by the help of optical instru­
ments, all matter seems to behave chemically
from time to time, though there may be long
stretches throughout which a given bit of matter
has no chance to exhibit any marked chemical
behaviour. But only a comparatively few bits of
matter ever exhibit vital behaviour. These are
always very complex chemically; they are always
composed of the same comparatively small selec­
tion of chemical elements; and they generally have
a characteristic external form and internal struc­
ture. All of them after a longer or shorter time cease
to show vital behaviour, and soon after this they
visibly lose their characteristic external form and
internal structure. We do not know how to make a
living body out of non-living materials; and we do
not know how to make a once living body, which
has ceased to behave vitally, live again. But we
know that plants, so long as they are alive, do take
up inorganic materials from their surroundings and
build them up into their own substance; that all
living bodies maintain themselves for a time
through constant change of material; and that
they all have the power of restoring themselves
when not too severely injured, and of producing
new living bodies like themselves.
Let us now consider what general types of view
are possible about the fact that certain things
behave in characteristically different ways.
(l) Certain characteristically different ways of
behaving may be regarded as absolutely unanalys­
able facts which do not depend in any way on
differences of structure or components. This
would be an absurd view to take about vital behav­
iour, for we know that all living bodies have a
complex structure even on the macroscopic scale,
and that their characteristic behaviour depends in
part at least on their structure and components. It
would also be a foolish view to take about the
chemical behaviour of non-living substances
which are known to be compounds and can be
split up and re-synthesized by us from their ele­
ments. But it was for many years the orthodox view
about the chemical elements. It was held that the
characteristic differences between the behaviour of
oxygen and hydrogen are due in no way to \nC. D. Broad
differences of structure or components, but must
simply be accepted as ultimate facts. This first
alternative can hardly be counted as one way of
explaining differences of behaviour, since it consists
in holding that there are certain differences which
cannot be explained, even in part, but must simply
be swallowed whole with that philosophic jam
which Professor Alexander calls 'natural piety'. It
is worthwhile to remark that we could never be
logically compelled to hold this view, since it is
always open to us to suppose that what is macro­
scopically homogeneous has a complex microscopic
structure which wholly or partly determines its
characteristic macroscropic behaviour. Neverthe­
less, it is perfectly possible that this hypothesis is
not true in certain cases, and that there are certain
ultimate differences in the material world which
must just be accepted as brute facts.
(2) We come now to types of theory which
profess to explain, wholly or partly, differences of
behaviour in terms of structure or components or
both. These of course all presuppose that the
objects that we are dealing with are at any rate
microscopically complex; a hypothesis, as I
have said, which can never be conclusively refuted.
We may divide up these theories as follows. (a) Those
which hold that the characteristic behaviour of a
certain object or class of objects is in part depend­
ent on the presence of a peculiar component which
does not occur in anything that does not behave in
this way. This is of course the usual view to take
about the characteristic chemical behaviour of
compounds. We say that silver chloride behaves
differently from common salt because one contains
silver and the other sodium. It is always held that
differences of microscopic structure are also relev­
ant to explaining differences of macroscopic che­
mical behaviour. For example, the very marked
differences between the chemical behaviour of
acetone and prop ion aldehyde, which both consist
of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen in exactly the same
proportions, are ascribed to the fact that the former
has the structure symbolized by
and that the latter has the structure symbolized by
-: :? 'O
CH 3 · CHz· C. "H
The doctrine which I will call 'Substantial Vit­
alism' is logically a theory of this type about vital
behaviour. It assumes that a necessary factor in
explaining the characteristic behaviour of living
bodies is the presence in them of a peculiar com­
ponent, often called an 'Entelechy', which does not
occur in inorganic matter or in bodies which were
formerly alive but have now died. I will try to bring
out the analogies and differences between this type
of theory as applied to vital behaviour and as
applied to the behaviour of chemical compounds.
(i) It is not supposed that the presence of an ente­
lechy is sujJicient to explain vital behaviour; as in
chemistry, the structure of the complex is admitted
to be also an essential factor. (ii) It is admitted that
entelechies cannot be isolated, and that perhaps
they cannot exist apart from the complex which
is a living organism. But there is plenty of analogy
to this in chemistry. In the first place, elements
have been recognized, and the characteristic
behaviour of certain compounds has been ascribed
to their presence, long before they were isolated.
Secondly, there are certain groups, like CH 3 and
C6HS in organic chemistry, which cannot exist in
isolation, but which nevertheless play an essential
part in determining the characteristic behaviour of
certain compounds. (iii) The entelechy is supposed
to exert some kind of directive influence over mat­
ter which enters the organism from outside. There
is a faint analogy to this in certain parts of organic
chemistry. The presence of certain groups in cer­
tain positions in a benzene nucleus makes it very
easy to put certain other groups and very hard to
put others into certain positions in the nucleus.
There are well-known empirical rules on this
point.
Why then do most of us feel pretty confident of
the truth of the chemical explanation and very
doubtful of the formally analogous explanation of
vital behaviour in terms of entelechies? I think that
our main reasons are the following, and that they
are fairly sound ones. (i) It is true that some ele­
ments were recognized and used for chemical
explanations long before they were isolated. But a
great many other elements had been isolated, and it
was known that the process presented various
degrees of difficulty. No entelechy, or anything
like one, has ever been isolated; hence an entelechy
is a purely hypothetical entity in a sense in which an
as yet unisolated but suspected chemical element is
not. If it be said that an isolated entelechy is from
the nature of the case something which could not
be perceived, and that this objection is therefore \nunreasonable, I can only answer (as I should to the
similar assertion that the physical phenomena of
mediumship can happen only in darkness and in
the presence of sympathetic spectators) that it may
well be true but is certainly very unfortunate. (ii) It
is true that some groups which cannot exist in
isolation play a most important part in chemical
explanations. But they are groups of known compo­
sition, not mysterious simple entities; and their
inability to exist by themselves is not an isolated
fact but is part of the more general, though imper­
fectly understood, fact of valency. Moreover, we
can at least pass these groups from one compound
to another, and can note how the chemical proper­
ties change as one compound loses such a group
and another gains it. There is no known analogy to
this with entelechies. You cannot pass an entelechy
from a living man into a corpse and note that the
former ceases and that latter begins to behave
vitally. (iii) Entelechies are supposed to differ in
kind from material particles; and it is doubtful
whether they are literally in space at all. It is thus
hard to understand what exactly is meant by saying
that a living body is a compound of an entelechy
and a material structure; and impossible to say
anything in detail about the structure of the total
complex thus formed.
These objections seem to me to make the doc­
trine of Substantial Vitalism unsatisfactory, though
not impossible. I think that those who have
accepted it have done so largely under a misappre­
hension. They have thought that there was no
alternative between Biological Mechanism (which
I shall define a little later) and Substantial Vitalism.
They found the former unsatisfactory, and so they
felt obliged to accept the latter. We shall see in a
moment, however, that there is another alternative
type of theory, which I will call 'Emergent Vital­
ism', borrowing the adjective from Professors
Samuel Alexander and C. Lloyd Morgan. Of
course, positive arguments have been put forward
in favour of entelechies, notably by Hans Driesch. I
do not propose to consider them in detail. I will
merely say that Driesch's arguments do not seem to
me to be in the least conclusive, even against Bio­
logical Mechanism, because they seem to forget
that the smallest fragment which we can make of
an organized body by cutting it up may contain an
enormous number of similar microscopic struc­
tures, each of enormous complexity. And, even if
it be held that Driesch has conclusively disproved
Biological Mechanism, I cannot see that his argu­
ments have the least tendency to prove Substantial
Mechanism and Emergentism
Vitalism rather than the Emergent form of Vitalism
which does not assume entelechies.
(b) I come now to the second type of theory
which professes to explain, wholly or partly, the
differences of behaviour between different things.
This kind of theory denies that there need be any
peculiar component which is present in all things
that behave in a certain way and is absent from all
things which do not behave in this way. It says that
the components may be exactly alike in both cases,
and it tries to explain the difference of behaviour
wholly in terms of difference of structure. Now it is
most important to notice that this type of theory
can take two radically different forms. They differ
according to the view that we take about the laws
which connect the properties of the components
with the characteristic behaviour of the complex
wholes which they make up. (i) On the first form of
the theory the characteristic behaviour of the whole
could not, even in theory, be deduced from the most
complete knowledge of the behaviour of its com­
ponents, taken separately or in other combinations,
and of their proportions and arrangements in this
whole. This alternative, which I have roughly out­
lined and shall soon discuss in detail, is what I
understand by the 'Theory of Emergence'. I cannot
give a conclusive example of it, since it is a matter
of controversy whether it actually applies to any­
thing. But there is no doubt, as I hope to show, that
it is a logically possible view with a good deal in its
favour. I will merely remark that, so far as we know
at present, the characteristic behaviour of common
salt cannot be deduced from the most complete
knowledge of the properties of sodium in isolation,
or of chlorine in isolation, or of other compounds of
sodium, such as silver chloride. (ii) On the second
form of the theory, the characteristic behaviour of
the whole is not only completely determined by the
nature and arrangement of its components; in addi­
tion to this, it is held that the behaviour of the
whole could, in theory at least, be deduced from a
sufficient knowledge of how the components
behave in isolation or in other wholes of a simpler
kind. I will call this kind of theory 'Mechanistic'. A
theory may be 'mechanistic' in this sense without
being an instance of Pure Mechanism, in the sense
defined earlier in this chapter. For example, if a
biologist held that all the characteristic behaviour
ofliving beings could be deduced from an adequate
knowledge of the physical and chemical laws which
its components would obey in isolation or in non­
living complexes, he would be called a 'Biological
Mechanist', even though he believed that the \nC. D. Broad
different chemical elements are ultimately different
kinds of stuff and that the laws of chemical compo­
sition are not of the type demanded by Pure
Mechanism.
The most obvious examples of wholes to which a
mechanistic theory applies are artificial machines.
A clock behaves in a characteristic way. But no one
supposes that the peculiar behaviour of clocks
depends on their containing as a component a
peculiar entity which is not present in anything
but clocks. Nor does anyone suppose that the pecu­
liar behaviour of clocks is simply an emergent
quality of that kind of structure and cannot be
learnt by studying anything but clocks. We know
perfectly well that the behaviour of a clock can be
deduced from the particular arrangement of
springs, wheels, pendulum, etc. in it, and from
general laws of mechanics and physics which
apply just as much to material systems which are
not clocks.
To sum up: We have distinguished three possi­
ble types of theory to account wholly or partly for
the characteristic differences of behaviour between
different kinds of material object: viz. , the Theory
of a Special Component, the Theory of Emergence,
and the Mechanistic Theory. We have illustrated
these, so far as possible, with examples which
everyone will accept. In the special problem of
the peculiar behaviour of living bodies these three
types of theory are represented by Substantial Vit­
alism, Emergent Vitalism and Biological Mechan­
ism. I have argued that Substantial Vitalism,
though logically possible, is a very unsatisfactory
kind of theory, and that probably many people who
have accepted it have done so because they did not
recognize the alternative of Emergent Vitalism. I
propose now to consider in greater detail the emer­
gent and the mechanistic types of theory.
Emergent theories
Put in abstract terms, the emergent theory asserts
that there are certain wholes, composed (say) of
constituents A, Band C in a relation R to each
other; that all wholes composed of constituents of
the same kind as A, Band C in relations of the same
kind as R have certain characteristic properties;
that A, Band C are capable of occurring in other
kinds of complex where the relation is not of the
same kind as R; and that the characteristic proper­
ties of the whole R(A, B, C) cannot, even in theory,
be deduced from the most complete knowledge of
the properties of A, Band C in isolation or in other
wholes which are not of the form R(A, B, C). The
mechanistic theory rejects the last clause of this
assertion.
Let us now consider the question in detail. If we
want to explain the behaviour of any whole in terms
of its structure and components, we always need
two independent kinds of information. (a) We need
to know how the parts would behave separately.
And (b) we need to know the law or laws according
to which the behaviour of the separate parts is
compounded when they are acting together in any
proportion and arrangement. Now it is extremely
important to notice that these two bits of informa­
tion are quite independent of each other in every
case. Let us consider, e. g. , the simplest possible
case. We know that a certain tap, when running by
itself, will put so many cubic centimetres of water
into a tank in a minute. We know that a certain
other tap, when running by itself, will put so many
cubic centimetres of water into this tank in the
same time. It does not follow logically from these
two bits of information that, when the two taps are
turned on together, the sum of these two numbers
of cubic centimetres will be added to the contents
of the tank every minute. This might not happen
for two reasons. In the first place, it is quite likely
that, if the two taps came from the same pipe, less
would flow from each when both were turned on
together than when each was turned on separately;
i. e. , the separate factors do not behave together as
they would have behaved in isolation. Again, if one
tap delivered hot water and the other cold water,
the simple assumption about composition would
break down although the separate factors contin­
ued to obey the same laws as they had followed
when acting in isolation. For there would be a
change of volume on mixture of the hot and cold
water.
Next let us consider the case oftwo forces acting
on a particle at an angle to each other. We find by
experiment that the actual motion of the body is the
vector-sum of the motions which it would have had
if each had been acting separately. There is not the
least possibility of deducing this law of composition
from the laws of each force taken separately. There
is one other fact worth mentioning here. As Mr
Russell pointed out long ago, a vector-sum is not a
sum in the ordinary sense of the word. We cannot
strictly say that each force is doing what it would
have done if it had been alone, and that the result of
their joint action is the sum of the results of their
separate actions. A velocity of 5 miles an hour in a
certain direction does not literally contain as parts a \nvelocity of 3 miles an hour in a certain other direc­
tion and a velocity of 4 miles an hour in a direction
at right angles to this. All that we can say is that the
effect of several forces acting together is a fairly
simple mathematical function of the purely
hypothetical effects which each would have had if
it had acted by itself, and that this function reduces
to an algebraical sum in the particular case where
all the forces are in the same line.
We will now pass to the case of chemical com­
position. Oxygen has certain properties, and
hydrogen has certain other properties. They com­
bine to form water, and the proportions in which
they do this are fixed. Nothing that we know about
oxygen by itself or in its combinations with any­
thing but hydrogen would give us the least reason
to suppose that it would combine with hydrogen at
all. Nothing that we know about hydrogen by itself
or in its combinations with anything but oxygen
would give us the least reason to expect that it
would combine with oxygen at all. And most of
the chemical and physical properties of water have
no known connection, either quantitative or qualit­
ative, with those of oxygen and hydrogen. Here we
have a clear instance of a case where, so far as we
can tell, the properties of a whole composed of two
constituents could not have been predicted from a
knowledge of the properties of these constituents
taken separately, or from this combined with a
knowledge of the properties of other wholes
which contain these constituents.
Let us sum up the conclusions which may be
reached from these examples before going further.
It is clear that in no case could the behaviour of a
whole composed of certain constituents be pre­
dicted mereZy from a knowledge of the properties
of these constituents, taken separately, and of their
proportions and arrangements in the particular
complex under consideration. Whenever this
seems to be possible, it is because we are using a
suppressed premiss which is so familiar that it has
escaped our notice. The suppressed premiss is the
fact that we have examined other complexes in the
past and have noted their behaviour; that we have
found a general law connecting the behaviour of
these wholes with that which their constituents
would show in isolation; and that we are assuming
that this law of composition will hold also of the
particular complex whole at present under consid­
eration. For purely dynamical transactions this
assumption is pretty well justified, because we
have found a simple law of composition and have
verified it very fully for wholes of very different
Mechanism and Emergentism
composition, complexity and internal structure. It
is therefore not particularly rash to expect to
predict the dynamical behaviour of any material
complex under the action of any set of forces,
however much it may differ in the details of its
structure and parts from those complexes for
which the assumed law of composition has actually
been verified.
The example of chemical compounds shows us
that we have no right to expect that the same simple
law of composition will hold for chemical as for
dynamical transactions. And it shows us something
further. It shows us that, if we want to know the
chemical (and many of the physical) properties of a
chemical compound, such as silver chloride, it is
absolutely necessary to study samples of that part­
icular compound. It would of course (on any view)
be useless merely to study silver in isolation and
chlorine in isolation; for that would tell us nothing
about the law of their conjoint action. This would
be equally true even if a mechanistic explanation of
the chemical behaviour of compounds were poss­
ible. The essential point is that it would also be
useless to study chemical compounds in general
and to compare their properties with those of
their elements in the hope of discovering a general
law of composition by which the properties of any
chemical compound could be foretold when the
properties of its separate elements were known.
So far as we know, there is no general law of this
kind. It is useless even to study the properties of
other compounds of silver and of other compounds
of chlorine in the hope of discovering one general
law by which the properties of silver compounds
could be predicted from those of elementary silver
and another general law by which the properties of
chlorine compounds could be predicted from those
of elementary chlorine. No doubt the properties of
silver chloride are completely determined by those
of silver and of chlorine, in the sense that whenever
you have a whole composed of these two elements
in certain proportions and relations, you have
something with the characteristic properties of sil­
ver chloride, and that nothing has these properties
except a whole composed in this way. But the law
connecting the properties of silver chloride with
those of silver and of chlorine and with the struc­
ture of the compound is, so far as we know, a unique
and ultimate law. By this I mean (a) that it is not a
special case which arises through substituting cer­
tain determinate values for determinable variables
in a general law which connects the properties of
any chemical compound with those of its separate \nC. D. Broad
elements and with its structure. And (b) that it is
not a special case which arises by combining two
more general laws, one of which connects the prop­
erties of any silver compound with those of ele­
mentary silver, whilst the other connects the
properties of any chlorine compound with those
of elementary chlorine. So far as we know, there are
no such laws. It is (c) a law which could have been
discovered only by studying samples of silver chlor­
ide itself, and which can be extended inductively
only to other samples of the same substance.
We may contrast this state of affairs with that
which exists where a mechanistic explanation is
possible. In order to predict the behaviour of a
clock, a man need never have seen a clock in his
life. Provided he is told how it is constructed, and
that he has learnt from the study of other material
systems the general rules about motion and about
the mechanical properties of springs and of rigid
bodies, he can foretell exactly how a system con­
structed like a clock must behave.
The situation with which we are faced in chem­
istry, which seems to offer the most plausible
example of emergent behaviour, may be described
in two alternative ways. These may be theoretically
different, but in practice they are equivalent. (i)
The first way of putting the case is the following.
What we call the 'properties' of the chemical ele­
ments are very largely propositions about the com­
pounds which they form with other elements under
suitable conditions. For example one of the 'prop­
erties' of silver is that it combines under certain
conditions with chlorine to give a compound with
the properties of silver chloride. Likewise, one of
the 'properties' of chlorine is that under certain
conditions it combines with silver to give a com­
pound with the properties of silver chloride. These
'properties' cannot be deduced from any selection
of the other properties of silver or of chlorine. Thus
we may say that we do not know all the properties
of chlorine and of silver until they have been put
in the presence of each other; and that no amount
of knowledge about the properties which they
manifest in other circumstances will tell us what
property, if any, they will manifest in these
circumstances. Put in this way, the position is
that we do not know all the properties of any
element, and that there is always the possibility of
their manifesting unpredictable properties when
put into new situations. This happens whenever a
chemical compound is prepared or discovered for
the first time. (ii) The other way to put the matter
is to confine the name 'property' to those charac-
teristics which the elements manifest when they do
not act chemically on each other: i. e. , the physical
characteristics of the isolated elements. In this case
we may indeed say, if we like, that we know all the
properties of each element; but we shall have to
admit that we do not know the laws according to
which elements, which have these properties in
isolation, together produce compounds having
such and such other characteristic properties. The
essential point is that the behaviour of an as yet
unexamined compound cannot be predicted from a
knowledge of the properties of their other com­
pounds; and it matters little whether we ascribe
this to the existence of innumerable 'latent' proper­
ties in each element, each of which is manifested
only in the presence of a certain other element, or
to the lack of any general principle of composition,
such as the parallelogram law in dynamics, by
which the behaviour of any chemical compound
could be deduced from its structure and from the
behaviour of each of its elements in isolation from
the rest.
Let us now apply the conceptions, which I have
been explaining and illustrating from chemistry, to
the case of vital behaviour. We know that the bits
of matter which behave vitally are composed of
various chemical compounds arranged in certain
characteristic ways. We have prepared and experi­
mented with many of these compounds apart from
living bodies, and we see no obvious reason why
some day they might not all be synthesized and
studied in the chemical laboratory. A living body
might be regarded as a compound of the second
order, i. e. , a compound composed of compounds;
just as silver chloride is a compound of the first
order, i. e. , one composed of chemical elements.
Now it is obviously possible that, just as the char­
acteristic behaviour of a first-order compound
could not be predicted from any amount of know­
ledge of the properties of its elements in isolation or
of the properties of other first-order compounds,
so the properties of a second-order compound
could not be predicted from any amount of know­
ledge about the properties of its first-order consti­
tuents taken separately or in other surroundings.
Just as the only way to find out the properties of
silver chloride is to study samples of silver chloride,
and no amount of study of silver and of chlorine
taken separately or in other combinations will help
us; so the only way to find out the characteristic
behaviour of living bodies may be to study living
bodies as such. And no amount of knowledge about
how the constituents of a living body behave in \nisolation or in other and non-living wholes might
suffice to enable us to predict the characteristic
behaviour of a living organism. This possibility is
perfectly compatible with the view that the char­
acteristic behaviour of a living body is completely
determined by the nature and arrangement of the
chemical compounds which compose it, in the
sense that any whole which is composed of such
compounds in such an arrangement will show vital
behaviour and that nothing else will do so. We
should merely have to recognize, as we had to do
in considering a first-order compound like silver
chloride, that we are dealing with a unique and
irreducible law, and not with a special case which
arises by the substitution of particular values for
variables in a more general law, nor with a combi­
nation of several more general laws.
We could state this possibility about living
organisms in two alternative but practically
equivalent ways, just as we stated the similar pos­
sibility about chemical compounds. (i) The first
way would be this. Most of the properties which
we ascribe to chemical compounds are statements
about what they do in presence of various chemical
reagents under certain conditions of temperature,
pressure, etc. These various properties are not
deducible from each other; and, until we have
tried a compound with every other compound
and under every possible condition of temperature,
pressure, etc. , we cannot possibly know that we
have exhausted all its properties. It is therefore
perfectly possible that, in the very special situation
in which a chemical compound is placed in a living
body, it may exhibit properties which remain
'latent' under all other conditions. (ii) The other,
and practically equivalent, way of putting the case
is the following. If we confine the name 'property'
to the behaviour which a chemical compound
shows in isolation, we may perhaps say that we
know all the 'properties' of the chemical constitu­
ents of a living body. But we shall not be able to
predict the behaviour of the body unless we also
know the laws according to which the behaviour
which each of these constituents would have shown
in isolation is compounded when they are acting
together in certain proportions and arrangements.
We can discover such laws only by studying com­
plexes containing these constituents in various pro­
portions and arrangements. And we have no right
to suppose that the laws which we have discovered
by studying non-living complexes can be carried
over without modification to the very different case
ofliving complexes. It may be that the only way to
Mechanism and Emergentism
discover the laws according to which the behaviour
of the separate constituents combines to produce
the behaviour of the whole in a living body is to
study living bodies as such. For practical purposes
it makes little difference whether we say that the
chemical compounds which compose a living body
have 'latent properties' which are manifested only
when they are parts of a whole of this peculiar
structure; or whether we say that the properties
of the constituents of a living body are the same
whether they are in it or out of it, but that the law
according to which these separate effects are com­
pounded with each other is different in a living
whole from what it is in any non-living whole.
This view about living bodies and vital behav­
iour is what I call 'Emergent Vitalism'; and it is
important to notice that it is quite different from
what I call 'Substantial Vitalism'. So far as I can
understand them, I should say that Driesch is a
Substantial Vitalist, and that Dr]. S. Haldane is an
Emergent Vitalist. But I may quite well be wrong
in classifying these two distinguished men in this
way.
Mechanistic theories
The mechanistic type of theory is much more
familiar than the emergent type, and it will there­
fore be needless to consider it in great detail. I will
just consider the mechanistic alternative about
chemical and vital behaviour, so as to make the
emergent theory still clearer by contrast. Suppose
it were certain, as it is very probable, that all the
different chemical atoms are composed of positive
and negative electrified particles in different num­
bers and arrangements; and that these differences
of number and arrangement are the only ultimate
difference between them. Suppose that all these
particles obey the same elementary laws, and that
their separate actions are compounded with each
other according to a single law which is the same no
matter how complicated may be the whole of which
they are constituents. Then it would be theoret­
ically possible to deduce the characteristic behav­
iour of any element from an adequate knowledge of
the number and arrangement of the particles in its
atom, without needing to observe a sample of the
substance. We could, in theory, deduce what other
elements it would combine with and in what pro­
portions; which of these compounds would be
stable to heat, etc. ; and how the various compounds
would react in the presence of each other under
given conditions of temperature, pressure, etc. And \nC. D. Broad
all this should be theoretically possible without
needing to observe samples of these compounds.
I want now to explain exactly what I mean by the
qualification 'theoretically'. (l) In the first place
the mathematical difficulties might be overwhelm­
ing in practice, even if we knew the structure and
the laws. This is a trivial qualification for our pres­
ent purpose, which is to bring out the logical dis­
tinction between mechanism and emergence. Let
us replace Sir Ernest Rutherford by a mathematical
archangel, and pass on. (2) Secondly, we cannot
directly perceive the microscopic structure of
atoms, but can only infer it from the macroscopic
behaviour of matter in bulk. Thus, in practice, even
if the mechanistic hypothesis were true and the
mathematical difficulties were overcome, we
should have to start by observing enough of the
macroscopic behaviour of samples of each element
to infer the probable structure of its atom. But,
once this was done, it should be possible to deduce
its behaviour in macroscopic conditions under
which it has never yet been observed. That is, if
we could infer its microscopic structure from a
selection of its observed macroscopic properties,
we could henceforth deduce all its other macro­
scopic properties from its microscopic structure
without further appeal to observation. The differ­
ence from the emergent theory is thus profound,
even when we allow for our mathematical and
perceptual limitations. If the emergent theory of
chemical compounds be true, a mathematical arch­
angel, gifted with the further power of perceiving
the microscopic structure of atoms as easily as we
can perceive hay stacks, could no more predict the
behaviour of silver or of chlorine or the properties
of silver chloride without having observed samples
of those substances than we can at present. And he
could no more deduce the rest of the properties of a
chemical element or compound from a selection of
its properties than we can.
Would there be any theoretical limit to the
deduction of the properties of chemical elements
and compounds if a mechanistic theory of chemis­
try were true? Yes. Take any ordinary statement,
such as we find in chemistry books: e. g. , 'Nitrogen
and hydrogen combine when an electric discharge
is passed through a mixture of the two. The result­
ing compound contains three atoms of hydrogen to
one of nitrogen; it is a gas readily soluble in water,
and possessed of a pungent and characteristic
smell. ' If the mechanistic theory be true, the arch­
angel could deduce from his knowledge of the
microscopic structure of atoms all these facts but
the last. He would know exactly what the micro­
scopic structure of ammonia must be; but he would
be totally unable to predict that a substance with
this structure must smell as ammonia does when it
gets into the human nose. The utmost that he could
predict on this subject would be that certain
changes would take place in the mucous mem­
brane, the olfactory nerves and so on. But he
could not possibly know that these changes would
be accompanied by the appearance of a smell in
general or of the peculiar smell of ammonia in
particular, unless someone told him so or he had
smelled it for himself. If the existence of the so­
called secondary qualities, or the fact of their
appearance, depends on the microscopic move­
ments and arrangements of material particles
which do not have these qualities themselves,
then the laws of this dependence are certainly of
the emergent type.
The mechanistic theory about vital behaviour
should now need little explanation. A man can
hold it without being a mechanist about chemistry.
The minimum that a Biological Mechanist need
believe is that, in theory, everything that is charac­
teristic of the behaviour of a living body could be
deduced from an adequate knowledge of its struc­
ture, the chemical compounds which make it up,
and the properties which these show in isolation or
in non-living wholes. \n38
w. V. Quine
One conspicuous concern of analytical or scientific
philosophy has been to reduce some notions to
others, preferably to less putative ones. A familiar
case of such reduction is Frege's definition of
number. Each natural number n became, if I may
speak in circles, the class of all n-member classes.
As is also well known, Frege's was not the only
good way. Another was von Neumann's. Under it,
if! may again speak in circles, each natural number
n became the class of all numbers less than n.
In my judgment we have satisfactorily reduced
one predicate to others, certainly, if in terms of
these others we have fashioned an open sentence
that is coextensive with the predicate in question as
originally interpreted; i. e. , that is satisfied by the
same values of the variables. But this standard does
not suit the Frege and von Neumann reductions of
number; for these reductions are both good, yet not
coextensive with each other.
Again, consider Carnap's clarification of mea­
sure, or impure number, where he construes 'the
temperature of x is n°C' in the fashion 'the tem­
perature-in-degrees-Centigrade of x is n' and so
dispenses with the impure numbers nOC in favor
of the pure numbers n. l There had been, we might
say, a two-place predicate 'H' of temperature such
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 61
(1964), pp. 209-16; the substantially revised version
reprinted here is from my The Ways of Paradox (New
York: Random House, 1966). I am grateful to Kenneth
F. Schaffner for a letter of inquiry that sparked the
revision. Copyright © byW. V. Quine. Reprinted by per­
mission of Columbia University.
that 'H(x, a)' meant that the temperature of x was
a. We end up with a new two-place predicate 'Ho'
of temperature in degrees Centigrade. 'H (x, n° C)'
is explained away as 'H, (x, n)'. But 'H' is not
coextensive with 'Hc', or indeed with any surviving
open sentence at all; 'H' had applied to putative
things a, impure numbers, which come to be ban­
ished from the universe. Their banishment was
Carnap's very purpose. Such reduction is in part
ontological, as we may say, and coextensiveness
here is clearly not the point.
The definitions of numbers by Frege and von
Neumann are best seen as ontological reductions
too. Carnap, in the last example, showed how to
skip the impure numbers and get by with pure
ones. Just so, we might say, Frege and von Neu­
mann showed how to skip the natural numbers and
get by with what we may for the moment call Frege
classes and von Neumann classes. There is only this
-difference of detail: Frege classes and von Neu­
mann classes simulate the behavior of the natural
numbers to the point where it is convenient to call
them natural numbers, instead of saying that we
have contrived to dispense with the natural num­
bers as Carnap dispensed with impure numbers.
Where reduction is in part ontological, we see,
coextensiveness is not the issue. What then is?
Consider again Frege's way and von Neumann's
of construing natural number. And there is yet a
third well-known way, Zermelo's. Why are these
all good? What have they in common? Each is a
structure-preserving model of the natural num­
bers. Each preserves arithmetic, and that is \nW. V. Quine
enough. It has been urged that we need more: we
need also to provide for translating mixed contexts
in which the arithmetical idioms occur in company
with expressions concerning physical objects and
the like. Specifically, we need to be able to say
what it means for a class to have n members. But in
fact this is no added requirement. We can say what it
means for a class to have n members no matter how
we construe the numbers, as long as we have them in
order. For to say that a class has n members is simply
to say that the members of the class can be correlated
with the natural numbers up to n, whatever they are.
The real numbers, like the natural numbers, can
be taken in a variety of ways. The Dedekind cut is
the central idea, but you can use it to explain real
numbers either as certain classes of ratios, or as
certain relations of natural numbers, or as certain
classes of natural numbers. Under the first method,
if I may again speak in circles, each real number x
becomes the class of all ratios less than x. Under the
second method, x becomes this relation of natural
numbers: m bears the relation to n if m stands to n
in a ratio less than x. For the third version, we
change this relation of natural numbers to a
class of natural numbers by mapping the ordered
pairs of natural numbers into the natural numbers.
All three alternatives are admissible, and what all
three conspicuously have in common is, again, just
the relevant structure: each is a structure-preserv­
ing model of the real numbers. Again it seems that
no more is needed to assure satisfactory translation
also of any mixed contexts. When real numbers are
applied to magnitudes in the physical world, any
model of the real numbers could be applied as well.
The same proves true when we come to the
imaginary numbers and the infinite numbers, car­
dinal and ordinal: the problem of construing comes
to no more, again, than modeling. Once we find a
model that reproduces the formal structure, there
seems to be no difficulty in translating any mixed
contexts as well.
These cases suggest that what justifies the
reduction of one system of objects to another is
preservation of relevant structure. Since, according
to the Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem, any theory
that admits of a true interpretation at all admits of
a model in the natural numbers, G. D. W. Berry
concluded that only common sense stands in the
way of adopting an all-purpose Pythagorean onto­
logy: natural numbers exclusively.
There is an interesting reversal here. Our first
examples of ontological reduction were Frege's and
von Neumann's reductions of natural number to
set theory. These and other examples encouraged
the thought that what matters in such reduction is
the discovery of a model. And so we end up saying,
in view of the Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem, that
theories about objects of any sort can, when true, be
reduced to theories of natural numbers. Instead of
reducing talk of numbers to talk of sets, we may
reduce talk of sets - and of all else - to talk of
natural numbers. And here there is an evident
again, since the natural numbers are relatively
clear and, as infinite sets go, economical.
But is it true that all that matters is a model? Any
interpretable theory can, in view of the Liiwenheim
-Skolem theorem, be modeled in the natural num­
bers, yes; but does this entitle us to say that it is
once and for all reducible to that domain, in a sense
that would allow us thenceforward to repudiate the
old objects for all purposes and recognize just the
new ones, the natural numbers? Examples encour­
aged in us the impression that modelling assured
such reducibility, but we should be able to confirm
or remove the impression with a little analysis.
What do we require of a reduction of one theory
to another? Here is a complaisant answer: any
effective mapping of closed sentences on closed
sentences will serve if it preserves truth. If we settle
for this, then what of the thesis that every true
theory B can be reduced to a theory about natural
numbers? It can be proved, even without the Liiw­
enheim-Skolem theorem. For we can translate
each closed sentence S of B as 'Tx' with x as the
Giidel number of S and with 'T' as the truth
predicate for B, a predicate satisfied by all and only
the Giidel numbers of true sentences of B.
Of this trivial way of reducing an ontology to
natural numbers, it must be said that whatever it
saves in ontology it pays for in ideology: we have to
strengthen the primitive predicates. For we know
from Giidel and Tarski that the truth predicate ofB
is expressible only in terms that are stronger in
essential ways than any originally available in B
itself. 2
Nor is this a price that can in general be saved by
invoking the Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem. I shall
explain why not. When, in conformity with the
proof of the Liiwenheim - Skolem theorem, we
reinterpret the primitive predicates of a theory B
so as to make them predicates of natural numbers,
we do not in general make them arithmetical pre­
dicates. That is, they do not in general go over into
predicates that can be expressed in terms of sum,
product, equality and logic. If we are modeling
merely the theorems of a deductive system - the \nimplicates of an effective if not finite set of axioms
- then certainly we can get arithmetical reinterpre­
tations of the predicates. .1 But that is not what we
are about. We are concerned rather to accommod­
ate all the truths of (j - all the sentences, regardless
ofaxiomatizability, that were true under the origi­
nal interpretation of the predicates of (j. There is,
under the Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem, a reinter­
pretation that carries all these truth into truths
about natural numbers; but there may be no such
interpretation in arithmetical terms. There will be
if (j admits of complete axiomatization, of course,
and there will be under some other circumstances,
but not under all. In the general case the most that
can be said is, again, that the numerical reinterpre­
tations are expressible in the notation of arithmetic
plus the truth predicate for (j. 4
So on the whole the reduction to a Pythagorean
ontology exacts a price in ideology whether we
invoke the truth predicate directly or let ourselves
be guided by the argument of the Liiwenheim­
Skolem theorem. Still there is a reason for prefer­
ring the latter, longer line. When I suggested
simply translating S as 'Tx' with x as Giidel num­
ber of S, I was taking advantage of the liberal
standard: reduction was just any effective and
truth-preserving mapping of closed sentences on
closed sentences. Now the virtue of the longer line
is that it works also for a less liberal standard of
reduction. Instead of accepting just any and every
mapping of closed sentences on closed sentences so
long as it is effective and truth-preserving, we can
insist rather that it preserve predicate structure.
That is, instead of mapping just whole sentences
of (j on sentences, we can require that each of the
erstwhile primitive predicates of (j carryover into a
predicate or open sentence about the new objects
(the natural numbers).
Whatever its proof and whatever its semantics, a
doctrine of blanket reducibility of ontologies to
natural numbers surely trivializes most further
ontological endeavor. If the universe of discourse
of every theory can as a matter of course be stand­
ardized as the Pythagorean universe, then appar­
ently the only special ontological reduction to
aspire to in any particular theory is reduction to a
finite universe. Once the size is both finite and
specified, of course, ontological considerations
lose all force; for we can then reduce all quantifica­
tions to conjunctions and alternations and so retain
no recognizably referential apparatus.
Some further scope for ontological endeavor
does still remain, I suppose, in the relativity to
Ontological Reduction and the World of Numbers
ideology. One can try to reduce a given theory to
the Pythagorean ontology without stepping up its
ideology. This endeavor has little bearing on com­
pletely axiomatized theories, however, since they
reduce to pure arithmetic, or elementary number
theory. 5
Anyway we seem to have trivialized most onto­
logical contrasts. Perhaps the trouble is that our
standard of ontological reduction is still too liberal.
We narrowed it appreciably when we required that
the predicates be construed severally. But we still
did not make it very narrow. We continued to allow
the several predicates of a theory (j to go over into
any predicates or open sentences concerning nat­
ural numbers, so long merely as the truth-values of
closed sentences were preserved.
Let us return to the Carnap case of impure
number for a closer look. We are initially con­
fronted with a theory whose objects include
place-times x and impure numbers a and whose
primitive predicates include 'If'. We reduce the
theory to a new one whose objects include place­
times and pure numbers, and whose predicates
include 'He'. The crucial step consists of explaining
'H(x, nOC)' as 'Hc(x, n)'.
Now this is successful, if it is, because three
conditions are met. One is, of course, that
'Hc(x, n)' under the intended interpretation agrees
in truth-value with 'H(x, nO)C', under its origin­
ally intended interpretation, for all values of x and
n. A second condition is that, in the original theory,
all mention of impure numbers a was confined or
confinable to the specific form of context 'H(x, a)'.
Otherwise the switch to 'Hc(x, n)' would not elim­
inate such mention. But if this condition were to
fail, through there being further predicates (say a
predicate oflength or of density) and further units
(say meters) along with 'If' and degrees, we could
still win through by just treating them similarly. A
third condition, finally, is that an impure number a
can always be referred to in terms of a pure number
and a unit: thus nOC, n meters. Otherwise explain­
ing 'H(x, nOC)' as 'Hc(x, n)' would not take care of
'H(x, oo)'.
This third condition is that we be able to specify
what I shall call a proxy function: a function which
assigns one of the new things, in this example a
pure number, to each of the old things - each of the
impure numbers of temperature. In this example
the proxy function is the function 'how many
degrees centigrade' - the function f such that
f(n°C) = n. It is not required that such a function
be expressible in the original theory (j to which 'H' \nW. V. Quine
belonged, much less that it be available in the final
theory (j' to which 'He' belongs. It is required
rather of us, out in the metatheory where we are
explaining and justifying the discontinuance of (j in
favor of (j', that we have some means of expressing
a proxy function. Only upon us, who explain
'H(x, a)' away by 'Hr(x, n)', does it devolve to
show how every a that was intended in the old (j
determines an n of the new (j'.
In these three conditions we have a further
narrowing of what had been too liberal a standard
of what to count as a reduction of one theory or
ontology to another. We have in fact narrowed it
to where, as it seems to me, the things we should
like to count as reduction do so count and the
rest do not. Carnap's elimination of impure
number so counts; likewise Frege's and von Neu­
mann's reduction of natural arithmetic to set
theory; likewise the various essentially Dedekin­
dian reductions of the theory of real numbers.
Yet the general trivialization of ontology fails;
there ceases to be any evident way of arguing,
from the Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem, that onto­
logies are generally reducible to the natural
numbers.
The three conditions came to us in an example.
If we restate them more generally, they lose their
tripartite character. The standard of reduction of a
theory (j to a theory (j' can now be put as follows.
We specify a function, not necessarily in the
notation of (j or (j', which admits as arguments all
objects in the universe of (j' and takes values in the
universe of (j'. This is the proxy function. Then to
each n-place primitive predicate of (j, for each n,
we effectively associate an open sentence of (j' in n
free variables, in such a way that the predicate
is fulfilled by an n-tuple of arguments of the
proxy function always and only when the open
sentence is fulfilled by the corresponding n-tuple
of values.
For brevity I am supposing that (j has only pre­
dicates, variables, quantifiers, and truth functions.
The exclusion of singular terms, function signs,
abstraction operators, and the like is no real restric­
tion, for these accessories are reducible to the nar­
rower basis in familiar ways.
Let us try applying the above standard of reduc­
tion to the Frege case: Frege's reduction of number
to set theory. Here the proxy function I is the
function which, applied, e. g. , to the 'genuine'
number 5, gives as value the class of all five-mem­
ber classes (Frege's so-called 5). In general, Ix is
describable as the class of all x-member classes.
When the real numbers are reduced (by what I
called the first method) to classes of ratios, jx is the
class of all ratios less than the 'genuine' real
number x.
I must admit that my formulation suffers from a
conspicuous element of make-believe. Thus, in the
Carnap case I had to talk as if there were such things
as xOC, much though I applaud Carnap's repudia­
tion of them. In the Frege case I had to talk as if the
'genuine' number 5 were really something over and
above Frege's, much though I applaud his reduc­
tion. My formulation belongs, by its nature, in an
inclusive theory that admits the objects of (j, as
unreduced, and the objects of (j' on an equal
footing.
But the formulation seems, if we overlook this
imperfection, to mark the boundary we want.
Ontological reductions that were felt to be serious
do conform. Another that conforms, besides those
thus far mentioned, is the reduction of an ontology
of place-times to an ontology of number quadru­
ples by means of Cartesian coordinates. And at the
same time any sweeping Pythagoreanization on the
strength of the Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem is
obstructed. The proof of the Liiwenheim-Skolem
theorem is such as to enable us to give the predic­
ates of the numerical model; but the standard of
ontological reduction that we have now reached
requires more than that. Reduction of a theory (j
to natural numbers - true reduction by our new
standard, and not mere modeling - means deter­
mining a proxy function that actually assigns num­
bers to all the objects of (j and maps the predicates
of (j into open sentences of the numerical model.
Where this can be done, with preservation of truth­
values of closed sentences, we may well speak of
reduction to natural numbers. But the Liiwen­
heim-Skolem argument determines, in the general
case, no proxy function. It does not determine
which numbers are to go proxy for the respective
objects of (j. Therein it falls short of our standard of
ontological reduction.
It emerged early in this paper that what justifies
an ontological reduction is, vaguely speaking, pre­
servation of relevant structure. What we now per­
ceive is that this relevant structure runs deep; the
objects of the one system must be assigned sever­
ally to objects of the other.
Goodman argued along other lines to this con­
clusion and more; 6 he called for isomorphism,
thereby requiring one-to-one correspondence
between the old objects and their proxies. I prefer
to let different things have the same proxy. For \ninstance, n is wanted as proxy for both nOC and n
meters. Or again, consider hidden inflation. 7
Relieving such inflation is a respectable brand of
Notes
1 Rudolf Carnap, Physikalische BegrijJsbildung (Karls­
ruhe: G. Brawn, 1926).
2 See A. Tarski, Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics,
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1956), p. 273. There are
exceptions where () is especially weak; see J. R.
Myhill, 'A complete theory of natural, rational, and
real numbers', lournal "f"Symbolic LogIc 15 (1950), pp.
185-96, at p. 194.
3 See Hao Wang, 'Arithmetic models for formal sys­
tems', Methodos 3 (I951), pp. 217-32; also S. C.
Kleene, IntroductIon to Metamathematics (New York:
Van Nostrand, 1952), pp. 389-98 and more particu­
larly p. 431. For exposition see also my 'Interpreta­
tions of sets of conditions', Journal (if" Symbolic Logic
19 (I954), pp. 97-102.
4 This can be seen by examining the general construc­
tion in sect. 1 of my 'Interpretations of sets of condi­
tions'.
Ontological Reduction and the World of Numbers
ontological reduction, and it consists precisely in
taking one thing as proxy for all the things that
were indiscriminable from it. R
Thus far in this paper I have been recording things
that I said in the Shearman Lectures at University
College, London, February 1954. Not so from
here on.
6 Nelson Goodman, The Structure of Appearance (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1951), pp.
5-19.
7 For details see W. V. Quine, 'Necessary truth', in
The Ways (if" Paradox (New York: Random Hause,
1966).
8 I am indebted for this observation to Paul Benacerraf.
On such deflation see further my discussion of
identification of indiscernibles in Word and Object
(Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1960), p. 230; in
From a LogIcal Point of" View (Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press, 1953), pp. 71f; and in
'Reply to Professor Marcus', in Quine, Ways of
Paradox. \n39
Jerry A. Fodor
A typical thesis of positivistic philosophy of science
is that all true theories in the special sciences
should reduce to physical theories in the 'long
run'. This is intended to be an empirical thesis,
and part of the evidence which supports it is pro­
vided by such scientific successes as the molecular
theory of heat and the physical explanation of the
chemical bond. But the philosophical popularity of
the reductionist program cannot be explained by
reference to these achievements alone. The devel­
opment of science has witnessed the proliferation
of specialized disciplines at least as often as it has
witnessed their elimination, so the widespread
enthusiasm for the view that there will eventually
be only physics can hardly be a mere induction over
past reductionist successes.
I think that many philosophers who accept
reductionism do so primarily because they wish to
endorse the generality of physics vis-a-vis the spe­
cial sciences: roughly, the view that all events
which fall under the laws of any science are phys­
ical events and hence fall under the laws of phy­
sics. 1 For such philosophers, saying that physics is
basic science and saying that theories in the special
sciences must reduce to physical theories have
seemed to be two ways of saying the same thing,
so that the latter doctrine has come to be a standard
construal of the former.
Originally published in Synthese 28 (1974), pp. 77-
115, appearing under the title 'Special sciences, or
The disunity of science as a working hypothesis:
Copyright © by Kluwer Academic Publishers. Re­
printed by permission of the author and the publisher.
In what follows, I shall argue that this is a con­
siderable confusion. What has traditionally been
called 'the unity of science' is a much stronger,
and much less plausible, thesis than the generality
of physics. If this is true, it is important. Though
reductionism is an empirical doctrine, it is
intended to playa regulative role in scientific prac­
tice. Reducibility to physics is taken to be a con­
straint upon the acceptability of theories in the
special science, with the curious consequence that
the more the special sciences succeed, the more
they ought to disappear. Methodological problems
about psychology, in particular, arise in just this
way: The assumption that the subject matter of
psychology is part of the subject matter of physics
is taken to imply that psychological theories must
reduce to physical theories, and it is this latter
principle that makes the trouble. I want to avoid
the trouble by challenging the inference.
Reductionism is the view that all the special
sciences reduce to physics. The sense of 'reduce
to' is, however, proprietary. It can be characterized
as follows. 2
Let formula (1) be a law of the special science S.
Formula (1) is intended to be read as something
like 'all events which consist of x's being SI bring
about events which consist of. v's being S2" I
assume that a science is individuated largely by
reference to its typical predicates (see n. 2), hence
that if S is a special science, 'SI' and 'Sz' are not
predicates of basic physics. (I also assume that the \n'all' which quantifies laws of the special sciences
needs to be taken with a grain of salt. Such laws are
typically not exceptionless. This is a point to which
I shall return at length. ) A necessary and sufficient
condition for the reduction of formula (1) to a law
of physics is that the formulae (2) and (3) should be
laws, and a necessary and sufficient condition for
the reduction
(2a) SIX. .. .. PIX
(2b) SLy. .. .. PLY
(3) PjJ-. ' --+ PLY
of S to physics is that all its laws should be so
reduced. 3
'PI' and 'PI' are supposed to be predicates of
physics, and formula (3) is supposed to be a phys­
icallaw. Formulae like (2) are often called 'bridge'
laws. Their characteristic feature is that they con­
tain predicates of both the reduced and the redu­
cing science. Bridge laws like formula (2) are thus
contrasted with 'proper' laws like formulae (1) and
(3). The upshot of the remarks so far is that the
reduction of a science requires that any formula
which appears as the antecedent or consequent of
one of its proper laws must appear as the reduced
formula in some bridge law or other. 4
Several points about the connective '--+' are now
in order. First, whatever properties that connective
may have, it is universally agreed that it must be
transitive. This is important, because it is usually
assumed that the reduction of some of the special
sciences proceeds via bridge laws which connect
their predicates with those of intermediate redu­
cing theories. Thus, psychology is presumed to
reduce to physics via, say, neurology, biochemis­
try, and other local stops. The present point is that
this makes no difference to the logic of the situation
so long as the transitivity of'--+' is assumed. Bridge
laws which connect the predicates of S to those of
S* will satisfy the constraints upon the reduction of
S to physics so long as there are other bridge laws
which, directly or indirectly, connect the predic­
ates of S* to physical predicates.
There are, however, quite serious open ques­
tions about the interpretation of '--t' in bridge
laws. What turns on these questions is the extent
to which reductionism is taken to be a physicalist
thesis.
To begin with, if we read '--t' as 'brings about'
or 'causes' in proper laws, we will have to have
some other connective for bridge laws, since bring-
Special Sciences
ing about and causing are presumably asymmetric,
while bridge laws express symmetric relations.
Moreover, unless bridge laws hold by virtue of
the identity of the events which satisfy their ante­
cedents with those that satisfy their consequents,
reductionism will guarantee only a weak version of
physicalism, and this would fail to express the
underlying ontological bias of the reductionist
program.
If bridge laws are not-identity statements, then
formulae like (2) claim at most that, by law, x's
satisfaction of a P predicate and x's satisfaction of
an S predicate are causally correlated. It follows
from this that it is nomologically necessary that S
and P predicates apply to the same things (i. e. , that
S predicates apply to a subset of the things that P
predicates apply to). But, of course, this is compat­
ible with a non physicalist ontology, since it is
compatible with the possibility that x's satisfying
S should not itself be a physical event. On this
interpretation, the truth of reductionism does not
guarantee the generality of physics vis-a-vis the
special sciences, since there are some events (satis­
factions of S predicates) which fall in the domain of
a special science (S) but not in the domain of
physics. (One could imagine, for example, a doc­
trine according to which physical and psychological
predicates are both held to apply to organisms, but
where it is denied that the event which consists of
an organism's satisfying a psychological predicate
is, in any sense, a physical event. The upshot would
be a kind of psychophysical dualism of a non­
Cartesian variety, a dualism of events and/ or prop­
erties rather than substances. )
Given these sorts of considerations, many philo­
sophers have held that bridge laws like formula (2)
ought to be taken to express contingent event
identities, so that one would read formula (2a) in
some such fashion as 'every event which consists of
an x's satisfying S I is identical to some event which
consists of that x's satisfying PI and vice versa'. On
this reading, the truth of reductionism would entail
that every event that falls under any scientific law is
a physical event, thereby simultaneously expres­
sing the ontological bias of reductionism and guar­
anteeing the generality of physics vis-a-vis the
special sciences.
If the bridge laws express event identities, and if
every event that falls under the proper laws of a
special science falls under a bridge law, we get
classical reductionism, a doctrine that entails the
truth of what I shall call 'token physicalism'. Token
physicalism is simply the claim that all the events \nJerry A. Fodor
that the sciences talk about are physical events.
There are three things to notice about token phy­
sicalism.
First, it is weaker than what is usually called
'materialism'. Materialism claims both that token
physicalism is true and that every event falls under
the laws of some science or other. One could
therefore be a token physicalist without being a
materialist, though I don't see why anyone would
bother.
Second, token physicalism is weaker than what
might be called 'type physicalism', the doctrine,
roughly, that every property mentioned in the laws
of any science is a physical property. Token phy­
sicalism does not entail type physicalism, if only
because the contingent identity of a pair of events
presumably does not guarantee the identity of the
properties whose instantiation constitutes the
events; not even when the event identity is nomo­
logically necessary. On the other hand, if an event
is simply the instantiation of a property, then type
physicalism does entail token physicalism; two
events will be identical when they consist of the
instantiation of the same property by the same
individual at the same time.
Third, token physicalism is weaker than reduc­
tionism. Since this point is, in a certain sense, the
burden of the argument to follow, I shan't labor it
here. But, as a first approximation, reductionism is
the conjunction of token physicalism with the
assumption that there are natural kind predicates
in an ideally completed physics which correspond
to each natural kind predicate in any ideally com­
pleted special science. It will be one of my morals
that reductionism cannot be inferred from the
assumption that token physicalism is true. Reduc­
tionism is a sufficient, but not a necessary, condi­
tion for token physicalism.
To summarize: I shall be reading reductionism
as entailing token physicalism, since, if bridge laws
state nomologically necessary contingent event
identities, a reduction of psychology to neurology
would require that any event which consists of the
instantiation of a psychological property is identical
with some event which consists of the instantiation
of a neurological property. Both reductionism and
token physicalism entail the generality of physics,
since both hold that any event which falls within
the universe of discourse of a special science will
also fall within the universe of discourse of physics.
Moreover, it is a consequence of both doctrines
that any prediction which follows from the laws
of a special science (and a statement of initial con-
ditions) will follow equally from a theory which
consists only of physics and the bridge laws
(together with the statement of initial conditions).
Finally, it is assumed by both reductionism and
token physicalism that physics is the only basic
science; viz. , that it is the only science that is
general in the sense just specified.
I now want to argue that reductionism is too
strong a constraint upon the unity of science, but
that, for any reasonable purposes, the weaker doc­
trine will do.
Every science implies a taxonomy of the events in
its universe of discourse. In particular, every
science employs a descriptive vocabulary of theo­
retical and observation predicates, such that events
fall under the laws of the science by virtue of
satisfying those predicates. Patently, not every
true description of an event is a description in
such a vocabulary. For example, there are a large
number of events which consist of things having
been transported to a distance of less than three
miles from the Eiffel Tower. I take it, however, that
there is no science which contains 'is transported to
a distance of less than three miles from the Eiffel
Tower' as part of its descriptive vocabulary.
Equivalently, I take it that there is no natural law
which applies to events in virtue of their instantiat­
ing the property is transported to a distance of less
than three miles from the Eiffel Tower (though I
suppose it is just conceivable that there is some
law that applies to events in virtue of their instan­
tiating some distinct but coextensive property). By
way of abbreviating these facts, I shall say that the
property is transported. .. does not determine a
(natural) kind, and that predicates which express
that property are not (natural) kind predicates.
If! knew what a law is, and if! believed that sci­
entific theories consist just of bodies of laws, then
I could say that 'P' is a kind predicate relative to S
if S contains proper laws of the form 'Pr -->. .. y'
or '. .. y --> P/: roughly, the kind predicates of a
science are the ones whose terms are the bound
variables in its proper laws. I am inclined to say this
even in my present state of ignorance, accepting the
consequence that it makes the murky notion of a
kind viciously dependent on the equally murky
notions of law and theo~y. There is no firm footing
here. If we disagree about what a kind is, we will
probably also disagree about what a law is, and for
the same reasons. I don't know how to break out of
this circle, but I think that there are some interest­
ing things to say about which circle we are in. \nFor example, we can now characterize the
respect in which reductionism is too strong a con­
strual of the doctrine of the unity of science. If
reductionism is true, then every kind is, or is coex­
tensive with, a physical kind. (Every kind is a
physical kind if bridge statements express nomolo­
gically necessary property identities, and every
kind is coextensive with a physical kind if bridge
statements express nomologically necessary event
identities. ) This follows immediately from the
reductionist premise that every predicate which
appears as the antecedent or consequent of a law
of a special science must appear as one of the
reduced predicates in some bridge law, together
with the assumption that the kind predicates are
the ones whose terms are the bound variables in
proper laws. If, in short, some physical law is
related to each law of a special science in the way
that formula (3) is related to formula (I), then every
kind predicate of a special science is related to
a kind predicate of physics in the way that formula
(2) relates 'S1 ' and 'S2' to 'PI' and 'PI' respectively.
I now want to suggest some reasons for believing
that this consequence is intolerable. These are not
supposed to be knock-down reasons; they couldn't
be, given that the question of whether reduction­
ism is too strong is finally an empirical question.
(The world could turn out to be such that every
kind corresponds to a physical kind, just as it could
turn out to be such that the property is transported
to a distance of less than three miles from the EifJel
Tower determines a kind in, say, hydrodynamics.
It's just that, as things stand, it seems very unlikely
that the world will turn out to be either of these
ways. )
The reason it is unlikely that every kind corres­
ponds to a physical kind is just that (a) interesting
generalizations (e. g. , counterfactual supporting
generalizations) can often be made about events
whose physical descriptions have nothing in com­
mon; (b) it is often the case that whether the phys­
ical descriptions of the events subsumed by such
generalizations have anything in common is, in an
obvious sense, entirely irrelevant to the truth of the
generalizations, or to their interestingness, or to
their degree of confirmation, or, indeed, to any of
their epistemologically important properties; and
(c) the special sciences are very much in the busi­
ness of formulating generalizations of this kind.
I take it that these remarks are obvious to the
point of self-certification; they leap to the eye as
soon as one makes the (apparently radical) move of
taking the existence of the special sciences at all
Special Sciences
seriously. Suppose, for example, that Gresham's
'law' really is true. (If one doesn't like Gresham's
law, then any true and counterfactual supporting
generalization of any conceivable future economics
will probably do as well. ) Gresham's law says
something about what will happen in monetary
exchanges under certain conditions. I am willing
to believe that physics is general in the sense that it
implies that any event which consists of a monetary
exchange (hence any event which falls under Gre­
sham's law) has a true description in the vocabulary of
physics and in virtue of which it falls under the laws of
physics. But banal considerations suggest that a
physical description which covers all such events
must be wildly disjunctive. Some monetary
exchanges involve strings of wampum. Some
involve dollar bills. And some involve signing
one's name to a check. What are the chances that
a disjunction of physical predicates which covers all
these events (i. e. , a disjunctive predicate which can
form the right-hand side of a bridge law of the form
'x is a monetary exchange <->. .. ') expresses a phy­
sical kind? In particular, what are the chances that
such a predicate forms the antecedent or con­
sequent of some proper law of physics? The point
is that monetary exchanges have interesting things
in common; Gresham's law, if true, says what one
of these interesting things is. But what is interest­
ing about monetary exchanges is surely not their
commonalities under physical description. A kind
like a monetary exchange could turn out to be
coextensive with a physical kind; but if it did, that
would be an accident on a cosmic scale.
In fact, the situation for reductionism is still
worse than the discussion thus far suggests. For
reductionism claims not only that all kinds are
coextensive with physical kinds, but that the coex­
tensions are nomologically necessary: bridge laws
are laws. So, if Gresham's law is true, it follows that
there is a (bridge) law of nature such that 'x is a
monetary exchange <-> x is P' is true for every value
of x, and such that P is a term for a physical kind.
But, surely, there is no such law. If there were, then
P would have to cover not only all the systems of
monetary exchange that there are, but also all the
systems of monetary exchange that there could be; a
law must succeed with the counterfactuals. What
physical predicate is a candidate for P in 'x is a
nomologically possible monetary exchange iff Px'?
To summarize: An immortal econophysicist
might, when the whole show is over, find a pre­
dicate in physics that was, in brute fact, coextensive
with 'is a monetary exchange'. If physics is \nJerry A. Fodor
general - if the ontological biases of reductionism
are true - then there must be such a predicate. But
(a) to paraphrase a remark Professor Donald
Davidson made in a slightly different context,
nothing but brute enumeration could convince us
of this brute coextensivity, and (b) there would
seem to be no chance at all that the physical pre­
dicate employed in stating the coextensivity would
be a physical kind term, and (c) there is still less
chance that the coextension would be lawful (i. e. ,
that it would hold not only for the nomologically
possible world that turned out to be real, but for
any nomologically possible world at all). 5
I take it that the preceding discussion strongly
suggests that economics is not reducible to physics
in the special sense of reduction involved in claims
for the unity of science. There is, I suspect, nothing
peculiar about economics in this respect; the rea­
sons why economics is unlikely to reduce to physics
are paralleled by those which suggest that psycho­
logy is unlikely to reduce to neurology.
If psychology is reducible to neurology, then for
every psychological kind predicate there is a coex­
tensive neurological kind predicate, and the gener­
alization which states this coextension is a law.
Clearly, many psychologists believe something of
the sort. There are departments of psychobiology
or psychology and brain science in universities
throughout the world whose very existence is an
institutionalized gamble that such lawful coexten­
sions can be found. Yet, as has been frequently
remarked in recent discussions of materialism,
there are good grounds for hedging these bets.
There are no firm data for any but the grossest
correspondence between types of psychological
states and types of neurological states, and it is
entirely possible that the nervous system of higher
organisms characteristically achieves a given psy­
chological end by a wide variety of neurological
means. It is also possible that given neurological
structures subserve many different psychological
functions at different times, depending upon the
character of the activities in which the organism is
engaged. 6 In either event, the attempt to pair neu­
rological structures with psychological functions
could expect only limited success. Physiological
psychologists of the stature of Karl Lashley have
held this sort of view.
The present point is that the reductionist pro­
gram in psychology is clearly not to be defended on
ontological grounds. Even if (token) psychological
events are (token) neurological events, it does not
follow that the kind predicates of psychology are
coextensive with the kind predicates of any other
discipline (including physics). That is, the assump­
tion that every psychological event is a physical
event does not guarantee that physics (or, afortiori,
any other discipline more general than psychology)
can provide an appropriate vocabulary for psycho­
logical theories. I emphasize this point because I
am convinced that the make-or-break commitment
of many physiological psychologists to the reduc­
tionist program stems precisely from having con­
fused that program with (token) physicalism.
What I have been doubting is that there are
neurological kinds coextensive with psychological
kinds. What seems increasingly clear is that, even if
there are such coextensions, they cannot be lawful.
For it seems increasingly likely that there are
nomologically possible systems other than organ­
isms (viz. , automata) which satisfy the kind predic­
ates of psychology but which satisfy no
neurological predicates at all. Now, as Putnam has
emphasized, 7 if there are any such systems, then
there must be vast numbers, since equivalent auto­
mata can, in principle, be made out of practically
anything. If this observation is correct, then there
can be no serious hope that the class of automata
whose psychology is effectively identical to that of
some organism can be described by physical kind
predicates (though, of course, if token physicalism
is true, that class can be picked out by some phys­
ical predicate or other). The upshot is that the
classical formulation of the unity of science is at
the mercy of progress in the field of computer
simulation. This is, of course, simply to say that
that formulation was too strong. The unity of
science was intended to be an empirical hypothesis,
defeasible by possible scientific findings. But no
one had it in mind that it should be defeated by
Newell, Shaw, and Simon.
I have thus far argued that psychological reduc­
tionism (the doctrine that every psychological nat­
ural kind is, or is coextensive with, a neurological
natural kind) is not equivalent to, and cannot be
inferred from, token physicalism (the doctrine that
every psychological event is a neurological event).
It may, however, be argued that one might as well
take the doctrines to be equivalent, since the only
possible evidence one could have for token physic­
alism would also be evidence for reductionism:
viz. , that such evidence would have to consist in
the discovery of type-to-type psychophysical cor­
relations.
A moment's consideration shows, however, that
this argument is not well taken. If type-to-type \npsychophysical correlations would be evidence for
token physicalism, so would correlations of other
specifiable kinds.
We have type-to-type correlations where, for
every n-tuple of events that are of the same psy­
chological kind, there is a correlated n-tuple of
events that are of the same neurological kind. 8
Imagine a world in which such correlations are
not forthcoming. What is found, instead, is that
for every n-tuple of type-identical psychological
events, there is a spatiotemporally correlated n­
tuple of type-distinct neurological events. That is,
every psychological event is paired with some neu­
rological event or other, but psychological events of
the same kind are sometimes paired with some
neurological events of different kinds. My present
point is that such pairings would provide as much
support for token physicalism as type-to-type pair­
ings do so long as we are able to show that the type­
distinct neurological events paired with a given kind of
p~ychological event are identical in respect of whatever
properties are relevant to type identification in psy­
chology. Suppose, for purposes of explication, that
psychological events are type-identified by refer­
ence to their behavioral consequences. 9 Then what
is required of all the neurological events paired
with a class of type-homogeneous psychological
events is only that they be identical in respect of
their behavioral consequences. To put it briefly,
type-identical events do not, of course, have all
their properties in common, and type-distinct
events must nevertheless be identical in some of
their properties. The empirical confirmation of
token physicalism does not depend on showing
that the neurological counterparts of type-identical
psychological events are themselves type-identical.
What needs to be shown is just that they are ident­
ical in respect of those properties which determine
what kind of p~y(hological event a given event is.
Could we have evidence that an otherwise het­
erogeneous set of neurological events have those
kinds of properties in common? Of course we
could. The neurological theory might itself explain
why an n-tuple of neurologically type-distinct
events are identical in their behavioral conse­
quences, or, indeed, in respect of any of indefi­
nitely many other such relational properties. And,
if the neurological theory failed to do so, some
science more basic than neurology might succeed.
My point in all this is, once again, not that
correlations between type-homogeneous psycholo­
gical states and type-heterogeneous neurological
states would prove that token physicalism is true.
Special Sciences
It is only that such correlations might give us as
much reason to be token physicalists as type­
to-type correlations would. If this is correct, then
epistemological arguments from token physicalism
to reductionism must be wrong.
It seems to me (to put the point quite generally)
that the classical construal of the unity of science
has really badly misconstrued the goal of scientific
reduction. The point of reduction is not primarily
to find some natural kind predicate of physics
coextensive with each kind predicate of a special
science. It is, rather, to explicate the physical
mechanisms whereby events conform to the laws
of the special sciences. I have been arguing that
there is no logical or epistemological reason why
success in the second of these projects should
require success in the first, and that the two are
likely to come apart in fact wherever the physical
mechanisms whereby events conform to a law of
the special sciences are heterogeneous.
I take it that the discussion thus far shows that
reductionism is probably too strong a construal of
the unity of science; on the one hand, it is incom­
patible with probable results in the special sciences,
and, on the other, it is more than we need to assume
if what we primarily want, from an ontological
point of view, is just to be good token physicalists.
In what follows, I shall try to sketch a liberalized
version of the relation between physics and the
special sciences which seems to me to be just strong
enough in these respects. I shall then give a couple
of independent reasons for supposing that the
revised doctrine may be the right one.
The problem all along has been that there is an
open empirical possibility that what corresponds to
the kind predicates of a reduced science may be a
heterogeneous and unsystematic disjunction of
predicates in the reducing science. We do not
want the unity of science to be prejudiced by this
possibility. Suppose, then, that we allow that
bridge statements may be of this form,
(4) Sx <-+ PIX V Pzx V··· V Pnx
where PI V P z V. .. V P n is not a kind predicate in
the reducing science. I take it that this is tanta­
mount to allowing that at least some 'bridge laws'
may, in fact, not turn out to be laws, since I take it
that a necessary condition on a universal general­
ization being lawlike is that the predicates which
constitute its antecedent and consequent should be
kind predicates. I am thus assuming that it is \nJerry A. Fodor
enough, for purposes of the unity of science, that
every law of the special sciences should be reduci­
ble to physics by bridge statements which express
true empirical generalizations. Bearing in mind
that bridge statements are to be construed as spe­
cies of identity statements, formula (4) will be read
as something like 'every event which consists of x's
satisfying 5 is identical with some event which
consists of x's satisfying some or other predicate
belonging to the disjunction PI V pz·. . V Pn. '
Now, in cases of reduction where what cor­
responds to formula (2) is not a law, what
corresponds to formula (3) will not be either, and
for the same reason: viz. , the predicates appearing
in the antecedent and consequent will, by hypoth­
esis, not be kind predicates. Rather, what we will
have is something that looks like figure 39. 1. That
is, the antecedent and consequent of the reduced
law will each be connected with a disjunction of
predicates in the reducing science. Suppose, for the
moment, that the reduced law is exceptionless, viz. ,
that no 51 events satisfy P'. Then there will be laws
of the reducing science which connect the satisfac­
tion of each member of the disjunction associated
with the antecedent of the reduced law with the
satisfaction of some member of the disjunction
associated with the consequent of the reduced
law. That is, if 5 1x -> 5lY is exceptionless, then
there must be some proper law of the reducing
science which either states or entails that
PIX -> P* for some P*, and similarly for Pzx
through Pnx. Since there must be such laws, and
since each of them is a 'proper law' in the sense
which we have been using that term, it follows that
Law of special science:
Disjunctive predicate of
reducing science:
Laws of redUCing science:
PiX V P 2 x
I
each disjunct of PI V Pz V. .. V Pn is a kind pre­
dicate, as is each disjunct of PI V Pi V. .. V P~.
This, however, is where push comes to shove.
For it might be argued that if each disjunct of the P
disjunction is lawfully connected to some disjunct
of the P* disjunction, then it follows that formula
(5) is itself a law.
(5) PIX V Pzx V. '. V Pnx ->P~y V PiyV. .. V P; y
The point would be that the schema in figure 39. 1
implies PIX -> Piy, Pzx -> P~y, etc. , and the
argument from a premise of the form (P: :) R)
and (Q: :) 5) to a conclusion of the form
(P V Q): :) (R V 5) is valid.
What I am inclined to say about this is that it just
shows that 'it's a law that -' defines a non-truth­
functional context (or, equivalently for these pur­
poses, that not all truth functions ofkind predicates
are themselves kind predicates); in particular, that
one may not argue from: 'it's a law that P brings
about R' and 'it's a law that Q brings about 5' to
'it's a law that P or Q brings about R or S'. Though,
of course, the argument from those premises to 'P
or Q brings about R or 5' simpliciter is fine. ) I think,
for example, that it is a law that the irradiation of
green plants by sunlight causes carbohydrate
synthesis, and I think that it is a law that friction
causes heat, but I do not think that it is a law that
(either the irradiation of green plants by sunlight or
friction) causes (either carbohydrate synthesis or
heat). Correspondingly, I doubt that 'is either
v. .. Pnx, P'x P*iY v. ., P*2Y v. .. P*m Y
•
~
I
•
•
Figure 39. 1 Schematic representation of the proposed relation between the reduced and the reducing science on a
revised account of the unity of science. If any SI events are of the type pI, they will be exceptions to the law Sp' -> S2Y. \ncarbohydrate synthesis or heat' is plausibly taken to
be a kind predicate.
It is not strictly mandatory that one should agree
with all this, but one denies it at a price. In par­
ticular, if one allows the full range of truth-func­
tional arguments inside the context 'it's a law that
~', then one gives up the possibility of identifying
the kind predicates of a science with the ones which
constitute the antecedents or consequents of its
proper laws. (Thus formula (5) would be a proper
law of physics which fails to satisfy that condition. )
One thus inherits the need for an alternative con­
strual of the notion of a kind, and I don't know
what that alternative would be like.
The upshot seems to be this. If we do not require
that bridge statements must be laws, then either
some of the generalizations to which the laws of
special sciences reduce are not themselves lawlike,
or some laws are not formulable in terms of kinds.
Whichever way one takes formula (5), the import­
ant point is that the relation between sciences pro­
posed by figure 39. 1 is weaker than what standard
reductionism requires. In particular, it does not
imply a correspondence between the kind predic­
ates of the reduced and the reducing science. Yet it
does imply physicalism given the same assumption
that makes standard reductionism physicalistic:
viz. , that bridge statements express token event
identities. But these are precisely the properties
that we wanted a revised account of the unity of
science to exhibit.
I now want to give two further reasons for think­
ing that this construal of the unity of science is
right. First, it allows us to see how the laws of the
special sciences could reasonably have exceptions,
and, second, it allows us to see why there are special
sciences at all. These points in turn.
Consider, again, the model of reduction implicit
in formulae (2) and (3). I assume that the laws of
basic science are strictly exception less, and I
assume that it is common knowledge that the laws
of the special sciences are not. But now we have a
dilemma to face. Since '--+' expresses a relation (or
relations) which must be transitive, formula (1) can
have exceptions only if the bridge laws do. But if
the bridge laws have exceptions, reductionism loses
its ontological bite, since we can no longer say that
every event which consists of the satisfaction of an
S predicate consists of the satisfaction of a P pre­
dicate. In short, given the reductionist model, we
cannot consistently assume that the bridge laws
and the basic laws are exceptionless while assuming
that the special laws are not. But we cannot accept
Special Sciences
the violation of the bridge laws unless we are will­
ing to vitiate the ontological claim that is the main
point of the reductionist program.
We can get out of this (salve the reductionist
model) in one of two ways. We can give up the
claim that the special laws have exceptions, or we
can give up the claim that the basic laws are excep­
tionless. I suggest that both alternatives are unde­
sirable - the first because it flies in the face of fact.
There is just no chance at all that the true, counter­
factual supporting generalizations of, say, psycho­
logy, will turn out to hold in strictly each and every
condition where their antecedents are satisfied.
Even when the spirit is willing, the flesh is often
weak. There are always going to be behavioral
lapses which are physiologically explicable but
which are uninteresting from the point of view of
psychological theory. But the second alternative is
not much better. It may, after all, turn out that the
laws of basic science have exceptions. But the ques­
tion arises whether one wants the unity of science
to depend on the assumption that they do.
On the account summarized figure 39. 1, how­
ever, everything works out satisfactorily. A nomo­
logically sufficient condition for an exception to
SIX --+ S2. Y is that the bridge statements should
identify some occurrence of the satisfaction of Sl
with an occurrence of the satisfaction of any P*
predicate which is not itself lawfully connected to
the satisfaction of any P* predicate (i. e. , suppose Sl
is connected to pi such that there is no law which
connects pi to any predicate which bridge state­
ments associate with Sz. Then any instantiation of
S I which is contingently identical to an instantia­
tion of pi will be an event which constitutes an
exception to SIX --+ S2. Y). Notice that, in this case,
we need assume no exceptions to the laws of the
reducing science, since, by hypothesis, formula (5)
is not a law.
In fact, strictly speaking formula (5) has no sta­
tus in the reduction at all. It is simply what one gets
when one universally quantifies a formula whose
antecedent is the physical disjunction correspond­
ing to Sl and whose consequent is the physical
disjunction corresponding to Sz. As such, it will
be true when SIX --+ S2. Y is exceptionless and false
otherwise. What does the work of expressing the
physical mechanisms whereby n-tuples of events
conform, or fail to conform, to SIX --+ S2. Y is not
formula (5) but the laws which severally relate
elements of the disjunction PI V P z V. .. V Pn
to elements of the disjunction P; V Pi V. .. V P~
Where there is a law which relates an event that \nJerry A. Fodor
satisfies one of the P disjuncts to an event
which satisfies one of the P* disjuncts, the pair of
events so related conforms to SIX --t SzY. When an
event which satisfies a P predicate is not related by
law to an event which satisfies a P* predicate, that
event will constitute an exception to SIX --t Szy.
The point is that none of the laws which effect
these several connections need themselves have
exceptions in order that SIX --t Szy should do so.
To put this discussion less technically: We
could, if we liked, require the taxonomies of the
special sciences to correspond to the taxonomy of
physics by insisting upon distinctions between the
kinds postulated by the former whenever they turn
out to correspond to distinct kinds in the latter.
This would make the laws of the special sciences
exceptionless if the laws of basic science are. But it
would also likely lose us precisely the generaliza­
tions which we want the special sciences to express.
(If economics were to posit as many kinds of mone­
tary systems as there are physical realizations of
monetary systems, then the generalizations of eco­
nomics would be exceptionless - but, presumably,
only vacuously so, since there would be no general­
izations left for economists to state. Gresham's law,
for example, would have to be formulated as a vast,
open disjunction about what happens in monetary
system I or monetary system. under conditions
which would themselves defy uniform character­
ization. We would not be able to say what happens
in monetary systems tout court since, by hypothesis,
'is a monetary system' corresponds to no kind of
predicate of physics. )
In fact, what we do is precisely the reverse. We
allow the generalizations of the special sciences to
have exceptions, thus preserving the kinds to which
the generalizations apply. But since we know that
the physical descriptions of the members of these
kinds may be quite heterogeneous, and since we
know that the physical mechanisms which connect
the satisfaction of the antecedents of such general­
izations to the satisfaction of their consequents may
be equally diverse, we expect both that there will be
exceptions to the generalizations and that these will
be 'explained away' at the level of the reducing
science. This is one of the respects in which physics
really is assumed to be bedrock science; exceptions
to its generalizations (if there are any) had better be
random, because there is nowhere 'further down'
to go in explaining the mechanism whereby the
exceptions occur.
This brings us to why there are special sciences
at all. Reductionism, as we remarked at the outset,
flies in the face of the facts about the scientific
institution: the existence of a vast and interleaved
conglomerate of special scientific disciplines which
often appear to proceed with only the most casual
acknowledgment of the constraint that their the­
ories must turn out to be physics 'in the long run'. I
mean that the acceptance of this constraint often
plays little or no role in the practical validation of
theories. Why is this so? Presumably, the reduc­
tionist answer must be entire~v epistemological. If
only physical particles weren't so small (if only
brains were on the outside, where one can get a
look at them), then we would do physics instead
of paleontology (neurology instead of psychology,
psychology instead of economics, and so on down).
There is an epistemological reply: viz. , that even if
brains were out where they could be looked at, we
wouldn't, as things now stand, know what to look
for. We lack the appropriate theoretical apparatus
for the psychological taxonomy of neurological
events.
ffit turns out that the functional decomposition
of the nervous system corresponds precisely to its
neurological (anatomical, biochemical, physical)
decomposition, then there are only epistemological
reasons for studying the former instead of the
latter. But suppose that there is no such correspond­
ence? Suppose the functional organization of the
nervous system cross-cuts its neurological organ­
ization. Then the existence of psychology depends
not on the fact that neurons are so depressingly
small, but rather on the fact that neurology does
not posit the kinds that psychology requires.
I am suggesting, roughly, that there are special
sciences not because of the nature of our epistemic
relation to the world, but because of the way the
world is put together: not all the kinds (not all the
classes of things and events about which there are
important, counter factual supporting generaliza­
tions to make) are, or correspond to, physical
kinds. A way of stating the classical reductionist
view is that things which belong to different phy­
sical kinds ipso facto can have none of their project­
able descriptions in common: 10 that if X and y differ
in those descriptions by virtue of which they fall
under the proper laws of physics, they must differ
in those descriptions by virtue of which they fall
under any laws at all. But why should we believe
that this is so? Any pair of entities, however differ­
ent their physical structure, must nevertheless con­
verge in indefinitely many of their properties. Why
should there not be, among those convergent prop­
erties, some whose lawful interrelations support \nthe generalizations of the special sciences? Why,
in short, should not the kind predicates of the
special sciences cross-classify the physical natural
kinds?
Physics develops the taxonomy of its subject
matter which best suits its purposes: the formula­
tion of exceptionless laws which are basic in the
several senses discussed above. But this is not the
only taxonomy which may be required if the pur­
poses of science in general are to be served: e. g. , if
we are to state such true, counterfactual supporting
Notes
For expository convenience, I shall usually assume
that sciences are about events in at least the sense
that it is the occurrence of events that makes the
laws of a science true. Nothing, however, hangs on
this assumption.
2 The version of reductionism I shall be concerned with
is a stronger one than many philosophers of science
hold, a point worth emphasizing, since my argument
will be precisely that it is too strong to get away with.
Still, I think that what I shall be attacking is what
many people have in mind when they refer to the
unity of science, and I suspect (though I shan't try
to prove it) that many of the liberalized versions of
reductionism sutTer from the same basic defect as
what I shall take to be the classical form of the doc­
trine.
3 There is an implicit assumption that a science simply
is a formulation of a set of laws. I think that this
assumption is implausible, but it is usually made
when the unity of science is discussed, and it is neutral
so far as the main argument of this chapter is con­
cerned.
4 I shall sometimes refer to 'the predicate which con­
stitutes the antecedent or consequent of a law'. This is
shorthand for 'the predicate such that the antecedent
or consequent of a law consists of that predicate,
together with its bound variables and the quantifiers
which bind them'. .
P. Oppenheim and H. Putnam, "Unity of science as a
working hypothesis, " in H. Feigl, M. Scriven, and G.
Maxwell (cds), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy oj
Science, vol. 2 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 1958), pp. 3-36, argue that the social sciences
probably can be reduced to physics assuming that the
reduction proceeds via (individual) psychology. Thus,
they remark, "in economics, if very weak assumptions
are satisfied, it is possible to represent the way in
which an individual orders his choices by means of
an individual preference function. In terms of these
functions, the economist attempts to explain group
phenomena, such as the market, to account for
Special SCiences
generalizations as there are to state. So there are
special sciences, with their specialized taxonomies,
in the business of stating some of these general­
izations. If science is to be unified, then all such
taxonomies must apply to the same things. If physics
is to be basic science, then each of these things had
better be a physical thing. But it is not further
required that the taxonomies which the special
sciences employ must themselves reduce to the
taxonomy of physics. It is not required, and it is
probably not true.
collective consumer behavior, to solve the problems
of welfare economics, etc. " (p. 17). They seem not to
have noticed, however, that even if such explanations
can be carried through, they would not yield the kind
of predicate-by-predicate reduction of economics to
psychology that Oppenheim and Putnam's own
account of the unity of science requires.
Suppose that the laws of economics hold because
people have the attitudes, motives, goals, needs, stra­
tegies, etc. , that they do. Then the fact that economics
is the way it is can be explained by reference to the fact
that people are the way that they are. But it doesn't
begin to follow that the typical predicates of econo­
mics can be reduced to the typical predicates of psy­
chology. Since bridge laws entail biconditionals, PI
reduces to Pz only if PI and Pz are at least coextensive.
But while the typical predicates of economics sub­
sume (e. g. ) monetary systems, cash flows, commod­
ities, labor pools, amounts of capital invested, etc. , the
typical predicates of psychology subsume stimuli,
responses, and mental states. Given the proprietary
sense of 'reduction' at issue, to reduce economics to
psychology would therefore involve a very great deal
more than showing that the economic behavior of
groups is determined by the psychology of the indi­
viduals that constitute them. In particular, it would
involve showing that such notions as commodity, labor
pool, etc. , can be reconstructed in the vocabulary of
stimuli, responses, and mental states, and that, more­
over, the predicates which affect the reconstruction
express psychological kinds (viz. , occur in the proper
laws of psychology). I think it's fair to say that there is
no reason at all to suppose that such reconstructions
can be provided: prima facie there is every reason to
think that they cannot.
6 This would be the case if higher organisms really are
interestingly analogous to general-purpose compu­
ters. Such machines exhibit no detailed structure­
to-function correspondence over time: rather, the
function subserved by a given structure may change
from instant to instant depending upon the \nJerry A. Fodor
character of the program and of the computation
being performed.
7 H. Putnam, "Minds and machines, " in S. Hook (ed. ),
Dimensions oj Mind (New York, New York University
Press, (1960), pp. 138-64.
8 To rule out degenerate cases, we assume that n is large
enough to yield correlations that are significant in the
statistical sense.
9 I don't think there is any chance at all that this is true.
What is more likely is that type identification for
psychological states can be carried out in terms of
the 'total states' of an abstract automation which
models the organism whose states they are.
10 For the notion of projectability, see N. Goodman,
Fact, Fiction and Forecast (Indianapolis: Bobbs­
Merrill, 1965). \n40
Jaegwon Kim
Introduction
It is part of today's conventional wisdom in philo­
sophy of mind that psychological states are "multi­
ply realizable, " and are in fact so realized, in a
variety of structures and organisms. We are con­
stantly reminded that any mental state, say pain,
is capable of "realization, " "instantiation, " or
"implementation" in widely diverse neural-biolo­
gical structures in humans, felines, reptiles, mol­
luscs, and perhaps other organisms further
removed from us. Sometimes we are asked to
contemplate the possibility that extraterrestrial
creatures with a biochemistry radically different
from the earthlings', or even electromechanical
devices, can "realize the same psychology" that
characterizes humans. This claim, to be called
hereafter "the Multiple Realization Thesis"
("MR, "] for short), is widely accepted by philoso­
phers, especially those who are inclined to favor the
functionalist line on mentality. I will not here dis­
pute the truth of MR, although what I will say may
prompt a reassessment of the considerations that
have led to its nearly universal acceptance.
And there is an influential and virtually uncon­
tested view about the philosophical significance of
MR. This is the belief that MR refutes psycho­
physical reductionism once and for all. In particu-
Originally published in Philosophy and Phenomenolo­
gical Research 52 (1992), pp. 309-35. Reprinted by
permission of Brown University, Providence, 1992.
lar, the classic psychoneural identity theory of
Feigl and Smart, the so-called type physicalism,
is standardly thought to have been definitively dis­
patched by MR to the heap of obsolete philosoph­
ical theories of mind. At any rate, it is this claim,
that MR proves the physical irreducibility of the
mental, that will be the starting point of my dis­
cussIOn.
Evidently, the current popularity of anti-reduc­
tionist physicalism is owed, for the most part, to
the influence of the MR-based anti-reductionist
argument originally developed by Hilary Putnam
and elaborated further by Jerry Fodor2 - rather
more so than to the "anomalist" argument asso­
ciated with Donald Davidson. 3 For example, in
their elegant paper on nonreductive physicalism, 4
Geoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson motivate
their project in the following way:
Traditionally, physicalism has taken the form of
reductionism - roughly, that all scientific terms
can be given explicit definitions in physical
terms. Of late there has been growing aware­
ness, however, that reductionism is an unrea­
sonably strong claim.
But why is reductionism "unreasonably strong"?
In a footnote Hellman and Thompson explain,
citing Fodor's "Special Sciences":
Doubts have arisen especially in connection
with functional explanation in the higher-level
sciences (psychology, linguistics, social theory, \nJaegwon Kim
etc. ). Functional predicates may be physically
realizable in heterogeneous ways, so as to elude
physical definition.
And Ernest Lepore and Barry Loewer tell us this:
It is practically received wisdom among philo­
sophers of mind that psychological properties
(including content properties) are not identical
to neurophysiological or other physical proper­
ties. The relationship between psychological
and neurophysiological properties is that the
latter realize the former. Furthermore, a single
psychological property might (in the sense of
conceptual possibility) be realized by a large
number, perhaps infinitely many, of different
physical properties and even by non-physical
properties. 5
They then go on to sketch the reason why MR, on
their view, leads to the rejection of mind-body
reduction:
If there are infinitely many physical (and per­
haps nonphysical) properties which can realize
F, then F will not be reducible to a basic phy­
sical property. Even if F can only be realized by
finitely many basic physical properties, it might
not be reducible to a basic physical property
since the disjunction of these properties might
not itself be a basic physical property (i. e. , occur
in a fundamental physical law). We will under­
stand "multiple realizability" as involving such
irreducibility. 6
This anti-reductionist reading of MR continues
to this day; in a recent paper, Ned Block writes:
Whatever the merits of physiological reduction­
ism, it is not available to the cognitive science
point of view assumed here. According to cog­
nitive science, the essence of the mental is com­
putational, and any computational state is
"multiply realizable" by physiological or elec­
tronic states that are not identical with one
another, and so content cannot be identified
with anyone ofthem. 7
Considerations of these sorts have succeeded in
persuading a large majority of philosophers of
minds to reject reductionism and type physicalism.
The upshot of all this has been impressive: MR has
not only ushered in "nonreductive physicalism" as
the new orthodoxy on the mind-body problem, but
in the process has put the very word "reduction­
ism" in disrepute, making reductionisms of all
stripes an easy target of disdain and curt dismissals.
I believe a reappraisal of MR is overdue. There
is something right and instructive in the anti­
reductionist claim based on MR and the basic
argument in its support, but I believe that we
have failed to follow out the implications of MR
far enough, and have as a result failed to appreciate
its full significance. One specific point that I will
argue is this: the popular view that psychology
constitutes an autonomous special science, a
doctrine heavily promoted in the wake of the
MR-inspired anti-reductionist dialectic, may in
fact be inconsistent with the real implications of
MR. Our discussion will show that MR, when
combined with certain plausible metaphysical and
methodological assumptions, leads to some sur­
prising conclusions about the status of the mental
and the nature of psychology as a science. I hope it
will become clear that the fate of type physicalism
is not among the more interesting consequences
of MR.
2 Multiple Realization
It was Putnam, in a paper published in 1967, 9 who
first injected MR into debates on the mind-body
problem. According to him, the classic reductive
theories of mind presupposed the following naive
picture of how psychological kinds (properties,
event and state types, etc. ) are correlated with
physical kinds:
For each psychological kind M there is a unique
physical (presumably, neurobiological) kind P
that is nomologically coextensive with it (i. e. , as a
matter oflaw, any system instantiates M at tiff
that system instantiates Pat t).
(We may call this "the Correlation Thesis. ") So
take pain: the Correlation Thesis has it that pain as
an event kind has a neural substrate, perhaps as yet
not fully and precisely identified, that, as a matter
oflaw, always co-occurs with it in all pain-capable
organisms and structures. Here there is no mention
of species or types of organisms or structures: the
neural correlate of pain is invariant across biolo­
gical species and structure types. In his 1967 paper,
Putnam pointed out something that, in retrospect,
seems all too obvious: \nConsider what the brain-state theorist has to do
to make good his claims. He has to specify a
physical-chemical state such that any organism
(not just a mammal) is in pain if and only if(a) it
possesses a brain of a suitable physical-chemical
structure; and (b) its brain is in that physical­
chemical state. This means that the physical­
chemical state in question must be a possible
state of a mammalian brain, a reptilian brain, a
mollusc's brain (octopuses are mollusca, and
certainly feel pain), etc. At the same time, it
must not be a possible brain of any physically
possible creature that cannot feel pain. 10
Putnam went on to argue that the Correlation
Thesis was empirically false. Later writers, how­
ever, have stressed the multiple realizability of the
mental as a conceptual point: it is an a priori, con­
ceptual fact about psychological properties that
they are "second-order" physical properties, and
that their specification does not include constraints
on the manner of their physical implementation. I I
Many proponents of the functionalist account of
psychological terms and properties hold such a
vIew.
Thus, on the new, improved picture, the rela­
tionship between psychological and physical kinds
is something like this: there is no single neural kind
N that "realizes" pain across all types of organisms
or physical systems; rather, there is a multiplicity
of neural-physical kinds, N h, N" N m, .. . such that
Nh realizes pain in humans, NT realizes pain in
reptiles, N m realizes pain in Martians, etc. Perhaps,
biological species as standardly understood are too
broad to yield unique physical-biological realiza­
tion bases; the neural basis of pain could perhaps
change even in a single organism over time. But the
main point is clear: any system capable of psycho­
logical states (that is, any system that "has a psy­
chology") falls under some structure type T such
that systems with structure T share the same phy­
sical base for each mental state-kind that they are
capable of instantiating (we should regard this as
relativized with respect to time to allow for the
possibility that an individual may fall under differ­
ent structure types at different times). Thus phy­
sical realization bases for mental states must be
relativized to species or, better, physical structure
types. We thus have the following thesis:
If anything has mental property M at time t,
there is some physical structure type T and
physical property P such that it is a system of
Multiple Realization and Reduction
type Tat t and has P at t, and it holds as a matter
of law that all systems of type T have M at a
time just in case they have P at the same time.
We may call this "the Structure-Restricted Corre­
lation Thesis" (or "the Restricted Correlation
Thesis" for short).
It may have been noticed that neither this nor
the correlation thesis speaks of "realization. " 12 The
talk of "realization" is not metaphysically neutral:
the idea that mental properties are "realized" or
"implemented" by physical properties carries with
it a certain ontological picture of mental properties
as derivative and dependent. There is the sugges­
tion that when we look at concrete reality, there is
nothing over and beyond instantiations of physical
properties and relations, and that the instantiation
on a given occasion of an appropriate physical
property in the right contextual (often causal) set­
ting simply counts as, or constitutes, an instantiation
of a mental property on that occasion. An idea like
this is evident in the functionalist conception of a
mental property as extrinsically characterized in
terms of its "causal role, " where what fills this
role is a physical (or, at any rate, nonmental) prop­
erty (the latter property will then be said to "rea­
lize" the mental property in question). The same
idea can be seen in the related functionalist proposal
to construe a mental property as a "second-order
property" consisting in the having of a physical
property satisfying certain extrinsic specifications.
We will recur to this topic later; however, we
should note that someone who accepts either of
the two correlation theses need not espouse the
"realization" idiom. That is, it is prima facie a
coherent position to think of mental properties as
"first-order properties" in their own right, charac­
terized by their intrinsic natures (e. g. , phenomenal
feel), which, as it happens, turn out to have nomo­
logical correlates in neural properties. (In fact, any­
one interested in defending a serious dualist
position on the mental should eschew the realiza­
tion talk altogether and consider mental properties
as first-order properties on a par with physical
properties. ) The main point of MR that is relevant
to the anti-reductionist argument it has generated
is just this: mental properties do not have nomically
coextensive physical properties, when the latter are
appropriately individuated. It may be that properties
that are candidates for reduction must be thought
of as being realized, or implemented, by properties
in the prospective reduction base; 13 that is, if we
think of certain properties as having their own \nJaegwon Kim
intrinsic characterizations that are entirely inde­
pendent of another set of properties, there is no
hope of reducing the former to the latter. But this
point needs to be argued, and will, in any case, not
playa role in what follows.
Assume that property M is realized by property
P. How are M and P related to each other and, in
particular, how do they covary with each other?
Lepore and Loewer say this:
The usual conception is that e's being P realizes
e's being F iff e is P and there is a strong
connection of some sort between P and F. We
propose to understand this connection as a
necessary connection which is explanatory.
The existence of an explanatory connection
between two properties is stronger than the
claim that P --> F is physically necessary since
not every physically necessary connection is
explanatory. 14
Thus, Lepore and Loewer require only that the
realization base of M be sufficient for M, not both
necessary and sufficient. This presumably is in
response to MR: if pain is multiply realized in
three ways as above, each of N h, N" and N m will
be sufficient for pain, and none necessary for it.
This I believe is not a correct response, however;
the correct response is not to weaken the joint
necessity and sufficiency of the physical base, but
rather to relativize it, as in the Restricted Correla­
tion Thesis, with respect to species or structure
types. For suppose we are designing a physical
system that will instantiate a certain psychology,
and let MI. .. ., Mn be the psychological properties
required by this psychology. The design process
must involve the specification of an n-tuple of
physical properties, PI. .. ., Pn, all of them instan­
tiable by the system, such that for each i, Pi con­
stitutes a necessary and sufficient condition in this
system (and others of relevantly similar physical
structure), not merely a sufficient one, for the
occurrence of Mi. (Each such n-tuple of physical
properties can be called a "physical realization" of
the psychology in question. IS) That is, for each
psychological state we must design into the system
a nomologically coextensive physical state. We
must do this if we are to control both the occurrence
and nonoccurrence of the psychological states involved,
and control of this kind is necessary if we are to
ensure that the physical device will properly
instantiate the psychology. (This is especially
clear if we think of building a computer; computer
analogies loom large in our thoughts about "reali­
zation. ")
But isn't it possible for multiple realization to
occur "locally" as well? That is, we may want to
avail ourselves of the flexibility of allowing a psy­
chological state, or function, to be instantiated by
alternative mechanisms within a single system.
This means that Pi can be a disjunction of physical
properties; thus, Mi is instantiated in the system in
question at a time if and only if at least one of the
disjuncts of Pi is instantiated at that time. The
upshot of all this is that Lepore and Loewer's con­
dition that P --> M holds as a matter oflaw needs to
be upgraded to the condition that, relative to the
species or structure type in question (and allowing P to
be disjunctive), P <-+ M holds as a matter oflaw. 16
For simplicity let us suppose that pain is realized
in three ways as above, by Nh in humans, N r in
reptiles, and N m in Martians. The finitude
assumption is not essential to any of my arguments:
if the list is not finite, we will have an infinite
disjunction rather than a finite one (alternatively,
we can talk in terms of "sets" of such properties
instead of their disjunctions). If the list is "open­
ended, " that's all right, too; it will not affect the
metaphysics of the situation. We allowed above the
possibility of a realization base of a psychological
property itself being disjunctive; to get the discus­
sion going, though, we will assume that these Ns,
the three imagined physical realization bases of
pain, are not themselves disjunctive ~ or, at any
rate, that their status as properties is not in dispute.
The propriety and significance of "disjunctive
properties" is precisely one of the principal issues
we will be dealing with below, and it will make little
difference just at what stage this issue is faced.
3 Disjunctive Properties and Fodor's
Argument
An obvious initial response to the MR-based argu­
ment against reducibility is "the disjunction move":
Why not take the disjunction Nh V N r V N m as the
single physical substrate of pain? In his 1967 paper,
Putnam considers such a move but dismisses it out
of hand: "Granted, in such a case the brain-state
theorist can save himself by ad hoc assumptions
(e. g. , defining the disjunction of two states to be a
single 'physical-chemical state'), but this does not
have to be taken seriously. ,, 17 Putnam gives no hint
as to why he thinks the disjunction strategy does
not merit serious consideration. \nIf there is something deeply wrong with disjunc­
tions of the sort involved here, that surely isn't
obvious; we need to go beyond a sense of unease
with such disjunctions and develop an intelligible
rationale for banning them. Here is where Fodor
steps in, for he appears to have an argument for
disallowing disjunctions. As I see it, Fodor's argu­
ment in "Special Sciences" depends crucially on
the following two assumptions:
(I) To reduce a special-science theory TM to
physical theory T" each "kind" in T. 'v! (pre­
sumably, represented by a basic predicate of
TM ) must have a nomologically coextensive
"kind" in Tj:
(2) A disjunction of heterogeneous kinds is not
itself a kind.
Point (I) is apparently prompted by the deriva­
tional model of intertheoretic reduction due to
Ernest Nagel: IX the reduction of Tz to Tl consists
in the derivation oflaws of Tz from the laws of Tl,
in conjunction with "bridge" laws or principles
connecting Tz-terms with T1-terms. Although
this characterization does not in general require
that each Tz-term be correlated with a co­
extensive T1-term, the natural thought is that the
existence of Tl-coextensions for Tz-terms would
in effect give us definitions of Tz-terms in T1-
terms, enabling us to rewrite Tz-Iaws exclusively
in the vocabulary of T1; we could then derive
these rewrites of Tz-Iaws from the laws of Tl (if
they cannot be so derived, we can add them as
additional T1-Iaws - assuming both theories to be
true).
Another thought that again leads us to look for
T1-coextensions for 7z-terms is this: for genuine
reduction, the bridge laws must be construed as
property identities, not mere proper~y correlations -
namely, we must be in a position to identify the
property expressed by a given Tz-term (say, water
solubility) with a property expressed by a term in
the reduction base (say, having a certain molecular
structure). This of course requires that each Tz-
term have a nomic (or otherwise suitably
modalized) coextension in the vocabulary of the
reduction base. To put it another way, ontologi­
cally significant reduction requires the reduction of
higher-level properties, and this in turn requires
(unless one takes an eliminativist stance) that they
be identified with complexes oflower-Ievel proper­
ties. Identity of properties of course requires, at
a minimum, an appropriately modalized coextens­
ivity. 19
Multiple Realization and Reduction
So assume M is a psychological kind, and let us
agree that to reduce M, or to reduce the psycholo­
gical theory containing M, we need a physical
coextension, P, for M. But why should we suppose
that P must be a physical "kind"? But what is a
"kind, " anyway? Fodor explains this notion in
terms of law, saying that a given predicate P is a
"kind predicate" of a science just in case the
science contains a law with P as its antecedent or
consequent. 20 There are various problems with
Fodor's characterization, but we don't need to
take its exact wording seriously; the main idea is
that kinds, or kind predicates, of a science are those
that figure in the laws of that science.
To return to our question, why should "bridge
laws" connect kinds to kinds, in this special sense of
"kind"? To say that bridge laws are "laws" and
that, by definition, only kind predicates can oecur
in laws is not much of an answer. For that only
invites the further question why "bridge laws"
ought to be "laws" - what would be lacking in a
reductive derivation if bridge laws were replaced by
"bridge principles" which do not necessarily con­
nect kinds to kinds. 21 But what of the consideration
that these principles must represent property
identities? Does this force on us the requirement
that each reduced kind must find a coextensive kind
in the reduction base? No; for it isn't obvious why it
isn't perfectly proper to reduce kinds by identifying
them with properties expressed by non-kind (dis­
junctive) predicates in the reduction base.
There is the following possible argument for
insisting on kinds: if M is identified with non­
kind Q (or M is reduced via a biconditional bridge
principle "M <-> Q, " where Q is a non-kind), M
could no longer figure in special science laws; e. g. ,
the law "M -+ R" would in effect reduce to
"Q -+ R, " and therefore lose its status as a law
on account of containing Q, a non-kind.
I think this is a plausible response - at least, the
beginning of one. As it stands, though, it smacks of
circularity: "Q -+ R" is not a law because a non­
kind, Q, occurs in it, and Q is a non-kind because it
cannot occur in a law and "Q -+ R, " in particular,
is not a law. What we need is an independent reason
for the claim that the sort of Q we are dealing with
under MR, namely a badly heterogeneous disjunc­
tion, is unsuited for laws.
This means that point (I) really reduces to point
(2) above. For, given Fodor's notion of a kind, (2)
comes to this: disjunctions of heterogeneous kinds
are unfit for laws. What we now need is an argument
for this claim; to dismiss such disjunctions as \nJaegwon Kim
"wildly disjunctive" or "heterogeneous and unsys­
tematic" is to label a problem, not to offer a diag­
nosis of it. 22 In the sections to follow, I hope to take
some steps toward such a diagnosis and draw some
implications which I believe are significant for the
status of mentality.
4 Jade, Jadeite, and Nephrite
Let me begin with an analogy that will guide us in
our thinking about multiply realizable kinds.
Consider jade: we are told that jade, as it turns
out, is not a mineral kind, contrary to what was
once believed; rather, jade comprises two distinct
minerals with dissimilar molecular structures,
jadeite and nephrite. Consider the following gener­
alization:
(L) Jade is green.
We may have thought, before the discovery of the
dual nature of jade, that (L) was a law, a law about
jade; and we may have thought, with reason, that
(L) had been strongly confirmed by all the millions
of jade samples that had been observed to be green
(and none that had been observed not to be green).
We now know better: (L) is really a conjunction of
these two laws:
(Ll) Jadeite is green.
(Lz) Nephrite is green.
But (L) itself might still be a law as well; is that
possible? It has the standard basic form of a law,
and it apparently has the power to support counter­
factuals: if anything were jade - that is, if anything
were a sample of jadeite or of nephrite - then, in
either case, it would follow, by law, that it was
green. No problem here.
But there is another standard mark of lawlike­
ness that is often cited, and this is "projectibility, "
the ability to be confirmed by observation of
"positive instances. " Any generalized conditional
of the form "All Fs are C" can be confirmed by the
exhaustion of the class of Fs - that is, by eliminating
all of its potential falsifiers. It is in this sense that
we can verify such generalizations as "All the coins
in my pockets are copper" and "Everyone in this
room is either first-born or an only child. " Lawlike
generalizations, however, are thought to have the
following further property: observation of positive
instances, Fs that are Cs, can strengthen our cred-
ence in the next F's being C. It is this kind of
instance-to-instance accretion of confirmation
that is supposed to be the hallmark of lawlike ness;
it is what explains the possibility of confirming a
generalization about an indefinitely large class of
items on the basis of a finite number of favorable
observations. This rough characterization of pro­
jectibility should suffice for our purposes.
Does (L), "Jade is green, " pass the projectibility
test? Here we seem to have a problem. Z. l For we can
imagine this: on re-examining the records of past
observations, we find, to our dismay, that all the
positive instances of (L), that is, all the millions of
observed samples of green jade, turn out to have
been samples of jadeite, and none of nephrite! If
this should happen, we clearly would not, and
should not, continue to think of (L) as well con­
firmed. All we have is evidence strongly confirm­
ing (L1), and none having anything to do with (L2)
(L) is merely a conjunction of two laws, one well
confirmed and the other with its epistemic status
wholly up in the air. But all the millions of green
jadeite samples are positive instances of (L): they
satisfy both the antecedent and the consequent of
(L). As we have just seen, however, (L) is not
confirmed by them, at least not in the standard
way we expect. And the reason, I suggest, is that
jade is a true disjunctive kind, a disjunction of two
heterogeneous nomic kinds which, however, is not
itself a nomic kind. 24
That disjunction is implicated in this failure of
projectibility can be seen in the following way:
inductive projection of generalizations like (L)
with disjunctive antecedents would sanction a
cheap, and illegitimate, confirmation procedure.
For assume that "All Fs are C" is a law that has
been confirmed by the observation of appropriately
numerous positive instances, things that are both F
and C. But these are also positive instances of the
generalization "All things that are For Hare C, "
for any H you please. So, if you in general permit
projection of generalizations with a disjunctive
antecedent, this latter generalization will also be
well confirmed. But "All things that are F or H
are C" logically implies "All Hs are C. " Any
statement implied by a well-confirmed statement
must itself be well confirmed. 25 So "All Hs are C"
is well confirmed - in fact, it is confirmed by the
observation of Fs that are Cs!
One might protest: "Look, the very same strat­
egy can be applied to something that is a genuine
law. We can think of any nomic kind - say, being an
emerald - as a disjunction, being an African emer-\naid or a non-African emerald. This would make
'All emeralds are green' a conjunction of two laws,
'All African emeralds are green' and 'All non-Afri­
can emeralds are green'. But surely this doesn't
show there is anything wrong with the lawlikeness
of 'All emeralds are green. ' " Our reply is obvious:
the disjunction "being an African emerald or non­
African emerald" does not denote some hetero­
geneously disjunctive, non nomic kind; it denotes
a perfectly well-behaved nomic kind, that of being
an emerald! There is nothing wrong with disjunc­
tive predicates as such; the trouble arises when the
kinds denoted by the disjoined predicates are het­
erogeneous, "wildly disjunctive, " so that instances
falling under them do not show the kind of "simil­
arity, " or unity, that we expect of instances falling
under a single kind.
The phenomenon under discussion, therefore, is
related to the simple maxim sometimes claimed to
underlie inductive inference: "similar things
behave in similar ways, " "same cause, same
effect, " and so on. The source of the trouble we
saw with instantial confirmation of "All jade is
green" is the fact, or belief, that samples of jadeite
and samples of nephrite do not exhibit an appro­
priate "similarity" with respect to each other to
warrant inductive projections from the observed
samples of jadeite to unobserved samples of
nephrite. But similarity of the required sort pre­
sumably holds for African emeralds and non-Afri­
can emeralds - at least, that is what we believe, and
that is what makes the "disjunctive kind, " being an
African emerald or a non-African emerald, a single
nomic kind. More generally, the phenomenon is
related to the point often made about disjunctive
properties: disjunctive properties, unlike conjunc­
tive properties, do not guarantee similarity for
instances falling under them. And similarity, it is
said, is the core of our idea of a property. If that is
your idea of a property, you will believe that there
are no such things as disjunctive properties (or
"negative properties"). More precisely, though,
we should remember that properties are not inher­
ently disjunctive or conjunctive any more than
classes are inherently unions or intersections, and
that any property can be expressed by a disjunctive
predicate. Properties of course can be conjunc­
tions, or disjunctions, of other properties. The
point about disjunctive properties is best put as a
closure condition on properties: the class of prop­
erties is not closed under disjunction (presumably,
or under negation). Thus, there may well be prop­
erties P and Q such that P or Q is also a property,
Multiple Realization and Reduction
but its being so doesn't follow from the mere fact
that P and Q are properties. 26
5 Jade and Pain
Let us now return to pain and its multiple realiza­
tion bases, N h, N" and N m. I believe the situation
here is instructively parallel to the case of jade in
relation to jadeite and nephrite. It seems that we
think of jadeite and nephrite as distinct kinds (and
of jade not as a kind) because they are different
chemical kinds. But why is their being distinct as
chemical kinds relevant here? Because many
important properties of minerals, we think, are
supervenient on, and explainable in terms of,
their microstructure, and chemical kinds constitute
a microstructural taxonomy that is explanatorily
rich and powerful. Microstructure is important,
in short, because macrophysical properties of sub­
stances are determined by microstructure. These
ideas make up our "metaphysics" of microdeter­
mination for properties of minerals and other sub­
stances, a background of partly empirical and
partly metaphysical assumptions that regulate our
inductive and explanatory practices.
The parallel metaphysical underpinnings for
pain, and other mental states in general, are, first,
the belief, expressed by the Restricted Correlation
Thesis, that pain, or any other mental state, occurs
in a system when, and only when, appropriate
physical conditions are present in the system,
and, second, the corollary belief that significant
properties of mental states, in particular nomic
relationships amongst them, are due to, and
explainable in terms of, the properties and causal­
nomic connections among their physical "sub­
strates. " I will call the conjunction of these two
beliefs "the Physical Realization Thesis. ,, 27
Whether or not the micro-explanation of the sort
indicated in the second half of the thesis amounts
to a "reduction" is a question we will take up later.
Apart from this question, though, the Physical
Realization Thesis is widely accepted by philo­
sophers who talk of "physical realization, " and
this includes most functionalists; it is all but expli­
cit in Lepore and Loewer, for example, and in
Fodor. 28
Define a property, N, by disjoining Nh, N" and
N m; that is, N has a disjunctive definition,
Nh V N r V N m. If we assume, with those who
endorse the MR-based anti-reductionist argument,
that N h, N" and N m are a heterogeneous lot, we \nJaegwon Kim
cannot make the heterogeneity go away merely by
introducing a simpler expression, "N"; if there is a
problem with certain disjunctive properties, it is
not a linguistic problem about the form of expres­
sions used to refer to them.
Now, we put the following question to Fodor
and like-minded philosophers: If pain is nomically
equivalent to N, the property claimed to be wildly
disjunctive and obviously nonnomic, why isn't pain
itself equally heterogeneous and nonnomic as a kind?
Why isn't pain's relationship to its realization
bases, Nh, N" and N m, analogous to jade's rela­
tionship to jadeite and nephrite? If jade turns out to
be nonnomic on account of its dual "realizations"
in distinct microstructures, why doesn't the same
fate befall pain? After all, the group of actual and
nomologically possible realizations of pain, as they
are described by the MR enthusiasts with such
imagination, is far more motley than the two che­
mical kinds comprising jade.
I believe we should insist on answers to these
questions from those functionalists who view men­
tal properties as "second-order" properties, i. e. ,
properties that consist in having a property with a
certain functional specification. z9 Thus, pain is said
to be a second-order property in that it is the
properzy of having some property with a certain specif­
ication in terms of its typical causes and effects and
its relation to other mental properties; call this
"specification H. " The point ofMR, on this view,
is that there is more than one property that meets
specification H - in fact, an open-ended set of such
properties, it will be said. But pain itself, it is
argued, is a more abstract but well-behaved prop­
erty at a higher level, namely the property of having
one of these properties meeting specification H. It
should be clear why a position like this is vulnerable
to the questions that have been raised. For the
property of having property P is exactly identical
with P, and the property of having one of the prop­
erties, PI, P z, .. ., Pn is exactly identical with the
disjunctive property, PI V Pz V. .. V P n. On the
assumption that Nh, N" and N m are all the propert­
ies satisfying specification H, the property of hav­
ing a property with H, namely pain, is none other
than the property of having either Nh or N r or N m 30
- namely, the disjunctive property, Nh V N r V N m!
We cannot hide the disjunctive character of pain
behind the second-order expression "the property of
having a property with specification H. " Thus, on
the construal of mental properties as second-order
properties, mental properties will in general turn
out to be disjunctions of their physical realization
bases. It is difficult to see how one could have it
both ways - that is, to castigate N h, V N" V N m as
unacceptably disjunctive while insisting on the
integrity of pain as a scientific kind.
Moreover, when we think about making projec­
tions over pain, very much the same worry should
arise about their propriety as did for jade. Consider a
possible law: "Sharp pains administered at random
intervals cause anxiety reactions. " Suppose this
generalization has been well confirmed for humans.
Should we expect on that basis that it will hold also
for Martians whose psychology is implemented (we
assume) by a vastly different physical mechanism?
Not if we accept the Physical Realization Thesis,
fundamental to functionalism, that psychological
regularities hold, to the extent that they do, in virtue
of the causal-nomological regularities at the physical
implementation level. The reason the law is true for
humans is due to the way the human brain is
"wired"; the Martians have a brain with a different
wiring plan, and we certainly should not expect the
regularity to hold for them just because it does for
humans. 31 "Pains cause anxiety reactions" may
turn out to possess no more unity as a scientific
law than does "Jade is green. "
Suppose that in spite of all this Fodor insists on
defending pain as a nomic kind. It isn't clear that
would be a viable strategy. For he would then owe
us an explanation of why the "wildly disjunctive"
N, which after all is equivalent to pain, is not a
nomic kind. If a predicate is nomically equivalent
to a well-behaved predicate, why isn't that enough
to show that it, too, is well behaved, and expresses a
well-behaved property? To say, as Fodor does, 32
that "it is a law that. .. " is "intensional" and does
not permit substitution of equivalent expressions
("equivalent" in various appropriate senses) is
merely to locate a potential problem, not to
resolve it.
Thus, the nomicity of pain may lead to the
nomicity of N; but this isn't very interesting. For,
given the Physical Realization Thesis and the
priority of the physical implicit in it, our earlier
line of argument, leading from the nonnomicity of
N to the nonnomicity of pain, is more compelling.
We must, I think, take seriously the reasoning
leading to the conclusion that pain, and other men­
tal states, might turn out to be nonnomic. If this
turns out to be the case, it puts in serious jeopardy
Fodor's contention that its physical irreducibility
renders psychology an autonomous special science.
If pain fails to be nomic, it is not the sort of
property in terms of which laws can be formulated; \nand "pain" is not a predicate that can enter into a
scientific theory that seeks to formulate causal laws
and causal explanations. And the same goes for all
multiply realizable psychological kinds - which,
according to MR, means all psychological kinds.
There are no scientific theories of jade, and we
don't need any; if you insist on having one, you
can help yourself with the conjunction of the theory
of jadeite and the theory of nephrite. In the same
way, there will be theories about human pains
(instances of N h ), reptilian pains (instances of
N r), and so on; but there will be no unified, inte­
grated theory encompassing all pains in all pain­
capable organisms, only a conjunction of pain the­
ories for appropriately individuated biological spe­
cies and physical structure types. Scientific
psychology, like the theory of jade, gives way to a
conjunction of structure-specific theories. If this is
right, the correct conclusion to be drawn from the
MR-inspired anti-reductionist argument is not the
claim that psychology is an irreducible and auton­
omous science, but something that contradicts it:
namely, that it cannot be a science with a unified
subject matter. This is the picture that is beginning
to emerge from MR when combined with the Phy­
sical Realization Thesis.
These reflections have been prompted by the
analogy with the case of jade; it is a strong and
instructive analogy, I think, and suggests the pos­
sibility of a general argument. In the following
section I will develop a direct argument, with
explicit premises and assumptions.
6 Causal Powers and Mental Kinds
One crucial premise we need for a direct argument
is a constraint on concept formation, or kind indi­
viduation, in science that has been around for many
years; it has lately been resurrected by Fodor in
connection with content externalism. 33 A precise
statement of the constraint may be difficult and
controversial, but its main idea can be put as
follows:
[Principle of Causal Individuation of Kinds]
Kinds in science are individuated on the basis
of causal powers; that is, objects and events fall
under a kind, or share in a property, insofar as
they have similar causal powers.
I believe this is a plausible principle, and it is, in
any case, widely accepted.
Multiple Realization and Reduction
We can see that this principle enables us to give a
specific interpretation to the claim that N h, N" and
N m are heterogeneous as kinds: the claim must mean
that they are heterogeneous as causal powers - that is,
they are diverse as causal powers and enter into
diverse causal laws. This must mean, given the
Physical Realization Thesis, that pain itself can
show no more unity as a causal power than the
disjunction, Nh V N r V N m. This becomes espe­
cially clear if we set forth the following principle,
which arguably is implied by the Physical Realiza­
tion Thesis (but we need not make an issue of this
here):
[The Causal Inheritance Principle] If mental
property M is realized in a system at t in virtue
of physical realization base P, the causal powers
of this instance oj M are identical with the causal
powers of p. 34
It is important to bear in mind that this principle
only concerns the causal powers of individual
instances oj M; it does not identify the causal
powers of mental property M in general with the
causal powers of some physical property P; such
identification is precluded by the multiple physical
realizability of M.
Why should we accept this principle? Let us just
note that to deny it would be to accept emergent
causal powers: causal powers that magically emerge
at a higher level and of which there is no accounting
in terms of lower-level properties and their causal
powers and nomic connections. This leads to the
notorious problem of "downward causation" and
the attendant violation of the causal closure of the
physical domain. 35 I believe that a serious physic­
alist would find these consequences intolerable.
It is clear that the Causal Inheritance Principle,
in conjunction with the Physical Realization The­
sis, has the consequence that mental kinds cannot
satisfy the Causal Individuation Principle, and this
effectively rules out mental kinds as scientific
kinds. The reasoning is simple: instances of M
that are realized by the same physical base must
be grouped under one kind, since ex hypothesi the
physical base is a causal kind; and instances of M
with different realization bases must be grouped
under distinct kinds, since, again ex hypothesi, these
realization bases are distinct as causal kinds. Given
that mental kinds are realized by diverse physical
causal kinds, therefore, it follows that mental kinds
are not causal kinds, and hence are disqualified as
proper scientific kinds. Each mental kind is \nJaegwon Kim
sundered into as many kinds as there are physical
realization bases for it, and psychology as a science
with disciplinary unity turns out to be an impos­
sible project.
What is the relationship between this argument
and the argument adumbrated in our reflections
based on the jade analogy? At first blush, the two
arguments might seem unrelated: the earlier argu­
ment depended chiefly on epistemological consid­
erations, considerations on inductive projectibility
of certain predicates, whereas the crucial premise
of the second argument is the Causal Individuation
Principle, a broadly metaphysical and methodolo­
gical principle about science. I think, though, that
the two arguments are closely related, and the key
to seeing the relationship is this: causal powers
involve laws, and laws are regularities that are
projectible. Thus, if pain (or jade) is not a kind
over which inductive projections can be made, it
cannot enter into laws, and therefore cannot qualify
as a causal kind; and this disqualifies it as a scien­
tific kind. If this is right, the jade-inspired reflec­
tions provide a possible rationale for the Causal
Individuation Principle. Fleshing out this rough
chain of reasoning in precise terms, however, goes
beyond what I can attempt here.
7 The Status of Psychology: Local
Reductions
Our conclusion at this point, therefore, is this: If
MR is true, psychological kinds are not scientific
kinds. What does this imply about the status of
psychology as a science? Do our considerations
show that psychology is a pseudo-science like
astrology and alchemy? Of course not. The crucial
difference, from the metaphysical point of view, is
that psychology has physical realizations, but
alchemy does not. To have a physical realization is
to be physically grounded and explainable in terms
of the processes at an underlying level. In fact, if
each of the psychological kinds posited in a psycho­
logical theory has a physical realization for a fixed
species, the theory can be "locally reduced" to the
physical theory of that species, in the following
sense. Let S be the species involved; for each law
Lm of psychological theory Tm, S ----> Lm (the
proposition that Lm holds for members of S) is the
"S-restricted" version of Lm: and S ----> Tm is the S­
restricted version of T m, the set of all S-restricted
laws of Tm. We can then say that Tm is "locally
reduced" for species S to an underlying theory,
Tp, just in case S ----> Tm is reduced to Tp. And the
latter obtains just in case each S-restricted law of
T m, S ----> Lm, 36 is derivable from the laws of the
reducing theory Tp, taken together with bridge
laws. What bridge laws suffice to guarantee the
derivation? Obviously, an array of S-restricted
bridge laws of the form, S --t (Mi <-> Pil, for each
mental kind Mi. Just as unrestricted psychological
bridge laws can underwrite a "global" or "uniform"
reduction of psychology, species-or structure­
restricted bridge laws sanction its "local" reduction.
If the same psychological theory is true of
humans, reptiles, and Martians, the psychological
kinds posited by that theory must have realizations
in human, reptilian, and Martian physiologies.
This implies that the theory is locally reducible in
three ways, for humans, reptiles, and Martians. If
the dependence of the mental on the physical means
anything, it must mean that the regularities posited
by this common psychology must have divergent
physical explanations for the three species. The
very idea of physical realization involves the poss­
ibility of physically explaining psychological prop­
erties and regularities, and the supposition of
multiple such realizations, namely MR, involves a
commitment to the possibility of multiple explanat­
ory reductions of psychology. 37 The important
moral of MR we need to keep in mind is this: if
psychological properties are multip~y realized, so is
psychology itself If physical realizations of psycho­
logical properties are a "wildly heterogeneous" and
"unsystematic" lot, psychological theory itself
must be realized by an equally heterogeneous and
unsystematic lot of physical theories.
I am inclined to think that multiple local reduc­
tions, rather than global reductions, are the rule,
even in areas in which we standardly suppose
reductions are possible. I will now deal with a
possible objection to the idea of local reduction, at
least as it is applied to psychology. The objection
goes like this: given what we know about the dif­
ferences among members of a single species, even
species are too wide to yield determinate realization
bases for psychological states, and given what we
know about the phenomena of maturation and
development, brain injuries, and the like, the phy­
sical bases of mentality may change even for a
single individual. This throws into serious doubt,
continues the objection, the availability of species­
restricted bridge laws needed for local reductions.
The point of this objection may well be correct
as a matter of empirical fact. Two points can be
made in reply, however. First, neurophysiological \nresearch goes on because there is a shared, and
probably well-grounded, belief among the workers
that there are not huge individual differences
within a species in the way psychological kinds
are realized. Con specifics must show important
physical-physiological similarities, and there prob­
ably is good reason for thinking that they share
physical realization bases to a sufficient degree to
make search for species-wide neural substrates for
mental states feasible and rewarding. Researchers
in this area evidently aim for neurobiological expla­
nations of psychological capacities and processes
that are generalizable over all or most ("normal")
members of a given species.
Second, even if there are huge individual dif­
ferences among con specifics as to how their
psychology is realized, that does not touch the
metaphysical point: as long as you believe in the
Physical Realization Thesis, you must believe that
every organism or system with mentality falls
under a physical structure type such that its mental
states are realized by determinate physical states of
organisms with that structure. It may be that these
structures are so finely individuated and so few
actual individuals fall under them that research
into the neural bases of mental states in these
structures is no longer worthwhile, theoretically
or practically. What we need to recognize here is
that the scientific possibility of, say, human psy­
chology is a contingent fact (assuming it is a fact); it
depends on the fortunate fact that individual
humans do not show huge physiological-biological
differences that are psychologically relevant. But if
they did, that would not change the metaphysics of
the situation one bit; it would remain true that the
psychology of each of us was determined by, and
locally reducible to, his neurobiology.
Realistically, there are going to be psychological
differences among individual humans: it is a com­
monsense platitude that no two persons are exactly
alike - either physically or psychologically. And
individual differences may be manifested not only
in particular psychological facts but in psycholo­
gical regularities. If we believe in the Physical
Realization Thesis, we must believe that our psy­
chological differences are rooted in, and explain­
able by, our physical differences, just as we expect
our psychological similarities to be so explainable.
Humans probably are less alike among themselves
than, say, tokens of a Chevrolet mode1. 38 And
psychological laws for humans, at a certain level
of specificity, must be expected to be statistical in
character, not deterministic - or, if you prefer,
Multiple Realization and Reduction
"ceteris paribus laws" rather than "strict laws. "
But this is nothing peculiar to psychology; these
remarks surely apply to human psychology and
anatomy as much as human psychology. In any
case, none of this affects the metaphysical point
being argued here concerning microdetermination
and microreductive explanation.
8 Metaphysical Illlplications
But does local reduction have any interesting phi­
losophical significance, especially in regard to the
status of mental properties? If a psychological
property has been multiply locally reduced, does
that mean that the property itself has been
reduced? Ned Block has raised just such a point,
arguing that species-restricted reductionism (or
species-restricted-type physicalism) "sidesteps
the main metaphysical question: 'What is common
to the pains of dogs and people (and all other
species) in virtue of which they are pains? ', ,39
Pereboom and Kornblith elaborate on Block's
point as follows: .. . even if there is a single type of physical state
that normally realizes pain in each type of
organism, or in each structure type, this does
not show that pain, as a ~ype of mental state, is
reducible to physical states. Reduction, in the
present debate, must be understood as reduct­
ion oftypes, since the primary object of reduct­
ive strategies is explanations and theories, and
explanations and theories quantify over
types. .. . The suggestion that there are spe­
cies-specific reductions of pain results in the
claim that pains in different species have noth­
ing in common. But this is just a form of elim­
inativism. 4o
There are several related but separable issues raised
here. But first we should ask: Must all pains have
"something in common" in virtue of which they
are pains?
According to the phenomenological conception
of pain, all pains do have something in common:
they all hurt. But as I take it, those who hold this
view of pain would reject any reductionist program,
independently of the issues presently on hand.
Even if there were a species-invariant uniform
bridge law correlating pains with a single physical
substrate across all species and structures, they
would claim that the correlation holds as a brute, \nJaegwon Kim
unexplainable matter of fact, and that pain as a
qualitative event, a "raw feel, " would remain irre­
ducibly distinct from its neural substrate. Many
emergentists apparently held a view of this kind.
I presume that Block, and Pereboom and Korn­
blith, are speaking not from a phenomenological
viewpoint of this kind but from a broadly function­
alist one. But from a functionalist perspective, it is
by no means clear how we should understand the
question "What do all pains have in common in
virtue of which they are all pains? " Why should all
pains have "something in common"? As I under­
stand it, at the core of the functionalist program is
the attempt to explain the meanings of mental
terms relationally, in terms of inputs, outputs,
and connections with other mental states. And on
the view, discussed briefly earlier, that mental
properties are second-order properties, pain is the
property of having a property with a certain func­
tional specification H (in terms of inputs, outputs,
etc. ). This yields a short answer to Block's ques­
tion: what all pains have in common is the pattern
of connections as specified by H. The local reduc­
tionist is entitled to that answer as much as the
functionalist is. Compare two pains, an instance of
Nh and one of N m; what they have in common is
that each is an instance of a property that realizes
pain - that is, they exhibit the same pattern of input
-output-other internal state connections, namely
the pattern specified by H.
But some will say: "But H is only an extrinsic
characterization; what do these instances of pain
have in common that is intrinsic to them? " The
local reductionist must grant that on his view
there is nothing intrinsic that all pains have in
common in virtue of which they are pains (assum­
ing that N h, Nr, and N m, "have nothing intrinsic in
common"). But that is also precisely the con­
sequence of the functionalist view. That, one
might say, is the whole point of functionalism:
the functionalist, especially one who believes in
MR, would not, and should not, look for something
common to all pains over and above H (the heart of
functionalism, one might say, is the belief that
mental states have no "intrinsic essence").
But there is a further question raised by Block et
al. : What happens to properties that have been
locally reduced? Are they still with us, distinct and
separate from the underlying physical-biological
properties? Granted: human pain is reduced to
N h, Martian pain to N m, and so forth, but what of
pain itself? It remains unreduced. Are we still stuck
with the dualism of mental and physical properties?
I will sketch two possible ways of meeting this
challenge. First, recall my earlier remarks about the
functionalist conception of mental properties as
second-order properties: pain is the property of
having a property with specification H, and, given
that N h, Nr, and N m are the properties meeting H,
pain turns out to be the disjunctive property,
Nh V N r V N m, If you hold the second-order prop­
erty view of mental properties, pain has been
reduced to, and survives as, this disjunctive physi­
cal kind. Quite apart from considerations of local
reduction, the very conception of pain you hold
commits you to the conclusion that pain is a dis­
junctive kind, and if you accept any form of
respectable physicalism (in particular, the Physical
Realization Thesis), it is a disjunctive physical kind.
And even if you don't accept the view of mental
properties as second-order properties, as long as
you are comfortable with disjunctive kinds and
properties, you can, in the aftermath oflocal reduc­
tion, identify pain with the disjunction of its real­
ization bases. On this approach, then, you have
another, more direct, answer to Block's question:
what all pains have in common is that they all fall
under the disjunctive kind, Nh, VNr V N m.
If you are averse to disjunctive kinds, there is
another more radical, and in some ways more satis­
fying, approach. The starting point of this
approach is the frank acknowledgment that MR
leads to the conclusion that pain as a property or
kind must go. Local reduction after all is reduction,
and to be reduced is to be eliminated as an
independent entity. You might say: global reduction
is different in that it is also conservative - if pain is
globally reduced to physical property P, pain sur­
vives as P. But it is also true that under local
reduction, pain survives as Nh in humans, as N r
in reptiles, and so on. It must be admitted, how­
ever, that pain as a kind does not survive multiple
local reduction. But is this so bad?
Let us return to jade once again. Is jade a kind?
We know it is not a mineral kind; but is it any kind
of a kind? That of course depends on what we mean
by "kind. " There are certain shared criteria, largely
based on observable macroproperties of mineral
samples (e. g. , hardness, color, etc. ), that determine
whether something is a sample of jade, or whether
the predicate "is jade" is correctly applicable to it.
What all samples of jade have in common is just
these observable macrophysical properties that
define the applicability of the predicate "is jade. "
In this sense, speakers of English who have "jade"
in their repertoire associate the same concept with \n"jade"; and we can recognize the existence of the
concept of jade and at the same time acknowledge
that the concept does not pick out, or answer to, a
property or kind in the natural world.
I think we can say something similar about pain
and "pain": there are shared criteria for the appli­
cation of the predicate "pain" or "is in pain, " and
these criteria may well be for the most part func­
tionalist ones. These criteria generate for us a
concept o(pain, a concept whose clarity and deter­
minacy depend, we may assume, on certain char­
acteristics (such as explicitness, coherence, and
completeness) of the criteria governing the appli­
cation of "pain. " But the concept of pain, on this
construal, need not pick out an objective kind any
more than the concept of jade does.
All this presupposes a distinction between con­
cepts and properties (or kinds). Do we have such a
distinction? I believe we do. Roughly, concepts are
in the same ball park as predicates, meanings (per­
haps, something like Fregean Sinnen), ideas, and
the like; Putnam has suggested that concepts be
identified with "synonymy classes of predicates, ,, 41
and that comes close enough to what I have in
mind. Properties and relations, on the other hand,
are "out there in the world"; they are features and
characteristics of things and events in the world.
They include fundamental physical magnitudes
and quantities, like mass, energy, size, and shape,
and are part of the causal structure of the world.
The property of being water is arguably identical
with the property of being H 20, but evidently the
concept of water is distinct from the concept of
H 20 (Socrates had the former but not the latter).
Most of us would agree that ethical predicates are
meaningful, and that we have the concepts of
"good, " "right, " etc. ; however, it is a debatable
issue, and has lately been much debated, whether
there are such properties as goodness and right­
ness. 42 If you find that most of these remarks make
sense, you understand the concept-property dis­
tinction that I have in mind. Admittedly, this is all
a little vague and programmatic, and we clearly
need a better-articulated theory of properties and
concepts; but the distinction is there, supported by
an impressively systematic set of intuitions and
philosophical requirements. 43
But is this second approach a form of mental
eliminativism? In a sense it is: as I said, on this
approach no properties in the world answer to
general, species-unrestricted mental concepts. But
remember: there still are pains, and we sometimes
are in pain, just as there still are samples of jade.
Multiple Realization and Reduction
We must also keep in mind that the present
approach is not, in its ontological implications, a
form of the standard mental eliminativism cur­
rently on the scene. 44 Without elaborating on
what the differences are, let us just note a few
important points. First, the present view does not
take away species-restricted mental properties,
e. g. , human pain, Martian pain, canine pain, and
the rest, although it takes away "pain as such. "
Second, while the standard eliminativism consigns
mentality to the same ontological limbo to which
phlogiston, witches, and magnetic effluvia have
been dispatched, the position I have been sketching
views it on a par with jade, tables, and adding
machines. To see jade as a non-kind is not to
question the existence of jade, or the legitimacy
and utility of the concept of jade. Tables do not
constitute a scientific kind; there are no laws about
tables as such, and being a table is not a causal­
explanatory kind. But that must be sharply distin­
guished from the false claim that there are no
tables. The same goes for pains. These points sug­
gest the following difference in regard to the status
of psychology: the present view allows, and in fact
encourages, "species-specific psychologies, " but
the standard e1iminativism would do away with
all things psychological - species-specific psycho­
logies as well as global psychology.
To summarize, then, the two metaphysical schemes
I have sketched offer these choices: either we allow
disjunctive kinds and construe pain and other
mental properties as such kinds, or else we must
acknowledge that our general mental terms and
concepts do not pick out properties and kinds in
the world (we may call this "mental property irre­
alism"). I should add that I am not interested in
promoting either disjunctive kinds or mental irreal­
ism, a troubling set of choices to most of us. Rather,
my main interest has been to follow out the con­
sequences of MR and try to come to terms with
them within a reasonable metaphysical scheme.
I have already commented on the status of psy­
chology as a science under MR. As I argued, MR
seriously compromises the disciplinary unity and
autonomy of psychology as a science. But that does
not have to be taken as a negative message. In
particular, the claim does not imply that a scientific
study of psychological phenomena is not possible
or useful; on the contrary, MR says that psycholo­
gical processes have a foundation in the biological
and physical processes and regularities, and it
opens the possibility of enlightening explanations \nJaegwon Kim
of psychological processes at a more basic level. It is
only that at a deeper level, psychology becomes
sundered by being multiply locally reduced. How­
ever, species-specific psychologies, e. g. , human
psychology, Martian psychology, etc. , can all flour­
ish as scientific theories. Psychology remains scien-
Notes
This paper is descended from an unpublished paper,
"The disunity of psychology as a working hypothesis? ,"
which was circulated in the early 1980s. I am indebted to
the following persons, among others, for helpful com­
ments: Fred Feldman, Hilary Kornblith, Barry Loewer,
Brian McLaughlin, Joe Mendola, Marcelo Sabates, and
James Van Cleve.
On occasion, "MR" will refer to the phenomenon of
multiple realization rather than the claim that such a
phenomenon exists; there should be no danger of
confusion.
2 Jerry Fodor, "Special sciences, " this volume, ch. 39.
3 Donald Davidson, "Mental events, " repr. in Essays on
Actions and Events (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1980).
4 Geoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson, "Physical­
ism: Ontology, Determination, and Reduction, " this
volume, ch. 41; the two quotations are from pp. 531
and 537.
Ernest Lepore and Barry Loewer, "More on making
mind matter, " Philosophical Topics 17 (1989), pp. 175-
92, at p. 179.
6 Ibid. , p. 180.
7 Ned Block, "Can the mind change the world? ," in
George Boolos (ed. ), Meaning and Method: Essays in
Honor of Hilary Putnam (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1990), p. 146.
8 They include Richard Boyd, "Materialism without
reductionism: what physicalism does not entail, " in
Block (ed. ), Readings in Philosopky of Psychology, vol. I
(Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1980);
Block, in "Introduction: what is functionalism? ," in
his anthology just cited, pp. 178-9; John Post, The
Faces of EXistence (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1987); Derk Pereboom and Hilary Kornblith,
"The metaphysics of irreducibility, " Philosophical
Studies 63 (1991), pp. 125-45. One philosopher who
is not impressed by the received view of MR is David
Lewis; see his "Review of Putnam, " in Block (ed. ),
Readings in Philosophy ofPlychology, vol. I.
9 Hilary Putnam, "Psychological predicates, " in W. H.
Capitan and D. D. Merrill (eds), Art, Mind, and
Religion (Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press,
1967); repr. with a new title, "The nature of mental
states, " in Block (ed. ), Readings in Philosophy of
Psychology.
tiflc, though perhaps not a science. If you insist on
having a global psychology valid for all species and
structures, you can help yourself with that, too; but
you must think of it as a conjunction of species­
restricted psychologies and be careful, above all,
with your inductions.
10 Putnam, "Nature of mental states, " p. 228.
II Thus, Post says, "Functional and intentional states
are defined without regard to their physical or other
realizations" (Faces afExistence, p. 161). Also compare
the earlier quotation from Block.
12 As far as I know, the term "realization" was first used
in something like its present sense by Hilary Putnam
in "Minds and machines, " in Sydney Hook (ed. ),
Dimensions of Mind (New York: New York University
Press, 1960).
13 On this point see Robert Van Gulick, "Nonreductive
materialism and intertheoretic constraints", in Ansgar
Beckermann, Hans Flohr, and Jaegwon Kim (eds),
Emergence or Reduction? (Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992).
14 Lepore and Loewer, "More on making mind matter, "
p. 179.
15 Cf. Hartry Field, "Mental representation, " in Block
(ed. ), Readings in Philosophy of Psychology (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1981),
vol. 2.
16 What of Lepore and Loewer's condition (ii), the
requirement that the realization basis "explain" the
realized property? Something like this explanatory
relation may well be entailed by the realization rela­
tion; however, I do not believe it should be part of the
definition of "realization"; that such an explanatory
relation holds should be a consequence of the realiza­
tion relation, not constitutive of it.
17 Putnam, "Nature of mental states, " p. 228.
18 Ernest Nagel, The Structure of Science (New York:
Harcourt, Brace & World, 1961), ch. II.
19 My remarks here and in the preceding paragraph
assume that the higher-level theory requires no "cor­
rection" in relation to the base theory. With appro­
priate caveats and qualifications, they should apply to
models of reduction that allow such corrections, or
models that only require the deduction of a suitable
analogue, or "image, " in the reduction base - as long
as the departures are not so extreme as to warrant talk
of replacement or elimination rather than reduction.
Cf. Patricia Churchland, Neurophi/osophy (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1986), ch. 7.
20 See Fodor, "Special sciences, " this volume, ch. 39,
p. 506.
21 Fodor appears to assume that the requirement that
bridge laws must connect "kinds" to "kinds" is part
of the classic positivist conception of reduction. \nI don't helieve there is any warrant for this assump­
tion, however.
22 See Pereboom and Kornhlith, "Metaphysics of irre­
ducihility, " in which it is suggested that laws with
disjunctive predicates are not "explanatory. " I think,
though, that this suggestion is not fully developed
there.
23 The points to follow concerning disjunctive predic­
ates were developed ahout a decade ago; however, I
have just come across some related and, in some
respects similar, points in David Owens's interesting
paper "Disjunctive laws, " Analysis 49 (1989), pp.
197-202. See also William Seager, "Disjunctive laws
and supervenience, " Analysis 51 (1991), pp. 93-8.
24 This can be taken to define one useful sense of kind
heterogeneity: two kinds are heterogeneous with
respect to each other just in case their disjunction is
not a kind.
25 Note: this doesn't say that for any e, if e is "positive
evidence" for hand h logically implies j, then e is
positive evidence for j. Ahout the latter principle there
is some dispute; see Carl G. Hempel, "Studies in the
logic of confirmation, " repr. in Hempel, Aspects of
Scientific Explanation (New York: Free Press, 1965),
esp. pp. 30·· 5; Rudolf Carnap, Logical Foundations of
Prohahllizy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1950), pp. 471-6.
26 On issues concerning properties, kinds, similarity,
and lawlikeness, see W. V. Quine, "Natural kinds, "
this volume, ch. 18; David Lewis, "New work for a
theory of universals, " this volume, ch. 17; D. M.
Armstrong, Universals (Boulder, Colo. : Westview
Press, 1989).
27 This term is a little misleading since the two subtheses
have been stated without the term "realization" and
may be acceptahle to those who would reject the
"realization" idiom in connection with the mental. I
use the term since we are chiefly addressing philoso­
phers (mainly functionalists) who construe the psy­
chophysical relation in terms of realization, rather
than, say, emergence or hrute correlation.
28 See E. Lepore and B. Loewer, "Making mind matter
more, " Philosophical Topics 17 (1989), pp. 59-79, and
Fodor "Special Sciences, " this volume, ch. 39.
29 See, e. g. , Block, "Can the mind change the world? ,"
p. 155.
30 We might keep in mind the close relationship between
disjunction and the existential quantifier standardly
noted in logic textbooks.
31 It may he a complicated affair to formulate this argu­
ment within certain functionalist schemes; if, for
example, mental properties are functionally defined
hy Ramseyfying a total psychological theory, it will
turn out that humans and Martians cannot share any
psychological state unless the same total psychology
(including the putative law in question) is true (or
held to be true) for hoth.
32 Fodor, "Special sciences, " this volume, ch. 39.
Multiple Realization and Reduction
33 See, e. g. , Carl G. Hempel, Fundamentals of Concept
Formation in Empirical Science (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1952); Q! Iine, "Natural kinds, " this
volume, ch. 18. Fodor gives it an explicit statement in
Psychosemantics (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press,
1988), ch. 2. A principle like this is often invoked in
the current externalism/internalism debate about
content; most principal participants in this debate
seem to accept it.
34 A principle like this is sometimes put in terms of
"supervenience" and "supervenience base" rather
than "realization" and "realization base. " See my
"Epiphenomenal and supervenient causation, " in
Jaegwon Kim, Supervenience and Mind (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1993), ch. 6. Fodor
appears to accept just such a principle of supervenient
causation for mental properties in ch. 2 of his Psycho­
semantics. In "Metaphysics of irreducibility, " Pere­
boom and Kornblith appear to reject it.
35 For more details see my "'Downward causation' in
emergentism and nonreductive Physicalism, " in
Beckermann, et al. (eds), Emergence or Reduction? ,
and "The nonreductivist's troubles with mental cau­
sation, " in Kim, Supervenience and Mind, ch. 17.
36 Or an appropriately corrected versIOn thereof
(this qualification applies to the bridge laws as
well).
37 In "Special sciences" and "Making mind matter
more" Fodor appears to accept the local reducibility
of psychology and other special sciences. But he uses
the terminology of local explanation, rather than
reduction, of psychological regularities in terms of
underlying microstructure. I think this is because his
preoccupation with Nagelian uniform reduction pre­
vents him from seeing that this is a form of inter­
theoretic reduction if anything is.
38 Compare]. ]. C. Smart's instructive analogy between
hiological organisms and superheterodyne radios,
In Philosophy and Scientific Realism (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963), pp. 56-7. Smart's
conception of the relation between physics and the
special sciences, such as biology and psychology, is
similar in some respects to the position I am defend­
ing here.
39 Block, "Introduction: what is functionalism? " pp.
178-9.
40 Pereboom and Korablith, "Metaphysics of irreduci­
hility. " See also Ronald Endicott, "On physical mul­
tiple realization, " Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 70
(1989), pp. 212-24. In personal correspondence Earl
Conee and Joe Mendola have raised similar points.
There is a useful discussion of various metaphysical
issues relating to MR in Cynthia Macdonald, Mind­
Body Identity Theories (London and New York: Rout­
ledge, 1989).
41 Putnam, "Nature of mental states. "
42 I of course have in mind the controversy concerning
moral realism; see essays in Geoffrey Sayre-McCord \nJaegwon Kim
(ed. ) Essays on Moral Realism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1988).
43 On concepts and properties, see, e. g. , Hilary Putnam,
"On properties, " this volume, ch. 19; Mark Wilson,
"Predicate meets property, " Philosophical Review 91
(1982), pp. 549-90, esp. sect. 3.
44 Such as the versions favored by W. V. Quine, Stephen
Stich, and Paul Churchland. \n41
Geoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson
Mathematical physics, as the most basic and
comprehensive of the sciences, occupies a special
position with respect to the overall scientific frame­
work. In its loosest sense, physicalism is a recogni­
tion of this special position. Traditionally,
physicalism has taken the form of reductionism -
roughly, that all scientific terms can be given expli­
cit definitions in physical terms. l Of late there has
been a growing awareness, however, that reduc­
tionism is an unreasonably strong claim. 2 Along
with this has come recognition that reductionism
is to be distinguished from a purely ontological
thesis concerning the sorts of entities of which the
world is constituted. This separation is important:
even if physical reductionism is unwarranted, what
may be called "emergence" of higher-order phe­
nomena is allowed for without departing from the
physical ontology. (In particular, anti-reductionist
arguments are seen as lending no support whatever
to Cartesian dualism as an ontological claim. )
Moreover, there has been a tendency to suppose
that reduction of terminology entails reduction of
ontology, but this is mistaken. It is thus necessary
to consider just how to state a reasonably precise
physicalist ontological position. This is the burden
of section I.
Although a purely ontological thesis is a neces­
sary component of physicalism, it is insufficient, in
that it makes no appeal to the power of physical
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 72 (1975),
pp. 551-64. Reprinted by permission of Columbia
University.
law. In section II, we seek to develop principles of
physical determination that spell out rather precisely
the underlying physicalist intuition that the physi­
cal facts determine all the facts. The goal is then to
show that these principles do not imply physical
reductionism. The main task here is to avoid the
effects of the well-known definability theorem of
Beth, to which end a natural solution is proposed.
Physicalism, so construed, consists in two sorts
of principles, one ontological, the other the prin­
ciples of physical determination, together com­
patible with the falsity of reductionism. Yet
physicalism without reductionism does not rule
out endless lawful connections between higher­
level and basic physical sciences. 3 Both ontological
and determinationist principles have the character
of higher-order empirical hypotheses and are not
immune from revision. Nor are they intended as
final claims, for it is recognized that physical
science is a changing and growing body of theory.
Nevertheless, these sorts of principles can be
adopted at various stages of development to assert
the tentative adequacy of a physical basis for onto­
logy and determination.
I
A. Ontology and reduction
Pre-systematically, the physicalist ontological posi­
tion is simply put: "Everything is physical. " How­
ever, unless 'physical' is spelled out, the claim is
hopelessly vague. Yet, as soon as the attempt is \nGeoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson
made to identify 'is physical' with satisfaction of any
predicate on some list of clearly physical predicates
(drawn, say, from standard physics texts), it is dis­
covered that the simple formula, (\Ix) (x satisfies
some predicate on the list), fails of its purpose.
Unless closure of the list under some fairly complex
operations were specified, predicates of ordinary
macroscopic objects would not appear, and the
claim would be trivially false. Indeed, one seems
already forced into the reductionist position of
defining ~ at least in the sense of finding extensional
equivalents for ~ all predicates in terms of the basic
list. What started as a bald ontological assertion
seems to involve dubious claims as to the defining
power of a language. When it is contemplated,
moreover, that, no matter how sophisticated the
list and the "defining machinery, " there are bound
to be entities composed of "randomly selected"
parts of other entities which elude description in
the physical language, then it is evident that some­
thing is wrong with this whole approach.
There is another approach. As a preliminary, it
should be stated here that no sharp distinction
between physics and mathematics is being presup­
posed. Since we are interested in physicalism vis-a­
vis the mind~body problem and the relations
among the sciences, we do not wish any physicalist
theses that we formulate to turn on views concern­
ing abstract entities. For the purposes of this dis­
cussion we will assume an object language L
containing a stock of mathematical-physical pre­
dicates, including those which might be drawn
from texts concerning elementary particles, field
theory, space-time physics, etc. ,4 as well as iden­
tity, the part~whole relation, "<" of the calculus of
individuals, and a full stock of mathematical pre­
dicates (which, for convenience we may suppose
are built up within set theory from 'E'). The meta­
language in which we work includes L (and enough
to express the (referential) semantics ofL). Hence­
forth, we shall use 'physics' to mean "physics plus
mathematics" and shall speak indifferently of
"physical" or "mathematical-physical" predicates.
Now a thesis that qualifies as ontological physic­
alism not involving any appeal to the defining
power of L (or any language) asserts, roughly,
that everything is exhausted ~ in a sense to be
explained ~ by mathematical-physical entities,
where these are specified as anything satisfying
any predicate in a list of basic positive physical
predicates of L. Such a list might include, e. g. ,
'-is a neutrino', '-is an electromagnetic field',
'-is a four-dimensional manifold', '-and - are
related by a force obeying the equations (Einstein's,
say) listed', etc. There are no doubt many ways of
developing such a list, depending on how physical
theory is formulated. The fundamental require­
ment for a basic positive physical predicate at a
place is that satisfaction of it at that place constitu­
tes a sufficient condition for being a physical entity,
clearly enough to be granted by physicalists and
non physicalists alike. s Clearly, negations of prim­
itive predicates of physics do not qualify; hence we
say "positive" physical predicates. However, it is
clear that certain predicates, even primitives, do
not meet the fundamental requirement just stated
at any place. For example, to include '=' in the list
would beg the question: any nonphysicalist will
agree that everything is exhausted by all the entities
in the extension of this predicate! The same goes
for the part~whole relation '<', and for set mem­
bership 'E', since what are regarded as among the
relata of these predicates depends quite directly on
one's ontological position. Finally, we must
exclude predicates of location of the form 'is at
space-time point p', since it would be question­
begging to say that merely having location is suffi­
cient for being a physical object.
Assume, then, that requisite exclusions of this
kind have been made and we have a list, r, of basic
positive physical predicates with the concrete
places specified. In terms of r we now sketch a
physicalist ontology. Since 'E' is not in r, special
provision must be made for mathematical entities.
The alternative we favor consists in an iterative set­
theoretic hierarchy built on a ground level of con­
crete physical entities (plus the null set). Since the
mathematical objects required by physical science
can be developed within set theory, we may con­
centrate on the members of r at their concrete
places (where they apply only to objects in space­
time). Thus, stipulating that
v[r](x) iff
x belongs to the extension at a concrete place of
some predicate of r
we may apply notions of the calculus of indi­
viduals6 to objects x such that V [r]( x). In particu­
lar, where b. is any set of predicates, it is assumed
there is a unique individual that exhausts all objects
satisfying V[b. ]; that is,
(3! x)(\iy)«3z)(z < y & z < x) <->
(3z)(3w)(V[b. ](z) & w < z & w <y)) \nwhere '<' is the part-whole relation of the calculus
of individuals, here understood as "spatiotemporal
part. " We designate this individual F(b. ). The
hierarchy is defined thus:
R(O) = {xix = ¢ V x < F(r)}
R((/) = Power set (R(n)) (a/successor of a)
R(A) = U, j < A R((3), limit ordinals A
These are just like the ranks, defined by transfinite
induction, in set theory, except here rank 0 con­
tains, in addition to the null set, all parts of the
fusion of concrete basic positive physical predicates
(as ur-elements). This hierarchy admits all
required mathematical constructions, both pure
and applied (i. e. , defined on physical systems). In
terms of this hierarchy, ontological physicalism
takes the following simple form: 7
(1) (Vx)(: Ja)(x E R(a))
The crucial step is in the use of 'x < F(r)' in the
definition ofR(O). Recall that, like 'E', '<' is not on
the basic list r. Its use enables one to say, without
begging any questions, that everything concrete is
exhausted by basic physical objects, without thereby
implying that everything is in the extension of a
basic physical predicate. (1) ensures that the only
further entities arc sets built on R(O), and may be
appropriately dubbed the Principle of Physical
Exhaustion (not to be confounded with mental
exhaustion! ).
There is, in addition to Physical Exhaustion, an
allied principle that merits attention under the
heading of purely ontological theses. It may be
called the Identity of Physical Indiscernibles and
corresponds to one reading of the basic physicalist
intuition, "no difference without a physical differ­
ence. " Letting ¢ range over physical predicates and
using u and v to range over arbitrary n-tuples of
objects, we may express the Identity of Physical
Indiscernibles thus:
(2) (Vu)(Vv)((V¢)(¢u <-> ¢v) ---+ u = v)
Let 1jJ range over all nonphysical predicates (all
predicates outside L needed to describe any phe­
nomena in any branch of science). Then, in the
presence of (a certain formulation of) Leibniz's
laws, (2) is equivalent to
(3) (V1jJ)(Vu)(Vv)(: J¢)(ljJu& ~ 1jJv ---+ ¢u
& ~¢v)
Physicalism: Reduction and Determination
i. e. , for every nonphysical predicate and every dis­
tinction it makes, there is a physical predicate that
makes that distinction. R
By appropriately restricting the range of ¢, (2)
and (3) come very close to implying (1): they imply
that there can be at most one entity discrete from
the sum of all basic physical entities. (Details are
omitted for lack of space. Suffice it to say, evidently
monotheism was an advance on polytheism after
all, provided God has no proper parts! ) However,
(2) and (3) are essentially stronger than Physical
Exhaustion: the physical might exhaust everything,
though physical language might be too weak to
distinguish nonidenticals. What is most significant,
however, is that, regardless of the appeal (2) and (3)
make to the power of physical language, none of the
principles (1 )-(3) says anything about reduction or
even accidental extensional equivalence between
nonphysical and physical predicates. While ruling
out Cartesian dualism, epiphenomenalism, and
their ilk, the principle of Physical Exhaustion
(like (2) or (3)) is compatible with there being no
physical predicate, no matter how complex, which
even accidentally picks out the extension of any
nonphysical predicate, even those of biology, not
to mention psychology. Insofar as reductionism has
been motivated by a desire to restrict ontological
commitment to the physical, it has made necessity
out of a virtue. 9
B. The status of the ontological principles
Let us take physical reductionism to be the claim
that, in the theory consisting of all the lawlike
truths of science (stated in an adequate language),
including, of course physical theory, every scienti­
fic predicate is definable in physical terms. That is,
for every n-place predicate P, the laws of science
entail a formula of the form
where A is a (finite) sentence containing only
physical vocabulary as nonlogical terms and occur­
rences of n distinct variables, Xl, .. ., xn. This is a
"strong" form of reductionism because it asserts
not merely that the extensions of all scientific pre­
dicates are physically expressible, but also that the
equivalences are lawlike. The equivalences are
provable in scientific theory and are therefore
logical consequences of its laws. Yet even this
strong form of reductionism is compatible with
ontological dualism. \nGeoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson
To see this, consider a very simple theory, ~,
containing just two nonlogical one-place pre­
dicates, P and! 6 and the following nonlogical
aXIOms:
(: lx)(: ly)(x i= y & (Vz)(z = x V z = y))
(: lx)(Px & (Vy)(Py ---7 Y = x))
(: lx)(Qx & (Vy)(Qy ---7 Y = x))
(Vx)(Px V Qx)
That is, ~ asserts that there are exactly two objects
and that exactly one object is a P and exactly one
object is a Q and everything is either a P or a Q
Now in ~, the following is provable:
(Vx)(Qx f-> ~ Px)
In other words, Q is definable in terms of P. Yet,
this doesn't guarantee that all objects are, or are
exhausted by, P-type things. In fact, in every
model of ~, there are two disjoint subsets of
entities, one P-type, the other Q_type. 1O
Although the Principle of Physical Exhaustion is
a necessary component of physicalism, it is hardly
sufficient, in that it says nothing about the scope or
power of physical laws. The same may be said for
the Identity of Physical Indiscernibles, since quan­
tification therein is restricted to the actual world. I I
All these principles are too weak in that they give
no expression to the fundamental physicalist claim
that physical phenomena determine all phenomena.
II
The intuitive notion to be explicated, then, is that
of one realm of facts determining another. A rela­
tion of determination has been thought to hold in
many cases of scientific interest, such as between
facts about the past and facts about the future, the
natural and the ethical, the instrumental or obser­
vational and the theoretical, and elsewhere, includ­
ing (as we here urge) the physical and all facts.
Although frequently identified with definability
or reduction (save the case of past and future),
determination, as will be seen, is an independent
matter.
A. Determination
If one kind or realm of facts determines another,
then, at a minimum, the truth-values of sentences
expressing facts in the latter realm cannot vary
without variance of the truth-values of sentences
expressing facts of the former kind. What cannot
happen happens under no scientifically possible cir­
cumstances. Circumstances are possible if they are
compatible with what is fixed. A model-theoretic
characterization of determination is in order. 12
For generality, assume we are working within a
family oflanguages such that any term appearing in
more than one has the same interpretation in each.
Let ¢ and 'l/J stand for various sets of nonlogical
terms and let 0' be a set of structures representing
scientific possibilities. We may now formulate the
notion of a complete ¢ characterization of the
world uniquely determining a complete 'l/J charac­
terization. Recall that two models are elementarily
equivalent ~ m eleq m' ~ if the same sentences are
true or valid in each, and that the restriction or
reduct of a model m to a certain vocabulary L ~ ml
L ~ is the structure derived from m by omitting
the interpretation of all terms not in L. Thus we
have
(4) In 0' structures, ¢ truth determines 'l/J
truth iff
(Vm)(Vm')((m, m' E 0' & ml¢ eleq m'I¢)
---7 ml'l/J eleq m'I'l/J).
The intuitive appeal of this notion is clear.
Given a full characterization of things in ¢ terms,
one and only one full characterization in 'l/J terms is
correct. Once the ¢ facts have been established, so
are the 'l/J facts. 13
This notion of determination has a number of
trivial and uninteresting applications which it
would be tedious to discuss explicitly or exclude.
In the interesting cases, 0' is a specifiable subset of
the models of a theory T which consists of lawlike
truths, ¢ and 'l/J are each subsets of the vocabulary
in which T is stated, and 'l/J is not a subset of ¢.
More strongly, T will contain sentences with
essential occurrences of terms of both ¢ and
'l/J - ¢. Thus the theory T connects the ¢ terms
and the 'l/J terms, which is to say that determination
involves "bridge laws" connecting the determining
phenomena with the phenomena determined.
Notice that determination would hold trivially if
all models of the theory T were elementarily
equivalent or, even more strongly, if T were cate­
gorical.
Thus far we have spoken of the determination of
one kind of fact or one kind of truths by another. \nCan we come closer to the world? Precisely the
same sentences can be true in two structures that
differ enormously in other respects, for example in
cardinality. Reference determines truth, as com­
mon sense assumes and Frege and Tarski clarified,
but truth does not determine reference. In refer­
ence different terms differentially correspond to
the world, determining truths that fail differen­
tially so to correspond.
It is natural to maintain that, just as models are
indistinguishable with respect to truth if the same
sentences are true in each, i. e. , if they are element­
arily equivalent, structures are indistinguishable
with respect to reference if each term has the
same reference in each, i. e. , if they are identical. !4
Thus corresponding to (4) we have
(5) In Q structures, ¢ reference determines
1/! reference iff
(Vm)(Vm')((m, m' E Q & ml¢ = m'I¢)
-4 ml1/! = m'I1/! ).
That is, if any two structures in Q agree on the
references they assign to the ¢ terms; i. e. , their
restrictions to the ¢ vocabulary are identical; then
they agree on the references they assign to the 1/!
terms; i. e. , their restrictions to the 1/! vocabulary are
identical. !5
A question concerning the relative strength of
these notions remains: What is the connection
between (4) and (5)? Perhaps surprisingly, the
answer is "none. " As they stand, they are model­
theoretically independent: there are Q, ¢, and 1/!
such that, in Q structures, ¢ reference determines
1/! reference but ¢ truth does not determine 1/! truth.
The commonplace about reference determining
truth does not here apply. Yet, for an extremely
important class of structures, those sets consisting
of all and only the models of some theory T, (5) so
restricted does imply (4).
If ¢ is construed as the vocabulary of mathem­
atical physics, 1/! as all the vocabulary by means
of which truths can be stated, and Q as a set of
structures representing scientific possibility, then
(4) and (5) constitute Principles of Physical Deter­
mination.
If Q is to represent scientific possibility, it must
at least be the case that every member of Q models
all the laws of science. The question can then be
raised whether this condition is sufficient as well
as necessary. If it were, we could in every occur­
rence simply replace 'Q' by '{ m: m models T}',
Physicalism: Reduction and Determination
where T is the whole of scientific theory, or (more
elegantly) reformulate our principles of physical
determination directly to refer to this body of
theory.
In the next section we shall argue that there is
reason to believe that scientific theory, at least
insofar as it is formulable without recourse to an
infinitary language, has models which would viol­
ate principles of physical determination and which
therefore, assuming as we do that principles of
physical determination hold, must be excluded by
other means. Fortunately, simple means are avail­
able to this end which allow us to construct (instead
of assume as an unanalyzed primitive) the requisite
notion of scientific possibility.
B. Reduction and determination
If for simplicity we assume that our language
contains only predicates as nonlogical terms (an
assumption which can easily be relaxed), then
A primitive n-place predicate P is definable in
terms of a vocabulary ¢ in Q structures
iff
there is a (finite) sentence A containing no
nonlogical terms not in ¢ and with occurrences
of n distinct variables, Xl, .•. , Xn, such that
every structure in Q models (VXI). .. (Vxn)
(PXI. .. Xn +4 A). 16
It should be noted that definability claims are
not per se claims of synonymy. Definability is a
clear notion; synonymy is not. But neither are
they simply claims of coextensiveness. As before,
Q is to be a set of structures representing scientific
possibility; at a minimum, every member of Q is a
model of the laws of science. Definability is thus a
kind of lawlike coextensiveness.
The notion of reducibility with which we are
here concerned is that obtaining when all the
terms of the vocabulary to be reduced are definable
in the reducing vocabulary. That is,
(6) In Q structures, ¢ reduces 1/! iff
(VP)(P E 1/! -4 P is definable in terms
of ¢ in Q structures). 17
If ¢ is construed as the vocabulary of mathem­
atical physics, 1/! as all the vocabulary by means of
which truths can be stated, and Q as a set of struc­
tures representing scientific possibility, then (6) \nGeoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson
constitutes the Principle of Physical Reduction­
ism. (A more stringent notion, which one might
call "effective reducibility, " would require that
every term in the reduced vocabulary be de­
finable in a recursively enumerable set of defini­
tions. )
Although some assumption as to the mathem­
atical-physical determination of all truth and,
probably, all reference is a regulative principle of
scientific theory construction, a general assump­
tion of the reducibility of all terms (and thus, all
theory) to mathematical-physical terms (and thus,
theory) is unwarranted and probably false. The
physicalism that appears plausible has two com­
ponents: ontological physicalism - the Principle
of Physical Exhaustion - and Physical Determina­
tionism, a unified thesis which we choose to call
Physicalist Materialism.
A word is here in order extending our earlier
point that ontological physicalism is formally in­
dependent from reductionism. As a moment's
reflection on "parallelism" will verify, ontological
physicalism is likewise independent from physical
determinationism. This will, however, give no
comfort to dualists. In the absence of positive argu­
ments for extra entities, Occam's razor (sound
scientific procedure) will dictate commitment to
the sparser ontology. And, physical determination
being given, such positive arguments would seem
difficult if not impossible to find.
This is not the place to argue the truth of this
version of physicalism. The aim is to characterize
the position so as to make evident its plausibility
and consistency, and, further, to make clear the
independence of any and all these principles (onto­
logical and determinationist) from physical reduc­
tionism and even from the mere coextensiveness
of nonphysical with physical terms. Therewith
it will have been demonstrated that anti-reduction­
ist arguments are irrelevant to the truth of physic­
alism.
That such a position has not been previously, to
our knowledge, presented in the relevant literature,
is surprising. Ontological physicalism and anti­
physical reductionism are both widely held, and
many have hinted at notions like physical deter­
minationism. To be sure, there is an argument,
based on an application of Beth's renowned defin­
ability theorem, which might appear to render
simultaneous support for determinationism and
anti-reductionism impossible. But it seems un­
likely that his argument has dissuaded many,
since, once again to our knowledge, this argument
has not been previously noticed.
Beth's theorem shows the equivalence of what
logicians have long distinguished as implicit and
explicit definability in a theory. All the terms in 1/J
are jmplicit~y defined by the terms in ¢, in a theory
T, just in case
(Vm)(Vm')((m, m' model T & ml¢ = m'I¢)
---> ml1/J = m'I1/J)
that is, just in case
(Vm)(Vm')((m, m' E {m: m models T} &
ml¢ = m'I¢) ---> ml1/J = m'l1/J
This is of course an instance of (5), and thus
equivalent to
(7) In {m: m models T} structures,
¢ reference determines 1/J reference.
All the terms in 1/J are explicit~y defined by the
terms in ¢, in a theory T, just in case
(8) In {m: m models T} structures,
¢ reduces 1/J.
Thus what Beth's theorem shows is that (7) and (8)
are model-theoretically equivalent (where T is a
first-order theory of a noninfinitary language),
that is, that with respect to sets of structures
which are all and only the models of (such) a
theory, determination of reference is equivalent to
reducibility.
But, in the general case in which the set of
structures a is not necessarily all and only the
models of some theory T, determination of refer­
ence is not equivalent to reducibility. Although (6)
entails (5), the converse does not obtain. Thus if
one holds that some models of the laws of science
are "nonstandard" models that do not represent
scientific possibilities, then one can endorse prin­
ciples of physical determinationism including
determination of reference without claiming that
all scientific facts are reducible to the mathemat­
ical-physical.
Nor does such a position commit one to accept­
ing the notion of scientific possibility as an unex­
plica ted primitive. One can specify a as that subset
of the models of the laws of science in which certain
predicates receive standard interpretations. One \ncan reqUire, for example, that the vocabulary of
pure arithmetic receive its standard interpretation,
thus specifying a set of structures representing
scientific possibility which, as is well known, is
not capturable as all and only the models of a first­
order theory in a noninfinitary language, even when
the theory itself fails to be recursively enumerable
in virtue of containing every truth of arithmetic.
Which models of the laws of science must be
excluded in order to delineate a set of structures
representing scientific possibility is itself a scienti­
fic question. Further mathematical notions, e. g. ,
set-theoretic, may plausibly be held standard, like­
wise resulting in a set of structures not capturable
as all and only the models of a theory. 18
The syntactically specifiable notion of a theory
plays a crucial role in the Beth theorem and hence
in the subcase in which determination and redu­
cibility are equivalent. The absence of a general
equivalence between determination and reducibil­
ity is somewhat clarified if it is noticed that the
notion of reducibility is essentially tied to that of
theory but determination is not. Reduction
requires the existence of syntactic entities, the
definitions, which license the elimination in prin­
ciple of certain theory and description. 19
Determination, in contrast to reducibility, has
nothing directly to do with the existence of a theory
containing or permitting the proof of certain kinds
of sentences. To emphasize the extreme, the deter­
mination of 1/) reference by 1; reference in Q struc­
tures is compatible with no term in 1/J being even
accidental(y coextensional with a term constructed
out of the 1; vocabulary. That is, (5) does not entail
that an instance of (6) holds where Q in the latter
formula is replaced by a reference to (the unit set
of) some member of Q.
Notes
For helpful comments on an earlier draft of this paper, the
authors are grateful to Hector Castaneda, Hartry Field,
Nelson Goodman, Richard Grandy, W. V. Quine, and
Paul Teller.
Of course, there are different reductionist positions
here, as elsewhere, corresponding to different criteria
of definition.
2 Doubts have arisen especially in connection with
functional explanation in the higher-level sciences
(psychology, linguistics, social theory, etc. ). Func­
tional predicates may be physically realizable in het­
erogeneous ways, so as to elude physical definition.
Physicalism: Reduction and Determination
In summary, it has been shown how to construct
both the ontological principle of physical exhaus­
tion and independent principles of physical deter­
mination which together, it is submitted, constitute
the major claims of physicalism. The principle of
the physical determination of reference threatened
to collapse to reducibility in view of Beth's defin­
ability theorem. However, as the work of Gtidel
and others would suggest, the power of our sym­
bolic systems is such that full theoretical character­
ization of scientific possibility in any manner that
would license the inference from determination to
reduction is not to be expected.
For some purposes, the prevalence of nonstand­
ard interpretation, the powerlessness of our most
useful theories directly to pin down the possible,
are grounds for discouragement. From a certain
perspective, however, the present case is entirely
the opposite. Physicalism in no way dictates the
course of progress in the higher-level sciences.
Reductions are indeed frequently constitutive of
such progress. But the truth of physicalism is com­
patible with the utter absence of lawlike or even
accidental generalized biconditionals connecting
any number of predicates of the higher-level
sciences with those of physics.
Finally, without specifying the forms of laws to
be sought by the higher-order sciences, the prin­
ciples of physicalism here sketched do, it is sug­
gested, play a regulative role. They do so by
incorporating certain standards of adequacy -
exhaustiveness of ontology, and determination of
truth and reference - by which the claims of a
physics as a comprehensive and most fundamental
level of scientific theory may be assessed. These
principles constitute a substantive and realistic
sense for the goal of unity of science.
Cf. H. Putnam, "Reductionism and the nature of
psychology, " Cognition 211 (1973), pp. 131-46; ].
Fodor, Psychological Explanation (New York: Ran­
dom House, 1968), ch. 3, and idem, The Language of
Thought (New York: Crowell, 1975).
3 Our position appears thus to be at odds with Donald
Davidson's "anomalism. " Cf. his "Mental events" in
L. Foster and]. Swanson (eds), Experience and Theory
(Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1970).
4 Obviously, there are many alternative formulations of
physical theory. Nothing of present concern will turn
on the specific choice of vocabulary in any way that is
not obvious from the context. \nGeoffrey Hellman and Frank Thompson
5 Thus, for example, magnitude-signs are typically
concrete at certain places (satisfied by concreta) and
abstract at others (satisfied by abstracta, e. g. , real
numbers).
6 For an exposition of the calculus of individuals,
see Nelson Goodman, The Structure of Appearance
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966), ch. 2.
7 Note that properties and relations are not taken as
entities on the ground level, thereby avoiding any
hidden reductionist claim behind the simple assertion
that everything is identical with some physical entity.
In a sequel to this paper, "Physicalist materialism, "
Nous II (1977), pp. 309-45, it will be shown how to
construe properties and relations of any scientific sort
without exceeding the physical ontology.
8 N. B. (3) corresponds to one reading of "no difference
without a physical difference"; another vastly differ­
ent reading corresponds to the result of rewriting (3)
with '(: J¢)' preceding '(Vu) (Vv)'. This (call it (3'»
says that, for any nonphysical predicate, there is a
physical predicate that makes all the distinctions it
does. By first-order quantifier logic, (3') implies
(V'Ij; ) (: J¢) (Vu)('Ij; u <--> ¢u), provided 'Ij; is neither
universal nor null, i. e. , that every such nonphysical
predicate is extensionally equivalent to a physical
predicate - a weak form of reductionism! (3), how­
ever, is much weaker, implying no form of reduction­
Ism. A better example of the value of logical
paraphrase would be hard to find!
9 Failure to recognize the independence of ontological
and reductionist theses undermines much work in
philosophy, particularly in the philosophy of mind.
The psychophysical identity thesis is the ontological
claim that every psychological entity is a physical
entity, i. e. , that every former entity is identical with
some latter entity. This is entirely compatible with the
irreducibility of psychology to physics and with psy­
chological properties not being physical properties
(although being mathematical-physical entities). This
point is elaborated in our "Physicalist materialism. "
10 Of course, an even simpler theory with the same
property is '(Vx)(Qx <--> ~ Px)' itself.
N. B. Nothing essential turns on there being only
two predicates. If use is made of certain relative terms,
clearly within physical vocabulary as conceived by
traditional reductionist positions, e. g. , predicates of
location, then parallel arguments can be constructed
for theories containing any finite number of pre­
dicates.
II Cf. Carnap's explication of determination in his Intro­
duction to Symbolic Logic and its Applications (New
York: Dover, 1958), p. 211.
12 For details on model theory relevant to what follows,
see J. Shoenfield, Mathematical Logic (Reading,
Mass. : Addison-Wesley, 1967), ch. 5; G. Boolos and
R. Jeffrey, Computability and Logic (New York: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1974), chs 17-19, 23, 24; and
M. A. Dickmann, Model Theory of Infinitary Lan-
guages, vol. I, Aarhus Lecture Notes Series no. 20
(1968/9), ch. I.
13 This and following notions of determination have a
number of interesting applications, explored in our
"Physicalist materialism. " Determinism in physics is
not a special case of(4), but rather of a somewhat more
general principle, here omitted for lack of space. See
ibid.
14 If a is closed under automorphic images, then (5) is
equivalent to the condition that any bijective map
between domains of m amd m' which is a ¢-isomorph­
ism is a 'Ij; -isomorphism. Otherwise the latter require­
ment may be stronger, depending on a. An analogous
point has been noted by J. Earman in his discussion of
Montague's treatment of determinism in physics in
"Laplacian determinism, or Is this any way to run a
universe? ," Journal of Philosophy 68, 21 (4 Nov. 1971),
pp. 729-44, at p. 738, n. 11.
15 One further type of determination principle along
these lines is interesting, that of ¢-reference deter­
mining 'Ij; -truth in a structures. This is weaker than
(4) but still makes a substantial determination claim.
It allows us to exploit our presumed confidence in the
scientific respectability of the determining vocabulary
¢ - confidence that its terms clearly refer to elements
in a well-understood part of our ontology - without
our needing to grant a similar respect for the vocabu­
lary of 'Ij; . We grant that the vocabulary of'lj; can be
used to state truths, truths which are determined by
the referential facts in ¢ terms, without claiming that
the references of the ¢ terms precisely determine
references for the 'Ij; terms as well.
16 The order of the quantifiers should be noted: It is not
simply that, in each structure in a, P is coextensive
with some primitive or complex term formulated in ¢
terms; rather, more strongly, there is a term formu­
lated in the ¢ vocabulary such that P is coextensive
with it in every structure in a.
17 Although this notion of reduction applies directly to
the linguistic primitives of the language reduced, it
extends in a natural way also to the sentences, includ­
ing the laws, formulated in that language: If in n
structures, ¢ reduces 7/; , then every law formulated
in whole or in part in 7/) terms (including the "bridge"
laws) is a definitional equivalent of a law formulated in
purely ¢ terms. Thus reduction of terms implies
reduction of laws, and thus, for example, physicalist
reduction is incompatible with nonontological "emer­
gence" these which claim that, although evolution
adds no nonphysical entities to the universe, it does
introduce lawlike regularities that can be captured
only by nonphysical laws. (A weaker "epistemolo­
gical" emergence thesis, which claims only that the
physical reductions oflaws formulated in the nonphy­
sical vocabulary will be independent of the physics
previously known, is not excluded. )
18 There is an obvious connection between this issue and
those raised by Saul Kripke concerning rigid designa-\ntion and David Lewis concerning counterparts. Cf.
above n. 14.
19 Thus, if in a structures, </> reduces 1/J, there is an easily
specifiable theory (not necessarily recursively enu­
merable) within which every definition composing
the reduction of 1/J to </> is provable. This is true
whether or not a, the set of structures to which the
reduction is relativized, is itself directly specifiable as
the models of such a theory. Given a, we can specify
the theory
n b: (: 3m)(m E a & m models, n
that is, the intersection of the theories of each of the
models in a, a theory which contains every definition
Physicalism: Reduction and Determination
required for the reduction of 1/J to </>. In fact, (6) is
equivalent to
In {m: m models n b: (: 3m')(m' E a &
m' models In}, </> reduces 1/J.
That is, if reducibility holds for a set of structures,
then, and only then, it holds for the set of models for
all sentences true in each member of that set of struc­
tures, even though the former may be a proper subset
of the latter. No such principle holds for determina­
tion; determination with respect to a can coexist with
indetermination with respect to the set of all struc­
tures modeling every sentence true in every member
ofa. \n42
Jaegwon Kim
1 Supervenience in Philosophy
Supervenience is a philosophical concept in more
ways than one. First of all, like such concepts as
cause and rationality, it is often used in the formu­
lation of philosophical doctrines and arguments.
Thus, we have the claim that ethical predicates
are "supervenient predicates, " or that the charac­
teristics of a whole supervene on those of its parts.
And arguments have been advanced to show that
the supervenience of moral properties undermines
moral realism, or that, on the contrary, moral
supervenience shows ethical judgements are
"objective" after all. And, again like causality and
rationality, the concept of supervenience itself has
become an object of philosophical analysis and a
matter of some controversy.
But unlike causality, supervenience is almost
exclusively a philosopher's concept, one not likely
to be encountered outside philosophical disserta­
tions and disputations. The notion of cause, on the
other hand, is an integral part of our workaday
language, a concept without which we could hardly
manage in describing our experiences and observa­
tions, framing explanations of natural events, and
Delivered as the Third Metaphilosophy Lecture at the
Graduate School, City University of New York, in May
1989. Originally published in Metaphilosophy 21
(1990), pp. 1-27, and reprinted in Supervenience
and Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1993).
assessing blame and praise. Something similar can
be said about the notion of being rational as well,
although this concept is not as ubiquitous in ordin­
ary discourse as that of cause. Supervenience of
course is not unique in being a technical philo­
sophical concept; there are many others, such as
"haecceity" and "possible world" in metaphysics,
"analyticity" in the theory of meaning, and the
currently prominent concepts of "wide" and "nar­
row" content.
But this isn't to say that the word "superveni­
ence" is a philosopher's neologism; on the con­
trary, it has been around for some time, and has
had a respectable history. The OED lists 1594 for
the first documented occurrence of the adjective
"supervenient" and 1647-8 for the verb "super­
vene"; the noun "supervenience" occurred as early
as 1664. In these uses, however, "supervene" and
its derivatives were almost without exception
applied to concrete events and occurrences in the
sense of "coming upon" a given event as something
additional and extraneous (perhaps as something
unexpected), or coming shortly after another
occurrence, as in "Upon a sudden supervened the
death of the king" (1647-8) and "The king was
bruised by the pommel of his saddle; fever super­
vened, and the injury proved fatal" (1867). There
is also this entry from Charlotte Bronte's Shirley
(1849): "A bad harvest supervened. Distress
reached its climax. " In common usage superveni­
ence usually implies temporal order: the superveni­
ent event occurs after the event upon which it
supervenes, often as an effect. It is clear that even
though the vernacular meaning of "supervenience" \nis not entirely unrelated to its current philosophical
sense, the relationship is pretty tenuous, and
unlikely to provide any helpful guide for the philo­
sophical discussion of the concept.
I noted that supervenience is like haecceity and
narrow content in that they are specifically philo­
sophical concepts, concepts introduced by philo­
sophers for philosophical purposes. But in one
significant respect supervenience differs from
them: haecceity and narrow content are notions
used within a restricted area of philosophy, to for­
mulate distinctions concerning a specific domain of
phenomena, or for the purpose of formulating doc­
trines and arguments concerning a specific topic.
Thus, the notion of haecceity arises in connection
with the problem of identity and the essence of
things; and the concepts of narrow and broad con­
tent emerge in the discussion of some problems
about meaning and propositional attitudes. In
contrast, supervenience is not subject-specific.
Although the idea of supervenience appears to
have originated in moral theory, 1 it is a general,
methodological concept in that it is entirely topic­
neutral, and its use is not restricted to any
particular problem or area of philosophy. It is this
subject-neutral character of supervenience that dis­
tinguishes it from the usual run of philosophical
concepts and makes it an appropriate object of
metaphilosophical inquiry. Supervenience is a
topic of interest from the point of view of philo­
sophical methodology.
In undertaking a philosophical study of super­
venience, we quickly run into the following diffi­
culty. Because the term is rarely used outside
philosophy, there is not a body of well-established
usage in ordinary or scientific language that could
generate reliable linguistic intuitions to guide the
inquiry; there are few linguistic or conceptual data
against which to test one's speculations and
hypotheses. This means that for supervenience
there are not the usual constraints on the "analy­
sis" of a concept; in a sense, there is no preexisting
concept to be analyzed. As we shall see, earlier
philosophical uses of the concept do set some
broad constraints on our discussion; however,
when it comes to matters of detail, supervenience
is going to be pretty much what we say it is. That is,
within limits we are free to define it to suit the
purposes on hand, and the primary measure of
success for our definitions is their philosophical
usefulness. This, I believe, is the principal ex­
planation of the multiplicity of supervenience
concepts currently on the scene.
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
Perhaps, the concept of a possible world is also
like this. If we want to use this concept in a serious
way, we would need to explain what we mean,
either by explicitly defining it or by providing
appropriately chosen examples and applications.
However this is done, we need not be bound, in
any significant way, by previous usage; there is not
a common body of philosophical usage to which
one's conception of a possible world must answer.
The only criterion of success here is pragmatic:
how useful and fruitful the introduced concept is
in clarifying modal concepts, systematizing our
modal intuitions, and helping us sharpen our meta­
physical opinions.
There is a long tradition of philosophical discus­
sion of modal concepts, the notions of necessity and
possibility, of essential and contingent properties,
of essences and haecceities, and so on. In contrast,
supervenience is a concept of a comparatively
recent origin. R. M. Hare is usually credited with
having introduced the term "supervenience" into
contemporary discussion, and our present use of
the term appears historically continuous with
Hare's use of it in The Language of Morals
(1952). 2 More than thirty years later, in his Inaug­
ural Address, "Supervenience" (1984), to the Aris­
totelian Society, 3 Hare wonders who first used the
term in its current philosophical sense, being quite
sure that he was not that person. Hare says that he
first used the term in an unpublished paper written
in 1950, but is not able to name any particular
philosopher who had used it before he did. In any
case, Hare's introduction ofthe term didn't exactly
start a stampede. There were, to be sure, isolated
appearances of the concept in the ethical literature
during the two decades following the publication of
The Language of Morals, 4 but they were not marked
by any real continuity, or an awareness of its poten­
tial and significance as a general philosophical con­
cept. An idea related to supervenience, that of
"universalizability" or "generality" of moral judg­
ments, was much discussed in moral philosophy
during this period, but the debate remained pretty
much one of local concern within ethics.
It would be an error, however, to think that
moral theorists had a monopoly on supervenience.
On the contrary, early in this century, "super­
venience" and its derivatives were used with some
regularity by the emergentists, and their critics, in
the formulation and discussion of the doctrine of
"emergent evolution, " and it seems possible that
Hare and others got "supervenience, " directly or
indirectly, from the emergentist literature. Many \nJaegwon Kim
of the leading emergentists were British (for ex­
ample, G. H. Lewes, Samuel Alexander, C. Lloyd
Morgan, C. D. Broad), and the emergence debate
was robust and active in the 1930s and 1940s. The
doctrine of emergence, in brief, is the claim that
when basic physicochemical processes achieve a
certain level of complexity of an appropriate kind,
genuinely novel characteristics, such as mentality,
appear as "emergent" qualities. Lloyd Morgan, a
central theoretician of the emergence school,
appears to have used "supervenient" as an occa­
sional stylistic variant of "emergent, " although the
latter remained the official term associated with
the philosophical position, and the concept he
intended with these terms seems surprisingly
close to the supervenience concept current today. 5
The emergence debate, however, has by and large
been forgotten, and appears to have had negligible
effects on the current debates in metaphysics, phi­
losophy of mind, and philosophy of science, except
perhaps in some areas of philosophy of biology. 6
This is to be regretted, because some of the issues
that were then discussed concerning the status of
emergent qualities are highly relevant to the current
debate on mental causation and the status of psy­
chology in relation to the biological and physical
sciences? In any case, the present interest in super­
venience was kindled by Donald Davidson in the
early 1970s when he used the term in his influential
and much discussed paper "Mental events"S to
formulate a version of nonreductive physicalism.
What is noteworthy is that the term has since gained
quick currency, especially in discussions of the
mind-body problem; and, more remarkably, the
term seems by now to have acquired, among philo­
sophers, a pretty substantial shared content.
"Supervene" and its derivatives are now regularly
encountered in philosophical writings, and often
they are used without explanation, signaling an
assumption on the part of the writers that their
meaning is a matter of common knowledge.
And during the past decade or so attempts have
been made to sharpen our understanding of the
concept itself. Various supervenience relations
have been distinguished, their mutual relationships
worked out, and their suitability for specific philo­
sophical purposes scrutinized. This has led David
Lewis to complain about an "unlovely prolifera­
tion" of supervenience concepts, which he believes
has weakened its core meaning. 9 I disagree with the
"unlovely" part of Lewis's characterization, but he
is certainly right about the proliferation. I think
this is a good time to take stock of the current state
of the supervenience concept, and reflect on its
usefulness as a philosophical concept. That is my
aim in this essay.
2 Covariance, Dependence, and
Nonreducibility
The first use of the term "supervene" (actually, the
Latin supervenire) I have found in a philosophical
text is by Leibniz. In connection with his celebrated
doctrine concerning relations, Leibniz wrote:
Relation is an accident which is in multiple
subjects; it is what results without any change
made in the subjects but supervenes from them;
it is the thinkability of objects together when we
think of multiple things simultaneously. lO
There has been much interpretive controversy
concerning Leibniz's doctrine of relations - in par­
ticular, whether or not it was a reducibility thesis,
to the effect that relations are reducible, in some
sense, to "intrinsic denominations" of things.
Leibniz's use of "supervene" in this context
seems not inappropriate in our light: his thesis
could be interpreted as the claim that relations
supervene on the intrinsic properties of their relata.
Such a claim would certainly be an interesting and
important metaphysical thesis.
But Leibniz's use of "supervene" may well have
been an isolated event; although I cannot say I have
done anything like an exhaustive or systematic
search, I have not found any other occurrence of
the term since then, until we come well into the
present century. However, the idea of superveni­
ence, or something very close to it, if not the term
"supervenience, " was clearly present in the writ­
ings of the British Moralists. There is, for example,
the following from Sidgwick:
There seems, however, to be this difference
between our conceptions of ethical and physical
objectivity: that we commonly refuse to admit
in the case of the former - what experience
compels us to admit as regards the latter -
variations for which we can discover no rational
explanation. In the variety of coexistent physi­
cal facts we find an accidental or arbitrary ele­
ment in which we have to acquiesce, .. . But
within the range of our cognitions of right and
wrong, it will generally be agreed that we can­
not admit a similar unexplained variation. We \ncannot judge an action to be right for A and
wrong for B, unless we can find in the nature or
circumstances of the two some difference which
we can regard as a reasonable ground for differ­
ence in their duties. I I
Sidgwick is saying that moral characteristics must
necessarily covary with certain (presumably non­
moral) characteristics, whereas there is no similar
covariance requirement for physical properties. In
terms of supervenience the idea comes to this:
moral properties, in particular, the rightness or
wrongness of an action, are supervenient on their
nonmoral properties (which could provide reasons
for the rightness or wrongness).
Concerning the concept of "intrinsic value, "
G. E. Moore said this: .. . if a given thing possesses any kind of intrin­
sic value in a certain degree, then not only must
that same thing possess it, under all circum­
stances, in the same degree, but also anything
exaa~y like it, must, under all circumstances,
possess it in exactly the same degree. 12
Likeness of things is grounded, presumably, In
their descriptive, or "naturalistic" properties -
that is, their none valuative properties. Thus,
Moore's point amounts to the statement that the
intrinsic value of a thing supervenes on its descript­
ive, nonevaluative properties.
Hare, introducing the term "supervenience"
into moral philosophy for the first time, said this:
First, let us take that characteristic of "good"
which has been called its supervenience. Sup­
pose that we say, "St Francis was a good man. "
It is logically impossible to say this and to
maintain at the same time that there might
have been another man placed exactly in the
same circumstances as St Francis, and who
behaved in exactly the same way, but who dif­
fered from St Francis in this respect only, that
he was not a good man. 13
It is clear that both Moore and Hare, like Sidgwick,
focus on the characteristic of moral properties or
ethical predicates that has to do with their necessary
covariation with descriptive - nonmoral and none­
valuative - properties or predicates. The attribu­
tion of moral properties, or the ascription of ethical
predicates, to an object is necessarily constrained,
in a specific way, by the nonethical properties
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
attributed to that object. For Moore the constraint
has the modal force of "must'; ' for Hare, the viola­
tion of the constraint amounts to the contravention
of logical consistency.
The basic idea of supervenience we find in Sidg­
wick, Moore, and Hare, therefore, has to do with
property covariation: properties of one kind must
covary with properties of another kind in a certain
way. As Lewis put it, "no difference of one sort
without differences of another sort, ,; 14 and a
change in respect of properties of one sort cannot
occur unless accompanied by a change in respect of
properties of another sort. If you have qualms
about properties as entities, the same idea can be
expressed in terms of predicates; if you think the
predicates in question do not express properties, in
something like the way ethical noncognitivists
regard ethical predicates, you could express the
idea in terms of "ascriptions" of predicates or the
making of ethical judgements. IS
Hare spoke of ethical and other evaluative pre­
dicates as "supervenient predicates, " apparently
taking supervenience as a property of expressions.
But it is evident that the fundamental idea involves
a relation between two sets of properties, or pre­
dicates, and that what Hare had in mind was the
supervenience of ethical predicates in relation to
nonethical, or naturalistic predicates. In fact, that
was precisely the way Lloyd Morgan used the
term, in the 1920s, some three decades before
Hare; he used "supervenience" to denote a general
relation, speaking of the supervenience of physical
and chemical events "on spatiotemporal events, ,, 16
and of deity as a quality that might be supervenient
"on reflective consciousness. ,, 17 As I said, Morgan
used "supervene" and "emerge" as stylistic vari­
ants, and this means that supervenience is as much
a general relation as emergence is.
Thus, Morgan and other emergentists were the
first, as far as I know, to develop a generalized
concept of supervenience as a relation, and their
concept turns out to be strikingly similar to that in
current use, especially in philosophy of mind.
They held that the supervenient, or emergent,
qualities necessarily manifest themselves when,
and only when, appropriate conditions obtain at
the more basic level; and some emergentistsl8
took great pains to emphasize that the phenomenon
of emergence is consistent with determinism. But
in spite of that, the emergents are not reducible, or
reductively explainable, in terms of their "basal"
conditions. In formulating his emergentism, Mor­
gan thought of himself as defending a reasonable \nJaegwon Kim
naturalistic alternative to both mechanistic reduc­
tionism and such anti-naturalisms as vitalism and
Cartesianism. Thus, Morgan's position bears an
interesting similarity to the supervenience thesis
Davidson has injected into philosophy of mind,
and to many currently popular versions of non­
reductive materialism which Davidson has helped
inspire. In a passage that has become a bench-mark
to the writers on supervenience and nonreductive
materialism, Davidson wrote:
Although the position I describe denies there
are psychophysical laws, it is consistent with the
view that mental characteristics are in some
sense dependent, or supervenient, on physical
characteristics. Such supervenience might be
taken to mean that there cannot be two events
alike in all physical respects but differing in
some mental respects, or that an object cannot
alter in some mental respects without altering in
some physical respects. Dependence or super­
venience of this kind does not entail reducibility
through law or definition: if it did, we could
reduce moral properties to descriptive, and
this there is good reason to believe cannot be
done. 19
Both Morgan and Davidson seem to be saying that
mental phenomena are supervenient on physical
phenomena and yet not reducible to them.
What Davidson says about the supervenience
relation between mental and physical character­
istics is entirely consonant with the idea of property
covariation we saw in Sidgwick, Moore, and Hare.
But he did more than echo the idea of the earlier
writers: in this paragraph Davidson explicitly
introduced two crucial new ideas, earlier adum­
brated in the emergence literature, that were to
change the complexion of the subsequent philo­
sophical thinking about supervenience. First,
supervenience is to be a relation of dependence:
that which is supervenient is dependent on that
on which it supervenes. Second, it is to be a non­
reductive relation: supervenient dependency is not
to entail the reducibility of the supervenient to its
subvenient base. 2o
Davidson had his own reasons for attaching
these two ideas to supervenience. The quoted para­
graph occurs in his "Mental events" just after he
has advanced his "anomalous monism, " the doc­
trine that mental events are identical to physical
events even though there are no laws connecting
mental and physical properties. In writing this
passage, he is trying to mitigate the likely impres­
sion that anomalous monism permits no significant
relationships between mental and physical attri­
butes, positing two isolated, autonomous domains.
His psychophysical anomalism, the thesis that
there are no laws connecting the mental with the
physical, has sundered the two domains; with the
supervenience thesis he is trying to bring them
back together. But not so close as to revive the
hope, or threat, of psychophysical reductionism.
In any event, these two ideas, dependency and
nonreductiveness, have become closely associated
with supervenience. In particular, the idea that
supervenience is a dependency relation has become
firmly entrenched, so firmly that it has by now
acquired the status of virtual analyticity. But I
think it is useful to keep these three ideas separate;
so let us summarize the three putative components,
or desiderata, of supervenience:
Covariance: Supervenient properties covary
with their subvenient, or base, properties. In
particular, indiscernibility in respect of the
base properties entails indiscernibility In
respect of the supervenient properties.
Dependen~y: Supervenient properties are
dependent on, or are determined by, their base
properties.
Nonreducibility: Supervenience is to be con­
sistent with the irreducibility of supervenient
properties to their base properties.
Obviously, covariance is the crucial component;
any supervenience concept must include this con­
dition in some form. The main issue, then,
concerns the relationship between covariance and
the other two components, and here there are two
principal questions. First, can covariance yield
dependence, or must dependence be considered
an independent component of supervenience?
Second, is there an interpretation of covariance
that is strong enough to sustain supervenience as
a dependency relation but weak enough not
to imply reducibility? More broadly, there is
this question: In what ways can these three desi­
derata be combined to yield coherent and philo­
sophically interesting concepts of supervenience?
I will not be offering definitive answers to these
questions here; for I don't have the answers. What
follows is a kind of interim report on the ongoing
work by myself and others on these and related
Issues. \n3 Types of Covariance
In the passage quoted above, Davidson writes as
though he held that property covariation of the sort
he is specifying between mental and physical prop­
erties generated a dependency relation between
them. That is, mental properties are dependent
on physical properties in virtue oj the fact that the
two sets of properties covary as indicated. Is this
idea sound? But what precisely is covariance, to
begin with?
It turns out that the simple statement of covari­
ance in terms of indiscernibility has at least two
distinct interpretations, one stronger than the
other, depending on whether things chosen for
comparison in respect of indiscernibility come
exclusively from one possible world, or may come
from different worlds. We can call them "weak"
and "strong" covariance. Let A and B be two sets
of properties, where we think of A as supervenient
and B as subvenient. I state two definitions for each
type of covariance:
Weak covariance I: No possible world con­
tains things, x and y, such that x and yare
indiscernible in respect of properties in B ("B­
indiscernible") and yet discernible in respect of
properties in A ("A-discernible").
Weak covariance II: Necessarily, if anything
has property F in A, there exists a property G in
B such that the thing has G, and everything that
has G has F.
Strong covariance I: For any objects x and
y and any worlds /Pi and /Pj, if x in /Pj is B­
indiscernible from y in /Pi (that is, x has in /Pj
precisely those B-properties that y has in /Pj),
then x in /Pi is A-indiscernible from y in /Pj.
Strong covariance II: Necessarily, if anything
has property F in A, there exists a property G in
B such that the thing has G, and necessari~y
everything with G has F.
For both weak and strong covariance, the two ver­
sions are equivalent under certain assumptions
concerning property composition. 21 However, it
will be convenient to have both versions. The sole
difference between strong covariance II and weak
covariance II lies in the presence of the second
modal expression "necessarily" in the former; this
ensures that the G-F correlation holds across
possible worlds and is not restricted to the given
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
world under consideration. I have elsewhere called
the two types of covariance "weak supervenience"
and "strong supervenience" respectively; I am
using the "covariance" terminology here since I
am trying to keep the idea of covariance and that
of dependence separate. This is a purely termino­
logical decision; if we liked, we could continue to
use the supervenience terminology here, and then
raise the question concerning the relationship
between supervenience and dependence.
How should we understand the modal term
"necessarily, " or quantification over possible
worlds, that occurs in the statements of covariance?
I believe that a general characterization of covari­
ance, or supervenience, should leave this term as an
unfixed parameter to be interpreted to suit specific
supervenience claims. The standard options in this
area include metaphysical, logico-mathematical,
analytic, and nomological necessity.
Hare's and Davidson's original statements of
supervenience seem neutral with respect to weak
and strong covariance. Interestingly, however, both
have since come out in favor of weak covariance:
Hare for moral supervenience and Davidson for
psychophysical supervenience. In his Inaugural
Address "Supervenience, " Hare says that "what I
have always had in mind is not what Kim now calls
'strong' supervenience. It is nearer to his 'weak'
supervenience, ,22
Davidson has recently given an explicit account
of the notion of supervenience that he says he had
earlier in mind:
The notion of supervenience, as I have used it,
is best thought of as a relation between a pre­
dicate and a set of predicates in a language: a
predicate p is supervenient on a set of predicates
s if for every pair of objects such that p is true of
one and not of the other there is a predicate of s
that is true of one and not of the other. 23
We can easily verify that this is equivalent to weak
covariance II, of the unit set consisting of p on the
set s.
Hare and Davidson are not alone in their pre­
ference for weak covariance. Simon Blackburn,
who has used normative supervenience as a pre­
mise in his argument against moral realism, opts
for weak covariance as his favored form of
supervenience, at least for the case of moral proper­
ties. 24 On his account, if property F supervenes on
a set G of properties, the following holds: in every
possible world, if something has F, its total or \nJaegwon Kim
maximal G-property, G*, is such that anything
with G* has F, Blackburn stresses that this last
universal conditional, "Everything with G* has
F, " is to be taken as a material conditional with
no modal force, zs which makes his concept exactly
fit our weak covariance II.
4 Covariance and Dependence
As may be recalled, Davidson has said that the
mental is "supervenient, or dependent" on the
physical; here he seems to be using "supervenient"
and "dependent" interchangeably, or perhaps the
former as specifying a sense of the latter. We have
just seen that it is weak covariance that he says he
had in mind when he spoke of supervenience. So
there is the following substantive question: Can
weak covariance give us a sense of dependence?
Or equivalently: Can weak covariance be a form
of supervenience if supervenience is to be a
dependency relation?
Weak covariance does place a constraint on
the distribution of supervenient properties relative
to the distribution of their base properties. The
question is whether this constraint is strong
enough to warrant our considering it a form of
dependence or determination. As I have argued
elsewhere, 26 the answer must be in the negative.
For concreteness consider the weak covariance
of mental on physical properties; this covariance
is consistent with each of the following situ­
ations:
In a world that is just like this one in the
distribution of physical properties, no mental­
ity is present.
2 In a world that is just like this one in all physical
details, unicellular organisms are all fully con­
scious, while no humans or other primates
exhibit mentality.
3 In a world that is just like this one in all physical
details, everything exhibits mentality in the
same degree and kind.
These are all possible under weak covariance
because its constraint works only within a single
world at a time: the fact that mentality is distributed
in a certain way in one world has absolute(y no effect
on how it might be distributed in another world. Intra­
world consistency of the distribution of mental
properties relative to the distribution of physical
properties is the only constraint imposed by weak
covariance.
This evidently makes weak covariance unsuit­
able for any dependency thesis with modal or sub­
junctive force. And modal force is arguably a
necessary aspect of any significant dependency
claim. Thus, when we say that the mental is de­
pendent on the physical, we would, I think, want
to exclude each of the possibilities, (1)_(3). 27
Not so with strong covariance: property-to­
property connections between supervenient and
subvenient properties carryover to other worlds.
That is obvious from both versions of strong co­
variance. Consider version II: When applied to the
psychophysical case, it says that if anything has a
mental property M, then there is some physical
property P such that the "P --> M" conditional
holds across all possible worlds. This supports in
a straightforward way the assertion that the psy­
chological character of a thing is entailed, or neces­
sitated, by its physical nature. The strength of
entailment, or necessitation, in this statement
depends on how the modal term "necessarily" is
interpreted, or alternatively, what possible worlds
are involved in our quantification over them (e. g. ,
whether we are talking about all possible worlds, or
only physically or nomologically possible worlds,
etc. ).
But does strong covariance give us dependence
or determination? If the mental strongly covaries
with the physical, does this mean that the mental is
dependent on, or determined by, the physical? As
we saw, strong covariance is essentially a relation of
entailment or necessitation. We notice this initial
difference between necessitation and dependence:
dependence, or determination, is usually under­
stood to be asymmetric whereas entailment or
necessitation is neither symmetric nor asymmetric.
We sometimes speak of "mutual dependence"
or "mutual determination"; however, when non­
reductive physicalists appeal to supervenience as a
way of expressing the dependence of the mental on
the physical, they pretty clearly have in mind an
asymmetric relation: they would say that their the­
sis automatically excludes the converse dependence
of the physical on the mental. "Functional depend­
ence, " in the sense that the two state variables of a
system are related by a mathematical function, may
be neither symmetric nor asymmetric; however,
what we want is metaphysical or ontic dependence
or determination, not merely the fact that values of
one variable are determined as a mathematical
function of those of another variable.
It isn't difficult to think of cases in which strong
covariance fails to be asymmetric: think of a \ndomain of perfect spheres. 28 The surface area of
each sphere strongly covaries with its volume, and
conversely, the volume with the surface area. And
we don't want to say either determines, or depends
on, the other, in any sense of these terms that
implies an asymmetry. There is only a functional
determination, and dependence, both ways; but we
would hesitate to impute a metaphysical or ontolo­
gical dependence either way.
Could we get a relation of dependency by requir­
ing that the subvenient properties not also strongly
covary with the supervenient properties? Let us
consider the following proposal: 29
A-properties depend on B-properties just III
case A strongly covaries with B, but not con­
versely; that is, any B-indiscernible things are
A-indiscernible, but there are A-indiscernible
things that are B-discernible.
In most cases of asymmetric dependence this con­
dition appears to hold; for example, the mental
strongly covaries with the physical, but the phy­
sical does not strongly covary with the mental; and
similarly for the evaluative and the descriptive.
Moreover, all of these examples involve large and
comprehensive systems of properties. So the idea
would be that when an asymmetric strong covari­
ance obtains for two comprehensive systems of
properties, a dependency relation may be imputed
to them.
It isn't clear that this proposal states a necessary
condition for dependence. For consider this: chem­
ical kinds (e. g. , water, gold, etc. ) and their micro­
physical compositions (at least, at one level of
description) seem to strongly covary with each
other, and yet it is true, presumably, that natural
kinds are asymmetrically dependent on microphy­
sical structures. Here our mereological intuition,
that macrophysical properties are asymmetrically
dependent on microphysical structures, seems to
be the major influence on our thinking, canceling
out the fact that the converse strong covariance may
also be present. I admit that this is not a clear-cut
example; for one thing, the converse strong covari­
ance could perhaps be defeated by going to a deeper
micro-level description; for another, one might
argue that there is here no dependence either way,
since being a certain chemical kind just is having a
certain microstructure.
It is even less clear whether the proposal states a
sufficient condition for dependence. There is rea­
son to think it does not. For what does the added
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
second condition that B not covary with A really
contribute? What is clear is this: the absence of
strong covariance from B to A guarantees that B
does not depend on A. For that means that there
are objects with identical A-properties but with
different B-properties. So the net effect of this
added condition is just that B does not depend on
A. The question then is this: Can we count on A to
depend on B whenever A strongly covaries with B
and B does not depend on A?
One might argue for an affirmative answer as
follows: "Strong covariance between A and B
requires an explanation, and it is highly likely that
any explanation must appeal to an asymmetric rela­
tion of dependence. So either A depends on B or B
depends on A; but the failure of strong covariance
from B to A shows that B doesn't depend on A.
Hence, A depends on B. "
What this argument neglects, rather glaringly, is
the possibility that an explanation of the covariance
from A to B may be formulated in terms of a third
set of properties. It seems clearly possible for there
to be three sets of properties A, B, and C, such that
A and B each depend on C, A covaries with B but B
does not covary with A, and A does not depend on
B. 30 Something like this could happen if, although
both A and B covary with C, B makes finer dis­
criminations than A, so that indiscernibility in
regard to B-properties entails indiscernibility with
respect to A, but not conversely.
As a possible example consider this: I've heard
that there is a correlation between intelligence as
measured by the IQtest and manual dexterity. It is
possible that both manual dexterity and intelli­
gence depend on certain genetic and develop­
mental factors, and that intelligence strongly
covaries with manual dexterity but not conversely.
If such were the case, we would not consider intel­
ligence to be dependent on, or determined by,
manual dexterity.
Although the argument, therefore, has a serious
flaw, it is not without value. Observed correlations
of properties, especially between two comprehens­
ive systems of properties, cry out for an explana­
tion, and when no third set of properties is in the
offing that might provide an appropriate ("com­
mon cause") explanation, it may be reasonable to
posit a direct dependency relation between the two
property families. The proposed criterion of
dependent covariation says that if B fails to covary
with A, that rules out the possibility that B depends
on A, leaving A's dependency on B as the only
remaining possibility. So the criterion may be of \nJaegwon Kim
some use in certain situations; however, it cannot
be regarded - at least, in its present form - as an
"analysis" of supervenient dependence, since the
needed further condition (i. e. , that there not be a
set C on which both A and B severally depend)
itself makes use of the concept of dependence.
Trying to define dependence in terms of covari­
ance is not likely to meet with complete and un­
ambiguous success. Consider the case of causal
dependence. Experience has taught us that we are
not likely to succeed in defining an asymmetric
relation of causal dependence, or causal direction­
ality, in terms only of nomological covariations
between properties or event kinds. 3l Unless, that
is, we make a direct appeal to some relation that is
explicitly asymmetric, like temporal precedence.
We are not likely to do any better with superveni­
ent dependence; the proposal above, with the
further proviso that the strong covariation holds
for two comprehensive sets of properties, may be
close to the best that can be done to generate
dependence out of covariation. All this points to
the conclusion that the idea of dependence,
whether causal or supervenient, is metaphysically
deeper and richer than what can be captured by
property covariance, even when the latter is sup­
plemented with the usual modal notions. 32
Much of the philosophical interest that super­
venience has elicited lies in the hope that it is a
relation of dependency; many philosophers saw in
it the promise of a new type of dependency relation
that seemed just right, neither too strong nor too
weak, allowing us to navigate between reduction­
ism and outright dualism. And it is the dependency
aspect of supervenience, not the covariation com­
ponent, that can sanction many of the usual philo­
sophical implications drawn from, or associated
with, supervenience these concerning various sub­
ject matters. Often it is thought, and claimed, that a
thing has a supervenient property because, or in
virtue of the fact that, it has the corresponding
base property, or that its having the relevant base
property explains why it has the supervenient prop­
erty. All these relations are essentially asymmetric,
and are in the same generic family of relations that
includes dependence and determination. Clearly,
property covariation by itself does not warrant the
use of "because, " "in virtue of, " etc. , in describing
the relationship any more than it warrants the
attribution of dependence. Thus, if we want to
promote the doctrine of psychophysical superven­
ience, intending it to include a claim of psycho­
physical dependence, we had better be prepared to
produce an independent justification of the depend­
ency claim which goes beyond the mere fact of
covariance between mental and physical properties.
Property covariation per se is metaphysically
neutral; dependence, and other such relations, sug­
gest ontological and explanatory directionality -
that upon which something depends is ontolo­
gically and explanatorily prior to, and more basic
than, that which depends on it. In fact, we can
think of the dependency relation as explaining or
grounding property covariations: e. g. , one might
say that mental properties covary with physical
properties because the former are dependent on
the latter. Direct dependence, however, is not the
only possible explanation; as we saw, two sets of
properties may covary because each is dependent
on a common third set.
The upshot, therefore, is this: it is best to separ­
ate the covariation element from the dependency
element in the relation of supervenience. Our dis­
cussion shows that property covariation alone, even
in the form of "strong asymmetric covariance, "
does not by itself give us dependency; in that
sense, dependency is an additional component of
supervenience. But the two components are not
entirely independent; for it seems that the follow­
ing is true: for there to be property dependence,
there must be property covariation. We can, there­
fore, distinguish between two forms of depend­
ence, each based on one of the two covariation
relations. Thus, "strong dependence" requires
strong covariation, while "weak dependence" can
do with weak covariation. What must be added to
covariation to yield dependence is an interesting,
and metaphysically deep, question. It's analogous,
in certain ways, to J. L. Mackie's question as to
what must be added to mere causal connectedness
to generate "causal priority, " or "causal direction­
ality. " Mackie and others have sought a single,
uniform account of that in which causal priority
consists; however, it isn't at all obvious that our
question concerning dependence admits of a single
answer. Evidently, dependency requires different
explanations in different cases, and for any given
case there can be competing accounts of why the
dependency holds. Among the most important
cases of supervenient dependence are instances of
part-whole dependence ("mereological superven­
ience"), and these may constitue a special basic
category of dependence. Concerning the superven­
ience of the moral on the naturalistic, the classic
ethical naturalist will formulate an explanation in
terms of meaning dependence or priority; the non-\ncognitivist's account may involve considerations of
the function of moral language and why its proper
fulfillment requires consistency, in an appropriate
sense, of moral avowals in relation to descriptive
judgments. These cases seem fundamentally dif­
ferent from one another metaphysically, and any
"analysis" of dependence that applies to all vari­
eties of dependence, I think, is unlikely to throw
much light on the nature of dependence. We will
briefly return to these issues in a later section.
5 Covariance and Reducibility
As previously noted, Davidson has been chiefly
responsible for the close association of superven­
ience with both the idea of dependency and that of
nonreducibility. Nonreducibility, however, has
been less firmly associated with supervenience
than dependency has been; and there has been
some controversy as to whether supervenience is
in fact a nonreductive relation. Also, it seems that
the association of nonreducibility with superven­
ience has come about from the historical happen­
stance that Moore and Hare, who are well known
for their supervenience thesis concerning the moral
relative to the naturalistic, also formulated classic
and influential arguments against ethical natural­
ism, the doctrine that the moral is definitionally
reducible to the naturalistic. 33 So why not model a
nonreductive psychophysical relation on superven­
ience? If the moral could be supervenient on the
naturalistic without being reducible to it, couldn't
the mental be supervenient on the physical without
being reducible to it? 34 But, it is possible that the
sense of reduction Moore had in mind when he
argued against the reducibility of the moral is very
different from the concept of reducibility that is
now current in philosophy of mind; and it is also
possible that Moore was just mistaken in thinking
that he could have supervenience without redu­
cibility.
Moore's so-called "open question" argument
suggests that the sort of naturalistic reduction he
was trying to undermine is a definitional reduction­
ism - the claim that ethical terms are analytically
definable in naturalistic terms. Moreover, the argu­
ment is effective only against the claim that there is
an overt synonymy relation between an ethical term
and its purported naturalistic definition. For con­
sider what the open question is intended to test: for
any pair of expressions X and Y, we are supposed
to determine whether "Is everything that is X also
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
Y? " can be used to ask an intelligible and signific­
ant question. The idea is that if X is definable as Y
(that is, if X and Yare synonymous), the question
would not be an intelligible one (consider: "Is
everyone who is a bachelor also a male? " and
"Does everything that is a cube also have twelve
edges? "). It is clear that the logical equivalence of X
and Y, or the fact that in some philosophical sense
X can be "analyzed" as Y, etc. , would not make the
question necessarily unintelligible or lack signific­
ance. The nomological equivalence between X and
Y probably was the furthest thing from Moore's
mind; he pointedly says that even if we found a
"physical equivalent" of the color yellow, certain
"light-vibrations" as Moore puts it, 35 these light­
vibrations are not what the term "yellow" means.
So Moore's anti-naturalism was the denial of the
definitional reducibility of ethical terms to nat­
uralistic terms, where the notion of definition itself
is extremely narrowly construed.
The kind of reduction Davidson had in mind in
"Mental events" is considerably wider than defini­
tional reduction of the Moorean sort: the main
focus of his anti-reductionist arguments is nomolo­
gical reduction, reduction underwritten by contin­
gent empirical laws correlating, and perhaps
identifying, properties being reduced with those
in the reduction base. Davidson's argument is
two-pronged: the demise of logical behaviorism
shows the unavailability of a definitional reduction
of the mental, and his own psychophysical anom­
alism, the doctrine that there are no laws correlat­
ing mental with physical properties, shows that a
nomological reduction isn't in the cards either. 36
Moore would have been unconcerned about nomo­
logical reducibility; his anti-naturalism apparently
permitted strong, necessary synthetic, a priori rela­
tionships between the moral and the nonmoral.
I earlier noted that the issue of reducibility
seemed less central to supervenience than that of
dependence. It is somewhat ironic that covariance
seems more intimately connected with reduction
than it is with dependence. But before getting into
the details, we must know what we mean by
reduction. Reduction is standardly understood as a
relation between theories, where a theory is under­
stood to consist of a distinctive theoretical vocabu­
lary and a set oflaws formulated in this vocabulary.
The reduction of one theory to another is thought to
be accomplished when the laws of the reduced the­
ory are shown to be derivable from the laws of the
reducer theory, with the help of "bridge principles"
connecting terms of the reduced theory with those \nJaegwon Kim
of the reducer. 37 Just what bridge laws are required
obviously depends on the strength of the two the­
ories involved, and there seems very little that is
both general and informative to say about this. The
only requirement on the bridge laws that can be
explicitly stated, independently of the particular
theories involved, is the following, which I will call
"the condition of strong connectibility". 38
Each primitive predicate P of the theory being
reduced is connected with a coextensive pre­
dicate Qofthe reducer in a biconditional law of
the form: "for all x, Px iff~"; and similarly for
all relational predicates.
If this condition is met, then no matter what the
content of the two theories may be, derivational
reduction is guaranteed; for these biconditional
laws would allow the rewriting of the laws of the
theory being reduced as laws of the reducer, and if
any of these rewrites is not derivable from the
preexisting laws of the reducer, it can be added as
an additional law (assuming both theories to be
true). In discussing reduction and covariance,
therefore, we will focus on this condition of strong
connectibility. 39
To begin, weak covariance obviously does not
entail strong connectibility. Weak covariance lacks
an appropriate modal force to generate laws, as
noted, the correlations entailed by weak covariance
between supervenient and subvenient properties
have no modal force, being restricted to particular
worlds.
What then of strong covariance? Here the situa­
tion is different; for consider strong covariance II:
it says that whenever a supervening property P is
instantiated by an object, there is a subvenient
property Q such that the instantiating object has
it and the following conditional holds: necessarily if
anything has Q, then it has P. So the picture we
have is that for supervenient property P, there is a
set of properties, QI, Qz. .. in the subvenient set
such that each QI is necessarily sufficient for P.
Assume that this list contains all the subvenient
properties each of which is sufficient for P. Con­
sider then their disjunction: QI or Qz or. .. (or
UQi for short). This disjunction may be infinite;
however, it is a well-defined disjunction, as well
defined as the union of infinitely many sets. It is
easy to see that this disjunction is necessarily co­
extensive with P.
First, it is clear enough that UQi entails P, since
each disjunct does. Second, does P entail UQ/
Suppose not: something then, say b, has P but
not UQi. According to strong covariance, b has
some property in the subvenient set, say S, such
that necessarily whatever has S also has P. But then
S must be one of the Oi and since b has S, b must
have UQi. So P entails UQi. So P and UQi are
necessarily coextensive, and whether the modality
here is metaphysical, logical, or nomological, it
should be strong enough to give us a serviceable
"bridge law" for reduction.
So does this show that the strong connectability
is entailed by strong covariance, and hence that the
supervenience relation incorporating strong covari­
ance entails reducibility? Some philosophers will
resist this inference. 4o Their concern will focus on
the way the nomological coextension for P was
constructed in the subvenient set - in particular,
the fact that the constructional procedure made use
of disjunction. 41 There are two questions, and only
two as far as I can see, that can be raised here: (I) Is
disjunction a proper way of forming properties out
of properties? (2) Given that disjunction is a per­
missible property-forming operation, is it proper to
form infinite disjunctions? I believe it is easy to
answer (2): the answer has to be a yes. I don't see
any special problem with an infinite procedure
here, any more than in the case of forming infinite
unions of sets or the addition of infinite series of
numbers. We are not here talking about predicates,
or linguistic expressions, but properties; I am not
saying that we should accept predicates of infinite
length, although I don't know if anything would go
astray if we accepted infinite disjunctive predicates
that are finitely specified (we could then introduce
a simple predicate to abbreviate it). So the main
question is (I).
Is disjunction a permissible mode of property
composition? One might argue as follows for a
negative answer, at least in the present context:
Bridge laws are laws and must connect nomological
kinds or properties (so their predicates must be
"lawlike, " "projectible, " and so on). However,
from the fact that M and N are each nomic, it
does not follow that their disjunction, M or N, is
also nomic. Consequently, our constructional pro­
cedure fails to guarantee the nomologicality of the
generated coextensions.
One might try to buttress this point by the
following argument: the core concept of a property
is resemblance - that is, the sharing of a property
must ensure resemblance in some respect. We can
now see that the disjunctive operation does not
preserve this crucial feature of propertyhood (nor \ndoes complementation, one might add). Round
objects resemble one another and so do red objects;
but we cannot count on objects with the property of
being round or red to resemble each other. This is
why "conjunctive properties" present no difficult­
ies, but "disjunctive properties, " and also "negat­
ive properties, " are problematic.
I do not find these arguments compelling. It isn't
at all obvious that we must be bound by such a
narrow and restrictive conception of what nomic
properties, or properties in general, must be in the
present context. When reduction is at issue, we are
talking about theories, theories couched in their
distinctive theoretical vocabularies. And it seems
that we allow, and ought to allow, freedom to
combine and recombine the basic theoretical pre­
dicates and functors by the usual logical and math­
ematical operations available in the underlying
language, without checking each step with some­
thing like the resemblance criterion; that would
work havoc with free and creative scientific theor­
izing. What, after all, is the point of having these
logical operations on predicates? When we discuss
the definitional reducibility of, say, ethical terms to
naturalistic terms, it would be absurd to disallow
definitions that make use of disjunctions, nega­
tions, and what have you; why should we deny
ourselves the use of these operations in forming
reductive bridges of other sorts? Moreover, it may
well be that when an artificial-looking predicate
proves useful, or essential, in a fecund and well­
corroborated theory and gets entrenched, we will
come to think of it as expressing a robust property,
an important respect in which objects and events
can resemble each other. In certain situations, that
recognizing something as a genuine property
would make reduction possible may itself be a
compelling reason for doing so! 42
Let me make a final point about this. The fact
that for each supervenient property, a coextension
- a qualitative coextension if not a certifiably nomic
one - exists in the subvenient base properties
means that there is at least the possibility of our
developing a theory that will give a perspicuous
theoretical description of this coextension, thus
providing us with strong reason for taking the
coextension as a nomic property. At least in this
somewhat attenuated sense, strong covariance can
be said to entail the possibility of reducing the
supervenient to the subvenient. And we should
note this: if we knew strong covariance to fail,
that would scotch the idea of reduction once and
for all.
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
We should briefly look at "global superven­
ience, " or "global covariance, " as a nonreductive
supervenience relation. For this idea has been tou­
ted by many philosophers as an appropriate depend­
ence relation between the mental and the physical
which is free of reductive implications. 43 The basic
idea of global supervenience is to apply the indis­
cernibility considerations globally to "worlds"
taken as units of comparison. Standardly the idea
is expressed as follows:
Worlds that are indiscernible in respect of sub­
venient properties are indiscernible in respect
of supervenient properties.
Worlds that coincide in respect of truths invol­
ving subvenient properties coincide in respect
of truths involving supervenient properties.
For our present purposes we may think of indis­
cernibility of worlds in respect of a given set of
properties (say, physical properties) as consisting
in the fact that these properties are distributed over
their individuals in the same way (for simplicity we
may assume that the worlds have the same indi­
viduals).
It is known that this covariance relation does not
imply property-to-property correlations between
supervenient and subvenient properties; thus, it
does not imply what I have called strong connect­
ibility. 44 So global supervenience, along with weak
supervenience, can qualify as a nonreductive rela­
tion. But this is a signal that global covariance may
be quite weak, perhaps too weak to sustain a
dependency relation of significance. 45
As I have argued elsewhere, 46 this can be seen in
at least two ways. First, this form of covariance
permits worlds that differ minutely in subvenient
properties to differ drastically in respect of super­
venient properties. Thus, global covariance of the
mental with respect to the physical is consistent
with there being a world that differs from this
world in some insignificant physical detail (say, it
contains one more hydrogen atom) but which dif­
fers radically in psychological respects (say, it is
wholly void of mentality). Second, global covar­
iance as explained fails to imply weak covariance;
that is, it can hold where weak covariance fails.
This means that psychophysical global covariance
can be true in a world that contains exact physical
duplicates with divergent psychological character­
istics; it permits the existence in the actual world of
an exact physical replica of you who, however, has \nJaegwon Kim
the mentality of a fruit fly. There certainly is reason
to wonder whether a supervenience relation whose
property covariance requirement is this weak can
qualify as a dependency relation. As I argued earl­
ier, property covariance alone, even "strong covari­
ance, " does not yield dependence, and in that sense
dependence must be considered an independent
component of supervenience in any case. However,
again as I argued, dependence does require an
appropriate relation of property covariance. This
raises the following question: Is global covariance
strong enough to ground a respectable superven­
ience relation? We may well wonder whether a
supervenience relation based on global covariance
might not turn out to be incongruous in that, given
this is what it requires of property covariance, the
dependency component makes little sense.
I suggest, however, that we keep an open mind
about this, and adopt an attitude of "Let one hun­
dred supervenience concepts bloom! " Each may
have its own sphere of application, serving as a
useful tool for formulating and evaluating philo­
sophical doctrines of interest. And this does not
mean that we must discard the core idea of super­
venience captured by the maxim "No difference of
one kind without a difference of another kind. " It's
just that we now recognize that this core idea can be
explained in distinct but interestingly related ways,
and that what we want to say about a supervenience
claim about a specific subject matter may depend
on the interpretation of supervenience appropriate
to the context. I think this is philosophical pro­
gress.
6 Grounds of Supervenience
It has been argued that supervenience is a mysteri­
ous and unexplained relation, and hence that any
philosophical argument couched in the vocabulary
of supervenience is a retrogressive and obfuscating
maneuver incapable of yielding any illumination
for the issue on hand. For example, Stephen Schif­
fer takes a dim view of those who appeal to super­
vemence:
How could being told that non-natural moral
properties stood in the supervenience relation
to physical properties make them any more
palatable? On the contrary, invoking a special
primitive metaphysical relation of superven­
ience to explain how non-natural moral proper­
ties were related to physical properties was just
to add mystery to mystery, to cover one obscur­
antist move with another. I therefore find it
more than a little ironic, and puzzling, that
supervenience is nowadays being heralded as a
way of making nonpleonastic, irreducibly non­
natural properties cohere with an acceptably
naturalistic solution to the mind - body prob­
lem. .. the appeal to a special primitive relation
of "supervenience, " as defined above, is
obscurantist in the extreme. 47
The supervenience relation Schiffer refers to "as
defined above" is in effect our strong covariance II,
with the further proviso that the relationship
"necessarily everything with G has F" is an unex­
plainable "brute metaphysical fact. "
There perhaps have been philosophers who
deserve Schiffer's excoriations; however, we need
to separate Schiffer's editorial comment that
supervenience is a "brute metaphysical" fact from
a mere claim of supervenience concerning a given
topic. Schiffer's addition is a nontrivial further
claim, which someone advocating a supervenience
thesis might or might not wish to make, that goes
beyond the claim of supervenient covariance or
dependence. For there is nothing in the concept
of covariance or dependence that forces us to view
supervenience as invariably involving unexplain­
able relationships. In fact, when a supervenience
claim is made, it makes perfectly good sense to ask
for an explanation of why the supervenience rela­
tion holds. Why does the moral supervene on the
nonmoral? Why do facts about wholes supervene, if
they do, on facts about their parts? Why does the
mental supervene on the physical?
It may well be that the only answer we can
muster for some of these questions is that, as far
as we can tell, it is a brute fact. But that need not be
the only kind of answer; we should, and can, hope
to do better. This is evident from the following fact
alone: supervenience, whether in the sense of co­
variation or in the sense that includes dependence,
is transitive. This means that it is possible, at least
in certain situations, to answer the question "Why
does X supervene on Y? " by saying that, as it
turns out, X supervenes on Z, and Z in turn super­
venes on Y. The interpolation of another super­
venient tier may well explain why X-to-Y
supervenience holds. (Compare: Why does X
cause Y? Answer: X causes Z, and Z causes Y. )
As Schiffer says, Moore gave a sort of "brute fact"
account of moral supervenience, and given his
metaethical theory he probably had no other \nchoice: we "intuit" necessary synthetic a priori
connections between nonnatural moral properties
and certain natural properties. But it isn't just
ethical intuitionists like Moore who accept moral
supervenience; Hare, whose metaethics radically
diverges from Moore's, too has championed
moral supervenience. And we also have Blackburn,
a "projectivist" moral anti realist, who professes
belief in moral supervenience, not to mention
John Post, 48 who is an objectivist about ethical
judgments. As I take it, these philosophers would
give different accounts of why moral supervenience
obtains; as we noted in our earlier discussion of
dependence as a component of supervenience,
Hare would presumably give an account in terms
of some consistency requirement on the use of
language of prescription. And Blackburn has
argued against "moral realism" on the ground
that it, unlike his own projectivist "quasi-realism, "
is unable to give a satisfactory explanation of moral. 49 supervellience.
We may distinguish between two kinds of
request for a "ground" of a supervenience relation.
One concerns general claims of supervenience: why
a given family of properties, say mental properties,
supervene on another family, say neurobiological
properties. Why does the mental supervene on the
physical, and why does the normative supervene on
the nonnormative? These are perfectly good, intel­
ligible questions, which may or may not have
informative answers. The second type of request
concerns the relationship between specific super­
venient properties and their base properties: Why
is it that pain supervenes on the activation of A­
delta and C-fibers? Why doesn't, say, itch or tickle
supervene on it? Why doesn't pain supervene on,
say, the excitation of A-and B-fibers?
The potential for supplying explanations for
specific supervenience relationships varies for dif­
ferent mind-body theories. Both the behaviorist
and the functionalist could formulate a plausible
meaning-based explanation (I mean, plausible given
their basic doctrines): pain, not itch, supervenes on
physicalistic condition P because of an analytic,
semantic connection between "pain" and the
standard expression for P. For the behaviorist,
the connection is a direct one of definability. The
functionalist will appeal to an additional empirical
fact, saying something like this: "pain, " as a matter
of meaning, designates a certain causal-functional
role, and it turns out, as a contingent empirical fact,
that condition P occupies this causal role (in organ­
isms or structures of a given kind). The function-
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
alist can push ahead with his search for
explanations and ask: why does condition P occupy
this causal role in these organisms? This question is
an empirical scientific question, and may be given
an evolution-based answer, or one based in engin­
eering considerations (in the case of artifacts); and
there may be answers of other types.
There are philosophers who have a fundament­
ally physicalist outlook on the mind-body prob­
lem and yet would reject any analytic, definitional
relationships between mental and nonmental
expressions. Many of them would accept a thor­
oughgoing dependence of the mental on the phys­
ical grounded in lawlike type-type correlations
between the two domains. Epiphenomenalism is
such a position; so is the classic nonfunctionalist
type-identity theory based on the supposed exist­
ence of pervasive psychophysical correlations. It
seems that someone holding a physicalist position
like these has no choice but to view the relationship
between say, pain and C-fiber activation as a brute
fact that is not further explainable, something like
the way G. E. Moore viewed the relationship
between the nonnatural property of goodness and
the natural property on which it supervenes. In this
respect, the position of a physicalist who accepts
psychophysical supervenience, especially of the
"strong covariance" sort, but rejects a physicalist
rendering of mental expressions, is much like that
of those emergentists who regarded the phenomena
of emergence as not susceptible of further explana­
tion; that is, it is not further explainable why men­
tality emerges just when these physicochemical
conditions are present, but not otherwise. Samuel
Alexander, a leading emergentist, recommended
that we accept these emergence relationships
"with natural piety"; Lloyd Morgan, referring to
Alexander, announced, "I accept this phrase. "so
Is this a serious blemish on non functionalist
physicalism? This is an interesting, and difficult,
question. Its proponents might insist that all of us
must accept certain brute facts about this world,
and that it is necessary to count fundamental psy­
chophysical correlations among them in order to
develop a plausible theory of mind, all things con­
sidered. This is only an opening move in what is
likely to be a protracted dialectic between them and
the functionalists, something we must set aside. sl I
will conclude with some brief remarks concerning
explanations of general supervenience claims.
I think that the only direct way of explaining
why a general supervenience relation holds, e. g. ,
why the mental supervenes on the physical, is to \nJaegwon Kim
appeal to the presence of specific supervenience
relations - that is, appropriate correlations between
specific supervenient properties and their subven­
ient bases. If these specific correlations are them­
selves explainable, so much the better; but whether
or not they are, invoking them would constitute the
first necessary step. Moreover, such correlations
seem to be the best, and the most natural, evidential
ground for supervenience claims - often the only
kind of solid evidence we could have for empirical
supervenience claims. Even the nonfunctionalist
physicalist has an explanation of sorts for psycho­
physical supervenience: it holds because a pervas­
ive system of lawlike psychophysical correlations
holds. These correlations are logically contingent
and empirically discovered; though they are not
further explainable, they constitute our ground,
both evidential and explanatory, of the superven­
ience of the mental on the physical.
This shows why a global supervenience claim
unaccompanied by the corresponding strong superven­
ience (or covariance) claim can be so unsatisfying:
Notes
However, see below on emergence and n. 5.
2 R. M. Hare, The Language of Morals (London: Oxford
University Press, 1952).
3 R. M. Hare, "Supervenience, " Proceedings of the Aris­
totelian Society, sup pI. vol. 58 (1984), pp. 1-16.
4 In Moral Notions (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1967), pp. 158-9, Julius Kovesi points to the
same characteristic of "good" that Hare called super­
venience, but without using the supervenience term­
inology. Kovesi mentions that this characteristic is
had by many nonethical expressions as well, e. g. ,
"tulip"; however, he does not develop this point in
any detail.
See especially Morgan's Emergent Evolution (London:
Williams and Norgate, 1923). Others who used
"supervenience" in connection with the doctrine of
emergence include Stephen C. Pepper, "Emer­
gence, " Journal of Philosophy 23 (1926), pp. 241-5;
and Paul Meehl and Wilfrid Sellars, "The concept of
emergence, " in Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven
(eds), Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science,
vol. 1 (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
1956).
6 See, e. g. , Ernest Nagel, The Structure of Science (New
York: Harcourt Brace & World, 1961); F. ]. Ayala and
T. Dobzhansky (eds), Studies in the Philosophy of
Biology: Reduction and Related Problems (Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1974).
we are being asked, it seems to me, to accept a
sweeping claim about all possible worlds, say, that
no two worlds could differ mentally without differ­
ing physically, on faith as a brute fact. In the
absence of specific psychophysical correlations,
and some knowledge of them, such a supervenience
claim should strike us as a mere article of faith
seriously lacking in motivation both evidentially
and explanatorily; it would assert as a fact some­
thing that is apparently unexplainable and whose
evidential status, moreover, IS unclear and
problematic. The attitude of the friends of global
psychophysical supervenience is not unlike that of
Samuel Alexander and Lloyd Morgan toward
emergence: we must accept it "with natural
piety"! But there is this difference: the emergen­
tists could at least point to the observed lawful
correlations between specific mental and biological
processes as evidence for the presence of a general
system of such correlations encompassing all men­
tal processes, and point to the latter as the ground
of the general thesis of mental emergence.
7 I discuss the doctrine of emergence in relation to the
currently popular doctrine of nonreductive physical­
ism in "'Downward causation' in emergentism and
nonreductive physicalism, " in A. Beckermann, H.
Flohr, and]. Kim (eds), Emergence or Reduction?
(Berlin: De Gruyter, 1992).
8 Donald Davidson, "Mental events, " repro in Essays on
Actions and Events (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1980); originally published in 1970.
9 David Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Basil
Blackwell, 1986), p. 14.
10 Die Leibniz-Handschrijien der koenighlichen oeffentli­
chen Bibliothek zu Hannover, ed. E. Bodemann (Han­
over, 1895), VII, c, p. 74. Q1. Ioted by Hide Ishiguro in
her Leibniz 's Philosophy of Logic and Language (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1972), p. 71, n. 3. The
Latin text reads: "Relatio est accidents quod est in
pluribus subjects estque resuItans tantum seu nulla
mutatione facta ab iis super venit, si plura simul cogi­
tantur, est concogitabilitas. "
11 Henry Sidgwick, The Method of Ethics (Lon­
don: Macmillan, 1874), pp. 208-9; quoted by
Michael DePaul in his "Supervenience and moral
dependence, " Philosophical Studies 51 (1987), pp.
425-39.
12 G. E. Moore, Philosophical Studies (London: Rout­
ledge and Kegan Paul, 1922), p. 261.
13 Hare, Language of Morals, p. 145.
14 Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds, p. 14. \nIS See James Klagge, "Supervenience: ontological and
ascriptive, " Australasian Journal ~r Philosophy 66
(1988), pp. 461-70.
16 Morgan, Emergent Evolution, p. 9.
17 Ibid. , p. 30. I should add that Morgan was here
expounding Samuel Alexander's doctrine of emer­
gence, and that he is skeptical about these two super­
venience theses.
18 See Arthur O. Lovejoy's distinction between "inde­
terminist" and "determinist" theories of emergent
evolution in his "The meaning of 'emergence' and
its modes, " in Proceedings of the Sixth International
Congress of Philosophy (New York, 1927), pp. 20-33.
19 Davidson, "Mental events, " p. 214.
20 Note that "nonreductive" is also consistent with
reducibility. Thus, "nonreductive" is to be under­
stood as indicting a neutral, noncommittal position
with regard to reducibility, not as an affirmation of
irreducibility.
21 See my "Concepts of supervenience" and" 'Strong'
and 'global' supervenience revisited, " in Jaegwon
Kim, Supervenience and Mind (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1993), chs 4, 5 respectively.
22 Hare, "Supervenience, " p. 4. Hare's actual definition
of supervenience, ibid. , pp. 4--5, is a little difficult to
interpret in terms of our present scheme, in part
because he still does not explicitly relativize super­
venience, treating "supervenient" as a one-place pre­
dicate of properties. But there is little question that his
definition of "F is a supervenient property" comes to
"F is weakly covariant with respect to (G, not-G)" (it
isn't wholly clear to me whether G is to be thought of
as existentially quantified, or contextually indicated).
23 Davidson, in his "Replies to essays X-XII, " in Bruce
Vermazen and Merrill B. Hintikka (eds) Essays on
Davidson: Actions and Events (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1985), p. 242.
24 See Simon Blackburn, "Supervenience revisited, " in
Ian Hacking (ed. ) Exercises in Analysis (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1985). His (S), on p. 49,
corresponds to weak covariance II; his (? ), on p. 50, to
strong covariance II. His argument against moral
realism depends on accepting (S), not (? ), as the
appropriate form of moral supervenience. In "The
supervenience argument against moral realism, "
Southern Journal of Philosophy 30 (1992), pp. 13-38,
James Dreier urges a reading of Blackburn's argument
on which it is committed to strong covariance.
25 Blackburn's (S), which he takes to characterize his
notion of supervenience, is a little more complicated;
it contains the relational predicate "x underlies y. "
However, I believe what he has in mind with (S) is
best read, and restated, as a definition of "underlie, "
that is, the converse of '''supervene. ''
26 E. g. , in "Concepts of supervenience. "
27 For some interesting considerations in defense of
weak covariance in connection with materialism, see
William Seager, "Weak supervenience and material-
Supervenience as a Philosophical Concept
ism, " Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 48
(1988), pp. 697-709.
28 This example is similar to the one used by Lawrence
Lombard in his interesting and helpful discussion of
covariance and dependence in Events: A Metaphysical
Study (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1986), pp.
225ff. My discussion here is indebted to Lombard,
and also to Michael R. DePaul, "Supervenience and
moral dependence, " and Thomas R. Grimes, "The
myth of supervenience, " Pacific Philosophical Quar­
terly 69 (1988), pp. 152--60.
29 In "The myth of supervenience" Grimes considers a
criterion of this form and rejects it as neither neces­
sary nor sufficient. The possible counterexamples I
consider below are consistent with Grimes's argu­
ment; however, only schematic examples are pre­
sented by Grimes.
30 Grimes makes a similar point, ibid. , p. 157.
31 For further discussion see J. L. Mackie, The Cement of
the Universe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974),
ch. 7; David H. Sanford, "The direction of causation
and the direction of conditionship, " Journal of Philo­
sophy 73 (1976), pp. 193-207, and idem, "The direc­
tion of causation and the direction of time, " in
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 9 (1984): pp. 53-75;
Tom Beauchamp and Alexander Rosenberg, Hume
and the Problem of Causation (New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1981), ch. 6.
32 Could counterfactuals help? Perhaps; see, e. g. , David
Lewis, "Causation, " this volume, ch. 34; but also
Grimes, "Myth of supervenience. "
33 There may also have been the influence of the emer­
gentist doctrine that emergent properties are irredu­
cible to their "basal" conditions.
34 For further discussion of supervenience in relation to
nonreductive physicalism see my "The myth of non­
reductive materialism, " in Kim, Supervenience and
Mind, ch. 14.
35 Moore, Principia Ethica, p. 10.
36 For details see Davidson's "Mental events. "
37 This is the model of derivational reduction developed
by Ernest Nagel in The Structure of Science. Whether
this is the most appropriate model to be used in the
present context could be debated; on this issue see
William C. Wimsatt, "Reductive explanation: a func­
tional account, " in R. S. Cohen et ai. , (eds), PSA 1974
(East Lansing, Mich. : Philosophy of Science Associa­
tion, 1974), pp. 671-710.
38 Restricting ourselves to theories formulated in first­
order languages.
39 There are various plausible considerations for think­
ing that derivational reduction as characterized isn't
enough (and that it may not even be necessary). One
line of consideration seems to show that we need
identities of entities and properties rather than correla­
tions; another line of consideration argues that the
reduction must exhibit some underlying "mechan­
ism, " preferably at a micro-level, that explains how \nJaegwon Kim
the higher processes work. We must bypass these
issues here.
40 See Paul Teller, "Comments on Kim's paper, " and
John Post, "Comment on Teller, " both in Southern
Journal of Philosophy 22 (1983), The Spindel Conference
Supplement ("Supervenience"), pp. 57-62, 163-7.
41 This in part meets an objection that John Post has
raised (in his "Comment on Teller") against my earl­
ier construction of these coextensions (in "Concepts
of supervenience") which made use of other property­
forming operations. Post's specific objection was
aimed at property complementation (or negation).
On this issue see also William Seager, "Weak super­
venience and materialism, " and James Van Cleve,
"Supervenience and closure, " Philosophical Studies
58 (1990), pp. 225-38. Some remarks to follow in
the main text are relevant to Post's point.
42 I wonder how "natural" the quantity 112 (mv 2)
looked before it was identified as kinetic energy.
43 See, e. g. , Terence Horgan, "Supervenience and
microphysics, " Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 63
(1982), pp. 29-43; David Lewis, "New work for a
theory of universals, " this volume, ch. 17. Also Geof­
frey Hellman and Frank Thompson, "Physicalism:
ontology, determination, and reduction, " this volume,
ch. 41.
44 See, e. g. , Bradford Petrie, "Global supervenience and
reduction, " Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
48 (1987), pp. 119-30. (Added 1993: for further dis­
cussion of this issue, see "Postcripts on superven­
ience, " sect. 3, in this volume. )
45 I believe this indeed is the case with psychophysical
global supervenience; filr details see my" 'Strong' and
'global' supervenience revisited" and "Myth of non­
reductive materialism. "
46 Kim, " 'Strong' and 'global' supervenience revisited. "
47 Stephen Schiffer, Remnants «{'Meaning (Cambridge,
Mass. : MIT Press, 1987), pp. 153-4.
48 See John Post, "On the determinacy of valuation, "
Philosophical Studies 45 (1984), pp. 315-33.
49 See Simon Blackburn, "Supervenience revisited. "
For discussion of Blackburn's argument see James
Klagge, "An alleged difficulty concerning moral
properties, " Mind 93 (1984), pp. 370-80; Dreier,
"Supervenience argument against moral realism. "
50 Morgan, Emergent Evolution, p. 36.
51 See for further discussion Terence Horgan and Mark
Timmons, "Troubles on moral Twin Earth: moral
queerness revisited, " Synthese 92 (1992), pp. 221-
60. Ernest Sosa has pointed out to me that appeals
to meaning and analyticity, too, might involve appeals
to brute facts in the end. \n\n\nIntroduction
Contemporary debates on realism/antirealism
have arisen largely from considerations of the
semantics oflanguages. One central use oflanguage
is to make statements, e. g. , that snow is white, that
the average high temperature in New York during
July is 85
0
F, that necessarily 7 + 5 = 12, that it is
wrong to cause gratutious pain, and so on. Some
statements we make are true; the rest are false - or,
at any rate, not true. But what makes a statement
true or false? Is it some mind-and knowledge-inde­
pendent reality, or is it something other than that?
Is truth dependent, in some ways, on evidence that
we have, or can have, or is it evidence-transcend­
ent?
In "Realism" (chapter 43), Michael Dummett,
who is one of the philosophers who have played a
major role in reintroducing the problem of realism
into contemporary philosophy, gives a wide-ran­
ging discussion of the variegated issues involved.
As Dummett conceives it, realism with respect to a
class of statements is a semantic thesis to the effect
that what renders a statement of that class true is
some reality existing independently of our know­
ledge, or belief. He argues that realism about a class
of statements has two important consequences:
first, the principle of bivalence for these statements
(i. e. , they must each be either true or false), and,
second, a truth-conditional meaning theory (i. e. ,
the meaning of a statement is its "truth-condition, "
a condition that obtains if and only if the statement
is true). Dummett then surveys in detail possible
antirealist options, discussing what each involves.
In "Pragmatic Realism" (chapter 44), Hilary
Putnam defends a combination of realism and con­
ceptual relativism. For him, realism is the thesis
that ordinary objects such as tables and chairs exist;
conceptual relativism is the thesis that questions
about what objects exist and what genuine proper­
ties there are have meaning only relative to a
scheme of concepts. Such a scheme generates con­
ditions for being an object and for being a genuine
property. Putnam also calls his position "internal
realism, " which he contrasts with "metaphysical
realism, " a position he rejects.
Sosa's "Putnam's Pragmatic Realism" (chapter
45) examines three arguments Putnam has offered
Introduction
for his pragmatic realism. The first is based on the
supposed perspectival character of causation; the
second begins with the premise that it is unlikely
that science will converge on a finished theory
that will provide an objective and absolute concept­
ion of reality; the third argument is from the non­
absoluteness of objecthood and existence. Sosa
feels that there is a case to be made for a view
suggested by Putnam's third argument, although
that argument is wrapped in a problematic linguis­
tic garb.
William Alston's "Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real
World" (chapter 46) is a defense of realism. He
takes realism to be the position that what there is is
independent of whether or how cognizers know or
think of it. Alston argues that the available anti­
realist arguments are unconvincing, and that the
antirealist is unable to produce a coherent concep­
tion of truth for propositions or sentences.
In "Morals and Modals" (chapter 47), Simon
Blackburn outlines a general antirealist approach
("quasi-realism") to discourses that apparently
commit us to a range of problematic facts. Unlike
standard varieties of antirealism, quasi-realism
does not advocate rejection or reconstruction of
the target discourse; rather, sentences of the target
discourse are treated as tools for "projection":
moral sentences, for example, are used to project
our conative attitudes, and the attribution of
"necessity" to a sentence projects our sense of
inability to "do anything" with the truth of that
sentence. Blackburn examines the latter case,
modal quasi-realism, in some detail, discussing
how it differs from moral quasi-realism.
In "Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-Rea­
lism" (chapter 48), Crispin Wright surveys and
discusses an array of possible antirealist alternat­
ives - Dummettian antirealism, irrealism, quasi­
realism, and a new version of antirealism that
Wright outlines. Both Dummettian antirealism
and Blackburn's quasi-realism come in for close
scrutiny, and are found wanting. Wright suggests
a new way of conducting debates over realism/
antirealism: Investigate the notion of truth appro­
priate to the discourse in question. Grant that the
notion of truth is applicable, but look into how
substantial a concept it is. Wright discusses some
specific questions to be asked in this context. \nPart IX
Further reading
Blackburn, Simon, Spreading the Word (Oxford: Claren­
don Press, 1984).
Devitt, Michael, "The metaphysics of nonfactualism, "
Philosophical Perspectives 10 (1996), pp. 159-76.
--, Realism and Truth, 2nd edn (Oxford: Blackwell,
1991).
Dummett, Michael, The Seas of Language (Oxford: Clar­
endon Press, 1993).
--, Truth and Other Enigmas (Cambridge, Mass: Har­
vard University Press, 1978).
Haldane, John, and Wright, Crispin (eds), Reality,
Representation, and Projection (New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1993).
Horwich, Paul, "Realism and truth, " Philosophical
Perspectives 10 (1996), pp. 187-99.
McCormick, Peter (ed. ), Starmaking: Realism, Anti-Real­
ism, and Irrealism (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press,
1996).
Putnam, Hilary, Realism and Reason: Philosophical Papers,
vol. 3 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1983).
--, Reason, Truth, and Histo~y (Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press, 1981).
Tennant, Neil, Anti-realism and Logic (Oxford: Claren­
don Press 1987).
Van Cleve, James, "Semantic supervenience and referen­
tial indeterminacy, " Journal of Philosophy 89 (1992),
pp. 344-61.
Wright, Crispin, Truth and Objectivity (Cambridge,
Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1992). \n43
Michael Dummett
The term 'realism' is constantly used by philo­
sophers, in various connections, to characterize
certain philosophical views; but it is rare for them
to attempt to explain what they mean by calling a
view realistic or non-realistic. I here attempt to
analyse the concept of realism.
It is clear that one can be a realist about one
subject-matter, and not about another: though
someone may have a general inclination towards
realistic views, it is plain that there is no coherent
philosophical position which consists in being a
realist tout court. This may be expressed by saying
that one may be a realist about certain entities ~
mental states, possible worlds, mathematical
objects ~ and not about others. But it seems pre­
ferable to say that realism is a view about a certain
class of statements ~ for instance, statements in the
future tense, or ethical statements ~ since certain
kinds of realism, for instance realism about the
future or about ethics, do not seem readily classifi­
able as doctrines about a realm of entities. So, in
every case, we may regard a realistic view as con­
sisting in a certain interpretation of statements in
some class, which I shall call 'the given class'.
So construed, realism is a semantic thesis, a thesis
about what, in general, renders a statement in the
given class true when it is true. The very minimum
that realism can be held to involve is that state­
ments in the given class relate to some reality that
Originally published in Synthese 52 (1982), pp. 55-
112. Reprinted with permission of Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
exists independently of our knowledge of it, in such
a way that that reality renders each statement in the
class determinately true or false, again independ­
ently of whether we know, or are even able to
discover, its truth-value. Thus realism involves
acceptance, for statements of the given class, of
the principle of bivalence, the principle that every
statement is determinately either true or false.
Acceptance of bivalence is not, as we shall see,
sufficient for realism, but it is necessary to it. It
follows that, on a realistic interpretation of some
class of statements, the classical logical constants
can always be intelligibly applied to those state­
ments; for instance, classical negation or existential
quantification, classically construed. Realism does
not, of itself, exclude the possibility of intelligibly
applying to statements of the given class some non­
classical logical operators. For instance, realism
concerning mathematical statements is usually
called Platonism: and a Platonist, although he
admits non-constructive mathematical reasoning
as valid, may quite legitimately take an interest in
whether or not a proof is constructive - legitim­
ately so, because a constructive proof gives
more information than a non-constructive one.
Having this interest, he could, ifhe liked, introduce
symbols for constructive disjunction and construc­
tive existential quantification into his mathematical
language. Where '0 R ' is constructive, and 'or' class­
ical, a proof of 'A 0 R B' must not merely prove 'A
or B', but must also provide an effective method of
finding a proof either of 'A' or of 'B', a proof of
'For each natural number n, A(n} OR B(n}' must \nMichael Dummett
supply an effective method for finding, for each
value k of'n', a proof of'A(k)' or a proof of'B(k}';
where 'SOME' is constructive and 'some' classical, a
proof of 'For SOME natural number n, A(n}' must
supply an effective method for finding a number k
and a proof of 'A(k)'. These constructive logical
constants plainly do not obey the classical laws: for
instance, 'A 0 R not A', the law of excluded middle,
cannot in all cases be asserted. The admission of
these non-classical logical constants does not, in
itself, in the least impair the realistic interpretation
of mathematical statements ~ at least, of those that
do not contain such logical constants. What would
rule out a realistic interpretation would be the view
that the constructive logical constants were the
only ones that could intelligibly be used in a math­
ematical context, that classical disjunction and clas­
sical existential quantification could not intelligibly
be applied to mathematical statements. It is not the
admissibility of non-classical logical operations,
but the inadmissibility of classical ones, that entails
a rejection of realism.
Rejection of the principle of bivalence for state­
ments of some given class always involves a repu­
diation of a realistic interpretation of them; and
adoption of an anti-realistic view often turns critic­
ally upon such a rejection of bivalence. But some­
times it is not the principle of bivalence that is the
crucial question. To have a realistic view, it is not
enough to suppose that statements of the given
class are determined, by the reality to which they
relate, either as true or as false; one has also to have
a certain conception of the manner in which they
are so determined. This conception consists essen­
tially in the classical two-valued semantics: and
this, in turn, embodies an appeal to the notion of
reference as an indispensable notion of the seman­
tic theory. Statements of the given class will ordi­
narily include ones containing expressions of
generality: and, within the two-valued semantics,
there will be associated with such expressions a
definite domain of objects. Reference is a relation
between a singular term, of a kind that can occur
within statements of the given class, and some one
object within the domain. We might, in a particular
case, be concerned with a class of statements that
contained no (closed) singular terms, but only
expressions of generality; but that will not affect
the crucial role within the semantic theory of the
notion of reference. It will not do so because ofthe
characteristic way in which, within the two-valued
semantics, the truth-value of a statement involving
generality ~ universal or existential quantification ~
is conceived of as being determined. The truth­
value of a quantified statement is, on this concep­
tion, determined by the truth-values of its
instances, so that the instances stand to the quanti­
fied statement just as the constituent subsentences
of a complex sentence whose principal operator is a
sentential connective stand to the complex sen­
tence: the truth-value of the quantified statement
is a truth-function of the truth-values of its
instances, albeit an infinitary one if the domain is
infinite. The truth-value of a universally quantified
statement is the logical product of the truth-values
of its instances, that of an existentially quantified
statement the logical sum of the truth-values of its
instances. These operations, these possibly infinit­
ary truth-functions, are conceived of as being
everywhere defined, that is, as having a value in
every case: in other words, the application of the
operation of universal or of existential quantifica­
tion to any predicate that is determinately true or
false of each object in the domain will always yield a
sentence that is itself determinately either true or
false, independently of whether we are able to come
to know its truth-value or not. (Thus, on this
semantic theory, it is correct, on the semantic
level, to say that universal quantification amounts
to infinite conjunction, existential quantification to
infinite disjunction; such a remark ceases to be true
only at the level of meaning (sense), since to know
the meaning of a quantified statement, it is not
necessary to know the meanings of all its instances. )
Here, of course, by an instance of a quantified
statement is simply meant the result of filling the
argument-place of the predicate with a singular
term, that is, of removing the quantifier and repla­
cing each occurrence of the variable that was bound
by that quantifier by that singular term.
Now, in an actual language, there may not be, for
every object in the domain, a singular term refer­
ring to that object. We can handle such a language
in either of two ways. On what is essentially Frege's
approach, instead of constructing a semantic theory
for that language, we construct one for an expan­
sion of it: this expanded language is obtained by
enriching the original language by adding suffi­
ciently many singular terms for there to be, for
each object in the domain, a term referring to it.
A semantic account of how the sentences of this
expanded language are determined as true or as
false will, of course, cover all the sentences of the
original language; and, in this account, the notion
of reference plays a crucial rolc. It does so precisely
because the semantics is such that, once the truth-\nvalues of all the atomic statements are given, the
truth-value of every complex statement, built up
from the atomic ones by means of the sentential
operators and the quantifiers, is thereby also deter­
mined; and the determination of the truth-value of
an atomic statement, formed by inserting singular
terms in the argument-place or argument-places of
a one-place or many-place predicate, goes via the
referents of the singular terms.
The other approach is that of Tarski. On this
approach, we regard complex sentences as, in gen­
eral, built up, not necessarily from atomic sen­
tences properly so called, but from atomic open
sentences, that is, from expressions that resemble
sentences save that free variables may occur where,
in an actual (closed) sentence, a singular term
might stand. Just as the Fregean approach required
consideration of a language expanded from the
original one, so the Tarskian approach may require
modification of the original language. It is being
presupposed that, in that language, generality is
expressed by means of the notation of quantifiers
and variables (or, at any rate, that the language has
first been modified to that extent in order to apply
classical semantics to it). This presupposition
entails that bound variables occur in some sentences
of the language; but there is no necessity that the
original language should admit any such device as
free variables, nor, therefore, even allow the forma­
tion of open sentences. However this may be, the
manner in which a quantified sentence is deter­
mined as true or false is explained, on the Tarskian
approach, not in terms of the truth-values of its
various instances, but in terms of the open sentence
that results from removing the quantifier and
replacing each occurrence of the variable that it
bound by a free variable. In order to do this, we
have to invoke the notion of the truth or falsity of
an open sentence under an assignment of some
object in the domain to the free variable, or of
objects to the various distinct free variables, when
there is more than one; this is often expressed as
the notion of the satisfaction of the open sentence
by an object or sequence of objects from the
domain. Instead of considering the replacement of
the bound variable by different singular terms,
each with a fixed reference to one particular object,
we consider its replacement by a single free vari­
able, regarded as capable of receiving different
assignments to it of an object from the domain. It
is plain, however, that this is a mere variation on
the idea embodied in the Fregean approach. Under
anyone particular assignment, the free variable
Realism
behaves exactly as if it were a singular term having
the assigned object as its referent. Save in a very
special case, we shall still need to introduce the
notion of reference in addition to that of an assign­
ment of values to the free variables. Suppose that
the language contains some individual constants
(proper names) and some function-symbols (like
'+') or functional expressions (like 'the wife of. .. '). The individual constants or proper names
must be taken as having references in the usual
way; to the functional expressions will correspond
functions, of appropriate degree, over the domain.
We shall then have to explain, inductively, the
notion of the reference of a simple or complex
singular term, which may be either open or closed,
that is, mayor may not contain free variables,
under any given assignment to the free variables,
as follows: what a free variable refers to, under the
assignment, is the object assigned to it; what an
individual constant refers to, under the assign­
ment, is simply the object it refers to; what a com­
plex term, say f(tl, t2), formed by means of a
function-symbol, refers to under the assignment
is the value of the corresponding function for
those objects as arguments to which the constituent
terms (here tl and t2) refer under the assignment.
The only case in which we can dispense altogether
with the notion of reference in favour of that of an
assignment is that in which the language contains
neither any individual constants or proper names
nor any function-symbols or other device for form­
ing complex terms; and, even in this case, the
notion of reference is being surreptitiously
appealed to, since the possible assignments to a
free variable are, in effect, different interpretations
of it as an individual constant. Thus, even if our
original language does not actually contain any
(closed) singular terms, and even if we formulate
the semantic theory in Tarski's manner, in terms of
satisfaction, the notion of reference still plays a
crucial role in the theory.
A semantic theory is not itself a theory of mean­
ing, since it does not concern itself with what is
known by a speaker and constitutes his grasp of the
use of an expression: a knowledge of the meaning of
a predicate does not consist in knowing of which
objects it is true and of which it is false, and a
knowledge of the meaning of a sentence does not
consist in knowing its truth-value. But a semantic
theory is plausible only in so far as it provides a
base on which a theory of meaning can be con­
structed. The semantic theory seeks to exhibit the
manner in which a sentence is determined as true, \nMichael Dummett
when it is true, in accordance with its composition,
its internal structure. It does so by specifying, for
each type of expression, what has to be associated
with an expression of that type in order that, for
every true sentence in which the expression occurs,
we can exhibit the manner in which that sentence is
determined as true in accordance with its composi­
tion. Let us say that, for any particular expression
of any given type, that which must, according to
the semantic theory, be so associated with it is its
semantic value.
Now some semantic theories do not admit that
every well-formed sentence with a definite sense is,
independently of our knowledge, determined
either as true or as not true. A characteristic way
in which this comes about is illustrated by the
intuitionistic semantic theory for mathematical
statements sketched by Heyting. In this semantics,
the semantic values of the component expressions
of a sentence jointly determine a decidable relation
between that sentence and an arbitrary mathemat­
ical construction which obtains just in case that
construction constitutes a proof of that sentence.
A sentence may then be said to be true if and only if
there exists a construction that constitutes a proof
of it: but, since the phrase 'there exists', in this
definition, is itself interpreted constructively, we
may not assert, for an arbitrary mathematical state­
ment with a well-defined meaning, that there either
does or does not exist a construction which is a
proof of it, not, therefore, that it either is true or is
not true. Within such a semantic theory, we cannot
say that the semantic values of the components of a
sentence determine that sentence either as true or
as not true, but only that they determine what, if
there be such a thing, will render it true.
A semantic theory of this kind is, evidently, a
highly non-realistic one, since it involves rejecting
the principle of bivalence. A realistic theory, on the
other hand, incorporates the principle of bivalence,
the principle that every meaningful sentence is
determined as true or as false, and so entails the
weaker principle, namely that every meaningful
sentence is determined as true or as not true. With­
out at present enquiring more closely into the
rationale that may be offered for admitting a dis­
tinction between a statement's failing to be true and
its actually being false, let us say that a semantic
theory which involves the weaker principle is an
objectivist semantics: a realistic semantics is neces­
sarily objectivist, but an objectivist semantics need
not be realistic. An objectivist semantics incorpo­
rates a notion of truth which is not closely linked to
the possibility of our recognizing a statement as
true: on such a semantic theory, a statement may
be true even though we have not recognized it as
such, and, possibly, even though we have no means
of doing so. By contrast, in such a semantic theory
as that of Heyting for mathematical statements,
intuitionistically interpreted, the only admissible
notion of truth is one directly connected with our
capacity for recognizing a statement as true: the
supposition that a statement is true is the supposi­
tion that there is a mathematical construction con­
stituting a proof of that statement.
In any objectivist semantic theory, it will be
possible to regard the semantic values of the com­
ponents of any sentence as jointly determining it
either as true or as not true; and so we may describe
such a semantic theory as specifying, for each type
of expression, what has to be associated with an
expression of that type in order that every sentence
in which the expression occurs should be deter­
mined as true or otherwise. Thus, in particular,
according to the classical two-valued semantics,
there must be associated with each proper name
or other singular term an object from the domain,
with each one-place predicate a mapping from the
domain into the set of the two truth-values, true
and false, with a sentential connective a truth-func­
tion, with a sentence, considered as capable of
serving as a constituent in a more complex sen­
tence, a truth-value, and so forth.
An understanding of a sentence must involve a
grasp of how it is determined as true, if it is true, in
accordance with its composition: hence a theory of
meaning must ascribe to a speaker of the language
an implicit grasp of the underlying semantic the­
ory. A grasp of the meaning of a specific expression
will thus involve a knowledge of the kind of seman­
tic value it may have, in virtue of the linguistic type
or category to which it belongs. It will not, in
general, amount, in any straightforward way, to a
knowledge of the semantic value of the expression,
since, on any objectivist semantic theory, once we
know the semantic values of all the component
expressions in some sentence, we are in a position
to say whether that sentence is or is not true,
whereas we can understand the sentence without
being in any such position. It is natural to say that
whether or not a sentence is true depends both on
its meaning and on the way the world is, on the
constitution of external reality; and, since the
semantic values of the component expressions
together determine whether or not the sentence is
true, it is plain that, in associating particular \nsemantic values with these expressions, we have
already taken the contribution of external reality
into account. But, given the way the world is,
whether a sentence is or is not true depends upon
its meaning; so, given the way the world is, the
semantic value of an expression depends only on its
meaning. It follows that a grasp of the meaning of a
specific expression must be something which,
taken together with the way the world is, deter­
mines the particular semantic value that it has.
Thus meaning must be something that determines
semantic value: in Frege's terminology, sense
determines reference. (For Frege, the notion of
reference applies not only to singular terms, as
I am here taking it, but to expressions of all cat­
egories; it thus coincides with what I am here call­
ing semantic value, at least within the two-valued
semantic theory, which Frege of course advocated. )
To say that meaning determines semantic value
does not just mean that, if the meanings of two
expressions coincide, so do their semantic values.
Rather, its having any particular semantic value is
to be explained in terms of its having a certain sort
of meaning. A grasp of its meaning just is the
conception of its having a semantic value that
depends in a certain way on how the world is: on
an objectivist semantic theory, to know the mean­
ing of an expression consists in knowing the con­
dition for it to have any given semantic value. In
Frege's terminology, the sense of the expression is
the mode under which its reference is presented to
us; to keep the metaphor, but employ the termino­
logy being used here, its meaning is the manner in
which its semantic value is given to us. It is in this
way that a semantic theory, while not itself being a
theory of meaning, forms a base for such a theory,
and is plausible only if a viable theory of meaning
can be constructed on it as base. To vary the
metaphor, it provides a framework for a theory of
meaning; it lays down the terms in which such a
theory must provide a model for that in which the
understanding of an expression of any given cat­
egory must consist.
If, in particular, our semantic theory is an object­
ivist one, then any theory of meaning that can be
erected on it as base will be one under which a
knowledge of the meaning of a sentence will consist
in a grasp of what has to be the case for it to be true,
where, in general, truth is regarded as determin­
ately attaching to certain statements and failing
to attach to others independently of our know­
ledge. It is important to notice, however, that this
observation holds good only as regards that under-
Realism
standing of a sentence which is sufficient to yield a
comprehension of its significance when it forms a
complete utterance - of what, for example, is the
content of an assertion made by means of it. A
knowledge of the condition that must hold for a
sentence to be true need not suffice for an under­
standing of the sentence as it might occur as a
constituent in a more complex sentence, that is,
of the contribution it makes to determining the
condition under which that more complex sentence
is true: for that, we may need to know more than
simply under what conditions the constituent sen­
tence is true. For instance, if the language contains
modal operators, explained in terms of a semantics
of possible worlds, the semantic theory may allow
that a grasp of the content of some sentence, con­
sidered as a complete utterance, amounts to a
knowledge of what has to be the case for it to be
true: but constituent sub sentences will not contri­
bute to determining this solely in virtue of whether
or not they are true, that is, true in the actual world,
but also in virtue of their being true or false in
various possible worlds. It is characteristic of the
two-valued semantics, however, that, according to
it, that understanding of a sentence which is enough
to supply a grasp of its content when it serves as a
complete utterance suffices also for an understand­
ing ofits significance when it occurs as a constituent
in a more complex sentence. From this it follows
that no distinction can be made between a senten­
ce's failing to be true and its being false; hence the
relatively weak principle common to all objectivist
semantic theories, that every statement is determi­
nately either true or not true, can be strengthened
to the principle of bivalence, that every statement is
determinately either true or false. In any case, a
theory of meaning for which the two-valued
semantics serves as a base is a truth-conditional
meaning-theory; one according to which to grasp
the meaning of a sentence consists in a knowledge
of the condition that has to obtain for it to be true.
Now some interpretations of the statements in
some given class fail to be realistic, not because
they involve a repudiation of the principle of biva­
lence, but because they diverge from a theory of
meaning of this kind. This may be because they are
not truth-conditional in form, that is, not con­
structed on the basis of an objectivist semantics:
they deny that an understanding of the statements
in question is to be explained in terms of a grasp of
the condition for such a statement to be true.
Alternatively, they may accept this general charac­
terization of that in which an understanding of a \nMichael Dummett
statement consists, but reject the account embod­
ied in the two-valued semantics of the mechanism
whereby a statement is determined as true or false;
they may, for instance, repudiate the conception
whereby a determination of the truth-value of a
statement containing a singular term proceeds via
an identification of an object as the referent of that
term. An example of a rejection of realism on both
counts would be Wittgenstein's view of statements
ascribing inner sensations to people. In one passage
of the Philosophical Investigations (1. 352), Witt­
genstein does, it is true, inveigh against the princi­
ple of bivalence for such statements (or, rather,
against the law of excluded middle, which, for
him, accepting as he did the redundancy theory of
truth, amounted to the same thing). He writes:
Here it happens that our thinking plays us a
queer trick. We want, that is, to quote the law of
excluded middle and to say: 'Either such an
image is in his mind, or it is not; there is no
third possibility! '. .. when it is said, 'Either he
has this experience, or not' - what primarily
occurs to us is a picture which by itself seems
to make the sense of the expressions unmistak­
able: 'Now you know what is in question' - we
should like to say. And that is precisely what it
does not tell him.
But, in fact, Wittgenstein is not particularly inter­
ested in denying the principle of bivalence for
ascriptions of inner sensations or images, save in
queer cases, such as if someone says that the stove
is in pain. The thrust of the argument is not that
bivalence fails: it is, rather, first, that we cannot
employ the notion of reference to explain how
expressions for inner sensations function ('if we
construe the grammar of the expression of sensa­
tion on the model of "object and name', the object
drops out of consideration as irrelevant" (1. 293) ),
and, secondly, that an understanding of ascriptions
of inner sensation cannot be explained as consisting
in a knowledge of the condition for them to be true.
The condition for an ascription of pain to someone
to be true is plainly not that he manifests pain­
behaviour. Hence, if we attempt to give a truth­
conditional account of the meaning of such
ascriptions, we are forced to resort to the concept­
ion whereby I understand the word 'pain' in the
first instance from my own case, namely by giving
myself a private ostensive definition of the word,
and then transfer it to the experiences of others by
analogy: the condition which I apprehend as being
that under which 'Henry is in pain' is true is then,
on this conception, that it should be with Henry as
it is with me when I am in pain. Having, as I think
successfully, but at least to his own satisfaction,
exposed the chimerical nature both of the private
ostensive definition and of the supposed analogical
transference, Wittgenstein concludes that the
understanding of pain-ascriptions is not to be
represented on the model of a grasp of truth-con­
ditions. Our philosophical perplexities arise,
according to him, precisely from the use of this
model: for, if we use it, we are forced to choose
between two alternatives. One is to seek for con­
clusive and publicly accessible grounds for ascrib­
ing pain to someone, and to declare the existence of
such grounds to be that which renders such an
ascription true; this is behaviourism. The other is
to deny the possibility of any publicly accessible
and absolutely conclusive grounds, and, on that
score, to hold that what renders a pain-ascription
true is something inaccessible to any but the one to
whom the pain is ascribed, and hence that our
understanding of pain-ascriptions rests on our
grasp of what it is for such an in principle inaccess­
ible state of affairs to obtain. The solution is to
abandon the attempt to give a truth-conditional
account of the meanings of statements of this
form. We have, rather, to accept that an under­
standing of pain-ascriptions consists in a mastery of
their actual use. This involves knowing that the
presence of a pain-stimulus and the manifestation
of pain-behaviour together supply an entitlement
for an ascription of pain; knowing when one of
these does, and when it does not, supply such an
entitlement in the apparent or demonstrable
absence of the other; and knowing what justifies
withdrawing an ascription of pain for which there
had been such an entitlement. (To display pity for
the sufferer and to gloat over his sufferings are two
possible manifestations of a belief that he is in pain:
but, in view of the callousness which is also a pre­
valent human attitude, it seems difficult to maintain
that such a belief is incompatible with behaviour no
different from that towards a broken chair. ) It is, on
this account, part of our understanding of the word
'pain' that we recognize that a report by a speaker
that he is himself in pain does not require grounds
or justification, but also that it is to be assessed like
any other pain-behaviour. It is not that the speaker
attaches a private meaning to the word 'pain' under
which he knows that he is in pain, as he understands
'pain'. Rather, the significance of his utterance
depends upon his use of the word as part of the \npublic language, and so on his grasp of the con­
nections between, pain, pain-stimuli, and pain­
behaviour; for instance, an apparently sincere
declaration on his part that he did not in the least
mind being in pain would call in question the
meaning, and thereby the truth, of his report.
The rejection of a realistic view of statements of
some given class has often been associated with the
maintenance of a reductionist thesis concerning
them. Reductionism, properly so called, is the the­
sis that there exists a translation of statements of
the given class into those of some other class, which
I shall call the reductive class. This translation is
proposed, not merely as preserving truth-values,
but as part of an account of the meanings of state­
ments of the given class: it is integral to the reduc­
tionist thesis that it is by an implicit grasp of the
scheme of translation that we understand those
statements. The most celebrated example of a
reductionist thesis is that embodied in classical
phenomenalism: the given class here consists of
statements about material objects, and the reduct­
ive class of statements about sense-data. Reduc­
tionism in this sense may indeed afford a ground
for rejecting realism concerning statements of the
given class, even when it does not provide any
reason for repudiating the principle of bivalence
as applied to them. To take an example of Frege's,
suppose that we have a method for translating
statements containing terms for and quantification
over directions into ones containing only terms for
and quantification over straight lines, and that a
grasp of this scheme of translation is accepted as
being integral to our understanding of statements
about directions. In the Grundlagen der Arithmetik,
Frege claimed that the necessity to invoke such a
translation in order to explain the meanings of
statements about directions would not render it
improper to ascribe a reference to terms for direc­
tions, since it is only in the context of a sentence
that a word has a meaning. Provided that an
expression really does function logically as a sin­
gular term, that is, that certain patterns of infer­
ence govern sentences containing it, and provided
that we have laid down determinate truth-condi­
tions for sentences containing that expression,
then, according to Frege, it is entirely proper to
ascribe a reference to that expression (a reference
to an object); any question that may remain as to
whether it actually has such a reference will not be
a semantic question, but a factual one, namely a
question as to the truth of an existential sentence of
the kind for which we have laid down the truth-
Realism
conditions. In the example, we have laid down the
truth-conditions of statements about directions
precisely by means of the translation, provided, of
course, that it is assumed that statements about
lines already have determinate truth-conditions.
Hence according to Frege, the setting up of such
a translation actually supplies a justification for
ascribing reference to terms for directions, or, in
another terminology, for admitting directions into
our ontology: no better justification can be required
for acknowledging the existence of abstract objects
than that we know what must hold good if sen­
tences concerning them are to be true.
Even in the Grundlagen, this was, for Frege, a
merely hypothetical case: for rather special reasons,
he did not in fact think that it was possible to
translate statements about directions into state­
ments about lines. Furthermore, his stance on
this matter in his later writings is somewhat
unclear. But, in Grundlagen at any rate, his espousal
of the hypothetical thesis is unequivocal: if we had
such a translation, then we should, by that very
fact, be justified in ascribing a reference to terms
for directions.
I do not wish to controvert this thesis: given an
acceptance of the scheme of translation as provid­
ing a correct account of the meanings of statements
about directions, nothing is gained by a philo­
sophical protest to the effect that 'there are not
really any such things as directions'. Such a protest
springs, however, from the perception of a genuine
and important fact: the fact, namely, that adoption
of this form of explanation for statements about
directions represents the abandonment of a realistic
view of such statements. Realism is abandoned, not
because a truth-conditional account of the mean­
ings of the statements is impossible, nor, necessar­
ily, because there is any reason to repudiate the
principle of bivalence as applied to them, but
because the notion of reference no longer plays
any role in the account of their meanings. Even if,
relying on Frege's principle that a term has refer­
ence only in the context of a sentence, we continue
to ascribe reference to terms for directions, we do
not need to invoke the notion of reference, as
applied to such terms, in order to explain how a
sentence containing such a term is determined as
true or false: the determination of the truth-value
of the sentence does not proceed via the identifica­
tion of an object as the referent of the term. Indeed,
just because it is only in the context of a sentence
that such a term is conceived of as having a
reference, the notion of reference, as applied to \nMichael Dummett
that term, has not been explained by the use of
anything characterized as identifying an object as
its referent; and, for all that has been said, there
may be no process that can legitimately be so char­
acterized. Suppose that we have the simplest kind
of statement about a direction, a sentence formed
by inserting in the argument-place of a suitable
one-place predicate a term for a direction. Then,
under the given account of the meanings of state­
ments about directions, the canonical means by
which we establish the atomic sentence as true or
as false is not by identifying some direction as being
that to which the term refers, and then determining
that the predicate is true of it; it is by first translat­
ing the sentence into a statement about lines, and
then determining, by whatever are the appropriate
means, the truth-value of the resulting statement.
In this process, the notion of reference as applied to
terms for lines may need to be invoked, if we have a
realistic theory of meaning for statements about
lines which here form our reductive class: but the
notion of reference as applied to terms for direc­
tions, however defensible, plays no role in the
account of the meaning of the original sentence.
And, because this is so for atomic sentences about
directions, it is so also for sentences involving
quantification over directions: we shall determine
such sentences as true or as false not by considering
their truth-values as the values of infinitary truth­
functions whose arguments are the truth values of
their instances, but by first applying our translation
scheme to obtain some statement about lines, and
then determining the resulting statement as true or
as false.
It may be for reasons of this kind that phenom­
enalism was always reckoned to stand in opposition
to realism concerning statements about material
objects; but I think that another, imperfectly appre­
hended, reason underlay this classification. I have
emphasized that realism concerning a given class of
statements requires adherence in all respects to a
certain pattern of explanation for statements of the
given class, a certain style of meaning-theory for
those statements: any divergence from that pattern
constitutes an abandonment of realism in its full­
fledged form. A very radical type of divergence is
involved when, as with Wittgenstein's view of
statements ascribing inner sensations, it is denied
that it is possible to give a truth-conditional
account of the meanings of the given statements;
if this is denied, it becomes relatively unimportant
whether the principle of bivalence is abandoned or
not. On the other hand, when the divergence takes
the form of dispensing with the notion of reference,
as playing a crucial role in the semantic account of
statements of the given class, perhaps because of
the acceptance of a reductionist thesis concerning
those statements, and does not involve either a
rejection of a truth-conditional account of their
meanings or a repudiation of bivalence, we have
only a comparatively mild species of anti-realism.
Probably the great majority of anti-realistic views
are ones whose most characteristic expression con­
sists in a rejection of the principle of bivalence: very
plain examples are a constructivist view of mathe­
matical statements, under which a mathematical
statement is true only if we are in possession of a
proof of it, and false only if we are in possession of a
refutation; and neutralism concerning the future,
under which future-tense statements are not in
general determinately true or false.
Now although there is just one logic, the familiar
classical logic, which accords with an acceptance of
the principle of bivalence, there is no one logic
which accords with its rejection: to reject the prin­
ciple of bivalence is, in itself, merely to adopt a
negative position, and is compatible with the
acceptance of a variety of semantic theories and a
variety of resulting logics. In some cases, the
semantic theory advocated by the anti-realist will
involve, not merely the rejection of bivalence, but
the abandonment of a truth-conditional theory of
meaning, because the semantic theory underlying
his theory of meaning is not of the objectivist type:
he does not admit, for statements of the given class,
any notion of truth under which each statement is
determinately either true or not true, independ­
ently of our knowledge. In other cases, the seman­
tic theory he advocates, although not embodying
the principle of bivalence, will remain objectivist in
character, and therefore compatible with a theory
of meaning under which a grasp of the meaning of a
sentence consists in a knowledge of the condition
that has to obtain for it to be true. In the former
case, we are concerned with an anti-realist view of a
very thoroughgoing kind; in the latter, with a less
radical type of anti-realism, although one more
radical than a view which leaves the principle of
bivalence intact, but merely calls in question the
role of the notion of reference in the meaning­
theory.
There are other cases, however, in which the
opponent of realism does not actually take the
step of rejecting the principle of bivalence, but in
which it appears that his position would be
strengthened were he to do so: and these cases are \nrather hard to classify. It has already been
remarked that opposition to realism is frequently
associated with acceptance of a reductionist thesis,
and not incorrectly so. But it has often been asso­
ciated also with acceptance of a weaker form of
thesis, which I shall call a reductive thesis. A reduct­
ive thesis, like a full-fledged reductionist thesis, is
concerned with the relation between two classes of
statements, the given class and the reductive class.
A red uctionist thesis claims the existence of a
translation from statements in the given class into
statements in the reductive class; a reductive thesis
more modestly claims only that no statement of the
given class can be true unless some suitable state­
ment or statements of the reductive class are true,
and, conversely, that the truth of those statements
of the reductive class guarantees the truth of the
corresponding statement of the given class. It is,
once again, essential that the reductive thesis be
advanced, not as a mere observation concerning a
connection between the truth-conditions of state­
ments of the two classes, but as part of an account
of the meanings of statements of the given class: the
proponent of the thesis holds that an understand­
ing of those statements involves an implicit grasp of
their relation to statements of the reductive class,
that is, an implicit acceptance of the reductive
thesis.
In order to bring out the difference between a
reductionist thesis and the weaker philosophical
proposition I have labelled a reductive thesis, it is
worth while to consider the different possible rea­
sons an adherent of the weaker thesis might have
for not advancing the stronger one.
(I) He might hold that, for any particular state­
ment A of the given class, there will in general be
infinitely many statements of the reductive class
the truth of anyone of which will guarantee the
truth of A, and such that the truth of A requires the
truth of one of those statements. If the language
does not contain a mechanism whereby we can
form a statement, belonging to the reductive
class, tantamount to the disjunction of those infin­
itely many statements, then it will be impossible
actually to translate A into a statement of the
reductive class. Alternatively, he might hold that
the truth of A entailed the simultaneous truth of
the statements in some infinite subset of the reduct­
ive class, and was guaranteed only by the truth of
all of them: and, again, if the language contained no
device for forming a sentence tantamount to the
infinite conjunction of the statements in that set, it
Realism
would be impossible actually to give a translation of
A. Or, again, he might combine these views: the
truth of A might guarantee, and might require, the
truth of all the statements in some one out of
infinitely many infinite subsets of the reductive
class, so that a translation of A could be given
only as an infinite disjunction of infinite conjunc­
tions of statements of the reductive class. Just such
a reason as this has been advanced by some philo­
sophers as a ground for denying the possibility of
translating statements about material objects into
statements about sense-data, while admitting the
correctness of a weaker reductive thesis concerning
these two classes of statements.
(2) Quite a different ground has been given for
denying the possibility of an actual scheme of
translation. This is, namely, that it is impossible
to introduce a vocabulary adequate for expressing
statements of the reductive class without thereby
introducing one adequate for the expression of
statements of the given class. This need not mean
that the given class becomes a subclass of the
reductive class, thereby rendering the reductive
thesis entirely nugatory: the reductive class may
be characterized in such a way that, although the
entire vocabulary by means of which statements of
the given class are expressed may occur in state­
ments of the reductive class, it does so only in a
restricted type of context. Nevertheless, when the
two classes are related in this way, there can be no
question of a translation of statements of the given
class in a manner that eliminates its characteristic
vocabulary. An example might be a reductive thesis
concerning mathematical statements, the thesis,
namely, that a mathematical statement A can be
true only if the statement r We possess a proof that
A 1 is true: the given class consists of mathematical
statements, the reductive class of statements to the
effect that we have proofs of such statements. Such
a reductive thesis is quite compatible with the view
that, for any given mathematical statement, there is
no way in which to express the general notion of
something's being a proof of that statement that
does not require the use of that statement itself as a
subordinate clause, or, more generally, that there is
no way of characterizing all possible proofs of a
given statement without employing a vocabulary
adequate for the expression of the statement in
question. Accordingly, a reductionist thesis could
not be maintained: there could be no scheme for
translating mathematical statements into state­
ments about our possession of proofs of them. \nMichael Dummett
Another example would be a reductive thesis, such
as has been advanced by some philosophers (Luka­
siewicz, C. 1. Lewis, and, at one time, A. J. Ayer)
concerning statements in the past tense, to the
effect that such a statement cannot be true unless
some statement about the existence of present (or
perhaps also future) evidence and memories is also
true; if every trace of the occurrence of the alleged
past event has disappeared, the statement that it
occurred is devoid of truth. This reductive thesis
could be maintained even though it was denied that
there could be any translation of past-tense state­
ments into ones in the present and future tense, on
the ground that any such translation would require
allusion to memories, and that there is no way to
characterize a memory of an event without the use
of the past tense. A similar ground has also been
given for denying the possibility of translating
material-object statements into ones about percep­
tual experience: our perceptual experience is, on
this view, so coloured by our interpretation of our
sense-impressions as revealing to us the constitu­
tion of material objects and their disposition in
three-dimensional space that there can be no way
of characterizing that experience without the use of
a vocabulary already adequate for the expression of
material-object statements.
This second type of ground for rejecting reduc­
tionism while accepting a reductive thesis deserves
a closer scrutiny. It might be objected that the
overlap of vocabulary is no impediment to a trans­
lation. We might still be supposed to be capable in
principle of understanding statements of the
reductive class in advance of understanding those
of the given class: at such a stage, our understand­
ing of the vocabulary needed for expressing state­
ments of the given class would be only partial, for
we should understand it only in those restricted
contexts in which it occurs in statements of the
reductive class. For instance, we might understand
a mathematical vocabulary only within contexts
governed by 'a proof that. .. '; or we might under­
stand the past tense only in contexts governed by
'. .. remembers that. .. '. If this assumption were
made, there would be no obstacle to an informative
translation of statements of the given class: we
should be translating statements in which certain
expressions occurred in a context of one kind into
statements in which they occurred only in contexts
of another kind. And, it might be urged, the poss­
ibility of such a translation is implicit in the claim
that the reductive thesis forms part of an account of
the meanings of the statements of the given class: if
we could not understand statements of the reduct­
ive class antecedently to a knowledge of the mean­
ings of those of the given class, how could the
reductive thesis operate as an explanation of those
meanings?
This objection is perfectly reasonable, so far as
our present characterization of this second ground
for resisting reductionism while accepting a reduct­
ive thesis goes. It shows, however, that we have not
yet fully characterized that ground. In a case of this
kind, the reductive thesis is not intended to be
understood as a partial explanation of the meanings
of statements of the given class after the manner of
a reductionist thesis and, perhaps, of other reduc­
tive theses. That is to say, the reductive thesis is
not intended to explain the meanings of statements
of the given class by formulating their truth-con­
ditions in terms that can be understood anteced­
ently to an understanding of those statements, as a
reductionist thesis is certainly intended to do. It is
precisely because, in a case of this sort, it is not
supposed that statements of the reductive class are
even in principle intelligible in advance of an
understanding of those of the given class that the
reductionist thesis is rejected. The reductive thesis
makes an important contribution to circumscribing
the form which a theory of meaning for statements
of the given class must take, namely by saying
something about the appropriate notion of truth
for statements of that class; but it is not intended to
offer an explanation of those statements in terms of
other statements regarded as capable of being ante­
cedently understood.
(3) A third ground for rejecting reductionism
while accepting a reductive thesis is very seldom
appealed to: it is that, while, for any statement A
of the given class there must be a statement B of
the reductive class in the truth of which the truth
of A consists, we have no effective means of iden­
tifying, for each statement A, the corresponding
statement B. This appears to be Donald David­
son's reason for denying the possibility of
translating psychological into neurophysiological
statements: I know of no other actual example of
an appeal to such a ground for denying a reduc­
tionist thesis.
Very often maintenance of any reductive thesis
is taken as constituting in itself a rejection of real­
ism for statements of the given class. This is,
however, a mistake. A reductive thesis does not,
of itself, imply that we cannot give a truth-condi­
tional account of the meanings of statements of the \ngiven class; it does not imply that bivalence fails for
those statements; it does not even imply that the
notion of reference does not play its standard role
in the explanation of how those statements are
determined as true or as false. An example might
be the reductive thesis, for psychological state­
ments, embodied in so-called central-state materi­
alism: the reductive class, in this case, consists of
statements about the states of the central nervous
system. Such a thesis has no tendency to cast doubt
upon whether any specific statement ascribing a
psychological state to an individual is determin­
ately either true or false: rather, it tends to rein­
force the presumption that it will be one or the
other, since it is assumed that his central nervous
system either is or is not in the corresponding state
at any given time. It does not even call in question
the ascription of reference to terms for particular
psychological states, since these can be construed
as referring, in a certain manner, to the corres­
ponding neurophysiological states. In fact, we can
see that, in this example, we do not arrive at an
anti-realist position even if the reductive thesis is
strengthened to a full-fledged reductionism: if
there is a one-{)ne correspondence between
describable psychological states and describable
neurophysiological states, then terms for the for­
mer can be construed as referring, in a particular
manner, to the latter. What, in the example con­
cerning directions and lines, deprived the notion of
reference of any significant role in the account of
the meanings of statements about directions was
that we tacitly assumed that, in the process of
translating such statements into statements about
lines, we did not simply replace a term for a direc­
tion by a term for a line, or by a term of any other
kind, but effected a transformation under which
that term disappeared altogether. If we had been
concerned with a translation under which a term
for a direction was replaced by a term for, say, a
maximal class of parallel lines, then we should not
have said that the notion of reference, as applied to
terms for directions, no longer had any part to play
in the meaning-theory: we should have said, rather,
that terms for directions were being construed as
referring to classes of parallel lines. In this latter
case, therefore, we should have a reductionist thesis
that in no way impugned a realistic interpretation
of statements about directions. Reductionism is,
therefore, not intrinsically anti-realist: it depends
on the character of the translation proposed. A
fortiori, a reductive thesis does not in itself involve
any rejection of realism.
Realism
The principal reason why philosophers have
often confused an advocacy of a reductive thesis
with the repudiation of realism is that the reductive
thesis frequently represents a first step in an argu­
ment leading to the rejection of bivalence. For
instance, it is first claimed that a mathematical
statement can be true only if there exists a proof
of it; and then the second step is taken, namely to
observe that there is no ground for assuming that,
for any intelligible mathematical statement, we
must be able to construct either a proof or a dis­
proof of it of the kind that we are able to grasp. It
then follows that we have no entitlement to assert
that every mathematical statement is either true or
false. In general, a reductive thesis may lead to a
rejection of bivalence if the correspondence
between the given class and the reductive class is
of a particular kind; given the reductive thesis, the
second step in the argument may be cogent even
though a realistic interpretation is allowed for state­
ments of the reductive class. The general form of
the second step consists in pointing out that, for any
particular statement A of the given class, there is no
guarantee that there should be any true statement,
or set of true statements, of the reductive class
whose truth would entail the truth of A or would
entail the truth of r Not A 1, the given class being
taken to be one closed under negation; where the
falsity of A is identified with the truth of its nega­
tion, as it is usually natural to do, it follows, given
the reductive thesis, that a statement of the given
class cannot be assumed to be either true or false.
This second step, leading to a rejection of bi­
valence, and, therefore, of realism concerning the
given class of statements, often very naturally fol­
lows upon the reductive thesis. For instance, if
statements about the past are considered as needing
to be rendered true, when they are true, by what
lies in the present or the future, it will inevitably be
inferred that a past-tense statement need not be
either true or false. Or, again, to take an example
not so far used, if a psychological statement is
regarded as requiring to be rendered true by
corresponding behaviour on the part of the indivi­
dual concerned, if it is to be true at all, it is almost
equally natural to conclude that a psychological
statement will not in all cases be either true or
false: the individual may not behave in such a way
as to render either that statement or its negation
true. It is, however, a mistake to suppose that a
reductive thesis leads inevitably to a rejection of
bivalence, or that it always represents a repudiation
of realism. We have to look at the particular case to \nMichael Dummett
see whether, given the reductive thesis, the second
step can be taken: the relation between the given
class and the reductive class may be such that ~
given a realistic interpretation of the reductive class
~ for any statement A of the given class, we are
assured that either there will be some true state­
ment B of the reductive class such that A is true in
virtue of the truth of B, or there will be some true
statement C of the reductive class such that the
negation of A is true in virtue of the truth of C. We
have already considered a case in which it is natural
to say this, namely when the given class consists of
psychological statements, and the reductive class
consists, not of statements about behaviour, but of
neurophysiological ones.
Realism about a certain class of statements is
thus compatible with acceptance of a reductive
thesis concerning that class: and we may label a
realistic view that is combined with, and, perhaps,
even rests on, a reductive thesis sophisticated real­
ism. In this sense, central-state materialism repres­
ents a form of sophisticated realism concerning
psychological statements. Opposed to all reductive
theses applied to a given class of statements is what
we may call an irreducibility thesis: the thesis,
namely, that no reductive thesis holds good for
that class. In characterizing the general notion of
a reductive thesis, I did not need to place any
restrictions on the two classes of statements con­
sidered: if the two classes can be chosen in such a
way that the reductive thesis becomes trivially true
and hence philosophically unilluminating, that is
no objection to the concept of a reductive thesis.
Probably, however, in order to give a clear explana­
tion of what I intend by speaking of an irreducib­
ility thesis, I ought to circumscribe the type of
class for which such a thesis can be propounded,
and the type of class about which the irreducibility
thesis asserts that it cannot serve as a reductive
class for the given class. To state such restrictions
accurately is, however, not easy to do, and I shall
therefore leave the notion of an irreducibility thesis
to this extent incompletely specified: I do not think
that any serious misunderstanding will result. A
reductive thesis offers an informative general
answer to the question 'What makes a statement
of the given class true, when it is true? ' or 'In virtue
of what is such a statement true, if it is true? ' An
irreducibility thesis is, conversely, to the effect
that, for a statement of the given class, no non­
trivial answer can be given to this question; or, at
least, that no non-trivial general answer is possible.
A trivial answer to the question what makes a
statement A true, if it is true, is one that consists,
actually or in effect, of simply repeating the state­
ment; and a trivial general answer to the question
what makes any statement of a certain class true,
when it is true, is one that amounts to no more than
saying, 'That statement's being true'. For instance,
a constructivist has an informative general answer
to the question 'What, in general, makes a true
mathematical statement true? ': namely, 'The exist­
ence of a proof of that statement'. A Platonist, on
the other hand, that is, one who adopts a realistic
interpretation of mathematical statements, can give
no answer to the question 'What makes Goldbach's
conjecture true, if it is true? ', save 'Every even
number's being the sum of two primes', that is,
by formulating Goldbach's conjecture; and, to the
general question 'What makes a mathematical
statement true, when it is true? ' he can do no better
than to reply, 'The constitution of mathematical
reality'. Since mathematical reality is composed of
mathematical facts, that reply is quite uninformat­
ive: it amounts to saying that each true mathemat­
ical statement is rendered true by the fact which it
states. An informative answer to the question what
makes a statement of some class true, when it is
true, sheds light on the notion of truth appropriate
for statements of that class, and gives an indication
of the type of semantic theory, and therefore the
type of meaning-theory, required for them: it is
therefore desirable when it can be attained. But
we cannot expect in each case to be able to find
an informative answer; in some cases, only a trivial
answer may be possible.
As already explained, a realistic interpretation of
a certain class of statements does not require the
maintenance of an irreducibility thesis concerning
them. It is, however, characteristic of a number of
disputes over the tenability of a realistic interpreta­
tion that the critic of realism maintains a reductive
thesis, while its defender rejects not only that, but
any conceivable, reductive thesis, and so pro­
pounds an irreducibility thesis. The term 'naive
realism' is well known from philosophical litera­
ture, although it is sometimes difficult to grasp
what is intended by it. For the present, let us say
that naive realism concerning statements of a given
class consists in the combination of a realistic inter­
pretation of them with an irreducibility thesis; how
far this agrees with the accepted use of the term we
shall enquire later.
Now an interesting distinction between reduct­
ive theses can be drawn by asking whether sub-\njunctive conditionals are admitted as belonging to
the reductive class. In some cases, the plausibility
of the reductive thesis depends heavily upon their
admission. Notoriously, for instance, the first step
in the phenomenalist translation of material-object
statements into sense-data statements was sup­
posed, in most cases, to consist in the formation
of a subjunctive conditional the antecedent of
which would state the condition for a suitable
observation to be made and the consequent of
which would state the making of a positive obser­
vation: the celebrated prototype was the rendering
of 'There is a table in the next room' by 'If anyone
were to go into the next room (and switch on the
light), he would see a table'. Of course, this was
only a first step, since at this stage both antecedent
and consequent are expressed in material-object
vocabulary: they would then be subjected to
further transformations, in order to obtain equiva­
lents couched solely in sense-datum vocabulary;
but, in the process, the subjunctive conditional
form would persist. The need for the admission
of the subjunctive conditional form in statements
of the reductive class arose from the fact that the
phenomenalists were not prepared to be suffi­
ciently tough-minded as to declare only those
material-object statements true which have actually
been observed to be true. A similar inclusion of
subjunctive conditionals among the statements of
the reductive class is very characteristic of a num­
ber of reductive theses. A behaviourist wants to
assert an intrinsic connection between the concept
of knowledge or of expectation and that of its
manifestation, between the concept of belief and
that of its avowal, between that of intention or of
emotion and its expression. But he hardly wants to
deny that a man may have knowledge which he
does not display, an expectation that he never
manifests, and so forth: so he is disposed to say
that 'X expects E to happen' is true provided that
X would show surprise ifhe were to discover that E
had not occurred, that to ascribe an intention to
someone is to say that he would act in accordance
with it were the occasion to arise, and the like.
Other reductive theses, on the other hand, make
no appeal to subjunctive conditionals. One who
takes a constructivist view of mathematical state­
ments does not hold that such a statement is true
provided that there would be a proof of it under
favourable conditions; he is content to say that it is
true only if there actually is such a proof. Even in
the mathematical case, however, there are contexts
in which it is natural to appeal to subjunctive con-
Realism
ditionals. A constructivist may be more or less
radical: he may be content, like the intuitionists,
to appeal to procedures that could in principle be
effectively carried out, or he may, like the strict
finitists, rely only on procedures that can in pract­
ice be carried out. A constructivist of the less
radical variety would accept a computation proce­
dure that would in principle effectively decide the
application of some predicate to any natural num­
ber as imposing a determinate meaning on that
predicate, of such a kind as to make it true or
false of every natural number: for instance, by
factorization we can decide whether or not a num­
ber is prime, or is square-free. A radical construct­
ivist will object that, for sufficiently large numbers,
we could not in fact decide the application of the
predicate by that means: the less radical one may
then be tempted to reply that, nevertheless, the
predicate is true of such a number provided that,
if we were to apply the decision procedure, we
should obtain an affirmative result. A case in
which an appeal to subjunctive conditionals is com­
pletely out of the question is that of a reductive
thesis concerning statements about the past. For an
anti-realist about the past, a past-tense statement
can be true only if there is present evidence for its
truth. He may well allow that it may be true, given
such evidence, even if we are unaware of that
evidence: but there is no plausible but non-trivial
thesis to the effect that it is true just in case, under
such-and-such conditions, there would be present
evidence for its truth.
If subjunctive conditionals are excluded from
the reductive class, it will usually be fairly obvious
whether or not the reductive thesis entails a rejec­
tion of bivalence for statements of the given class.
When subjunctive conditionals are admitted to the
reductive class, however, it is a great deal more
delicate to decide whether, given the reductive
thesis, bivalence will fail: it depends on how many
subjunctive conditionals are considered as holding
good. This problem was particularly acute for the
phenomenalist. For the naive realist, or for any
realist who rejected the phenomenalist reduction,
any significant statement about the physical uni­
verse, for example, 'There are living organisms on
some planet in the Andromeda galaxy', must be
determinately true or false, at least within the limits
imposed by the vagueness of some of the terms
occurring in it. From the truth of such a statement,
the truth of a subjunctive conditional concerning
the results of observation under suitable condi­
tions, in our case, 'If we were to travel to the \nMichael Dummett
Andromeda galaxy and inspect all the planets in it,
we should observe at least one on which there were
living organisms', would follow; from its falsity,
the truth of the opposite subjunctive conditional
would follow, where the opposite of any condi­
tional is that conditional having the same anteced­
ent and the contradictory consequent. The realist
therefore had good ground for holding that, of any
pair of such opposite subjunctive conditionals, one
must be true and the other false. The phenomen­
alist, however, was in a different position. For him,
the affirmative subjunctive conditional was not a
consequence of the material-object statement, but
equivalent to it in meaning: it represented the
first step in the translation of that statement. The
phenomenalist could not, therefore, argue, as the
realist could, that, because the material-object state­
ment was either true or false, so one or other of the
pair of opposite subjunctive conditionals must be
true. For him, a decision on whether the material­
object statement had to be either true or false must
depend upon a prior decision as to whether it was
necessary that one or other of the two subjunctive
conditionals must be true.
Now one who adopted a realistic interpretation
of material-object statements could well afford to
hold a reductive thesis concerning subjunctive con­
ditionals. On such a view, for any subjunctive con­
ditional, we can always give an informative answer,
even if a rather complicated one, to the question in
virtue of what it is true, ifit is true: such an answer
would allude to general laws and, perhaps, to tend­
encies, intentions, and the like. If the phenomen­
alist likewise accepted a reductive thesis
concerning subjunctive conditionals, he would be
more or less forced to grant that material-object
statements, understood in his way, did not satisfy
the principle of bivalence. For the realist, an essen­
tial ingredient in an informative answer to the
question what renders the subjunctive condition,
'If we were to inspect the planets in the Andromeda
galaxy, we should observe one on which there were
living organisms', true, if it is true, would be
'There being living organisms on some planet in
the Andromeda galaxy'. But, for the phenomenal­
ist, this could not be part of an informative answer
to that question, since, for him, it is simply to
reiterate the subjunctive conditional in a disguised
form: the phenomenalist had, as it were, a much
more slender basis of categorical truths on which to
support those subjunctive conditionals which he
could consider true. For the phenomenalist who
accepted a reductive thesis concerning subjunctive
conditionals, a subjunctive conditional could not be
true in virtue of the truth of some material-object
statement whose truth we might never know: it
could be true only in virtue of some actual reports
of observation, expressible as sense-datum state­
ments, together with laws stating observed or at
least observable regularities connecting our obser­
vations. On such a basis, it would be quite implaus­
ible that, for any material-object statement, either
the subjunctive conditional which represented the
first step in its translation, or the opposite one,
would have to be true: and so the consequence
would be a denial of the principle of bivalence for
material-object statements, and, therefore, a thor­
oughgoing repudiation of realism.
What is surprising is that, in the actual historical
development, very few phenomenalists appear to
have taken that position. Rather, they appear to
have rejected any reductive thesis concerning sub­
junctive conditionals, while continuing to maintain
a reductionist view of material-object statements.
To reject a reductive thesis concerning a certain
class of statements does not, of itself, afford any
ground for accepting the principle of bivalence as
applied to them: it merely disposes of one argu­
ment to show that bivalence fails. Independently of
any reductive thesis concerning subjunctive condi­
tionals, for example, it would be hard to maintain
that they satisfy the principle of bivalence, if the
falsity of a subjunctive conditional be equated with
the truth of the opposite conditional. Few could be
found to hold that such a subjunctive conditional as
'If the next Pope to be elected were an Englishman,
he would take the name Adrian' must, in this sense,
be determinately be true or false, that is, that either
it or its opposite must be true. It could, indeed, be
argued that this is not the natural way to under­
stand the word 'false' as applied to subjunctive
conditionals, that it should, instead, be so taken
that the falsity of the foregoing subjunctive condi­
tional would involve the truth only of 'If the next
Pope to be elected were an Englishman, he would
not necessarily take the name Adrian', rather than
that of the opposite conditional 'If the next Pope to
be elected were an Englishman, he would not take
the name Adrian'. On this latter way of under­
standing the notion of the falsity of a subjunctive
conditional, the opinion that subjunctive condi­
tionals are determinately either true or false
would be much more widespread. Let us speak of
strong bivalence for subjunctive conditionals when
the falsity of a conditional is equated with the truth
of its opposite, and of weak bivalence when its \nfalsity is equated with the truth of the statement
resulting from inserting 'not necessarily' in the
consequent. The appropriate application of 'false'
to subjunctive conditionals is not, however, to the
present point. If we call subjunctive conditionals
with 'might', 'would perhaps', or 'would not neces­
sarily' in their consequents permissive conditionals,
and those with plain 'would' or 'would not' in their
consequents straighforward conditionals, it is plain
that the first step in the phenomenalist translation
of a material-object statement will always yield a
straightforward, not a permissive, subjunctive con­
ditional; this will normally be the case under any
reductionist thesis admitting subjunctive condi­
tionals in the reductive class. In particular, the
phenomenalist translation of the negation of a
material-object statement A will be the opposite
subjunctive conditional to that which is the trans­
lation of A. Hence, for the phenomenalist, the
question whether the principle of bivalence holds
for material-object statements is the question
whether strong bivalence holds for subjunctive
conditionals of the kind which serve as their trans­
lations into the sense-datum language: it makes no
difference whether strong bivalence is or is not
what 'bivalence' should be taken to mean when
applied to subjunctive conditionals.
Now it is impossible to hold that subjunctive
conditionals satisfy the principle of strong biva­
lence quite generally. The reason is that there are
obvious cases in which it is neither true to say that,
if it had been the case that A, then it would have
been the case that B, nor true to say that, if it had
been the case that A, then it would not have been
the case that B. A very wide class of such cases is
provided by those in which an additional condition
is required to determine the consequent: that is,
where, for some additional statement C, we can
truly say (1) that, if it had been the case that A, it
might or might not also have been the case that C,
(2) that, if it had been the case that A and that
C, then it would have been the case that B, and (3)
that, if it had been the case that A but not C, then it
would not have been the case that B. Now, since
subjunctive conditionals cannot be held to be gen­
erally subject to strong bivalence, the most that can
be claimed is that strong bivalence holds for some
restricted range of subjunctive conditionals. The
most characteristic reason for supposing this is the
belief that there is some underlying class of cat­
egorical statements such that, for any subjunctive
conditional in the given range, there is some cat­
egorical statement in the underlying class that
Realism
would support it, and that these categorical state­
ments are subject to bivalence. For instance, we
may have a test T for the possession of some prop­
erty P by a body. The statement 'The body x
possesses the property P' then gives support to
the subjunctive conditional 'If x were to be sub­
jected to the test T, it would pass that test'. If
statements ascribing the property P to a body are
realistically interpreted, they will be regarded as
subject to bivalence: at any given time, any parti­
cular body either has the property P or does not
have it. It will then follow that, for any subjunctive
conditional of the form 'If x were to be (have been)
subjected to the test T, it would pass (have passed)
it', either it or the opposite conditional must be
true. This assurance reflects the fact that a realistic
interpretation has been adopted for statements of
the form 'x has property P': we could say that the
belief that subjunctive conditionals of this form
satisfy strong bivalence simply expresses accept­
ance of a realistic view of statements ascribing the
property P to a body.
The phenomenalists appear, however, not
merely to have rejected a reductive thesis for sub­
junctive conditionals, but, further, to have retained
the belief, natural for anyone taking a realistic view
of material-object statements, that strong bivalence
holds good for the subjunctive conditionals result­
ing from the phenomenalist translation. This belief
on the part of the phenomenalist could not have the
same basis as the corresponding belief held by a
realist. For the phenomenalist, such a subjunctive
conditional would not rest on the corresponding
material-object statement; that is, it would not be
true in virtue of the truth of that statement,
together with the laws of nature, since it would be
a translation of it. In so far as the phenomenalist
rejected a reductive thesis for subjunctive condi­
tionals, they need not rest on anything at all: there
need be no non-trivial answer to the question in
virtue of what such a statement was true.
This extraordinary situation reveals how close
the classical phenomenalist actually was to his
opponent, the realist. In terms of the analysis of
the concept of realism I am here putting forward, a
phenomenalist of this kind diverged from a realistic
view of material-object statements neither in repu­
diating the principle of bivalence as applied to them
nor in rejecting a truth-conditional account of their
meanings. Indeed, in only one respect could he be
said to diverge from realism, as I have analysed it,
namely if he denied that the notion of reference, as
applied to names of material objects, played any \nMichael Dummett
role in the account of how a statement containing
such names was to be determined as true or as false.
Whether he could be said to deny this would
depend upon the details of his translation into the
sense-datum language, details which were, notori­
ously, never forthcoming: specifically, on whether,
in the process of translation, a name for a material
object would be replaced by a term for some com­
plex of sense-data, or whether it would be dissolved
altogether so that no corresponding term remained
in the sense-datum sentence. It thus becomes
highly dubious whether a classical phenomenalist
can properly be described as having held an anti­
realist view at all. His principal disagreement with
those who called themselves realists lay in his
acceptance of a reductionist thesis concerning
material-object statements; and, as we have seen,
neither a reductive nor even a reductionist thesis is
sufficient for a rejection of realism. It would be
better to say that the distinction between those
who called themselves realists and those who called
themselves phenomenalists was that the former
were naive realists, at least as I earlier explained
the term 'naive realism', while the latter were
sophisticated realists, concerning material objects.
An outcome which involves that a philosophical
view like phenomenalism that would ordinarily be
taken as a prototype of anti-realism is better
regarded as a sophisticated version of realism may
seem to be a reductio ad absurdum of my proposed
analysis of the concept of realism; but I do not
think so. The disposition to classify phenomenal­
ism as an outstanding example of anti-realism is
partly to be explained as due to a failure to distin­
guish clearly between anti-realism, properly so
called, and advocacy of a reductive thesis. But it
is not wholly due to that confusion. It springs also
from a perception of the irrationality of the classical
phenomenalist's position: he had neither ground
nor motive for accepting strong bivalence for the
subjunctive conditionals resulting from his transla­
tion of material-object statements. We can reason­
ably regard his having done so as due to a lingering
attachment to a realistic view of material-object
statements; and, so regarded, he was not genuinely
an anti-realist. But we can equally view him as
having failed to pursue his ideas to their natural
conclusion. Given his reductionist thesis about
material-object statements, the natural line for
him to have taken was to accept a reductive thesis
for subjunctive conditionals generally, and, on that
very ground, to have rejected strong bivalence for
the subjunctive conditionals resulting from his
translation; he would then have had to reject the
principle of bivalence for material-object state­
ments. Had he taken such a position, he would,
on the present analysis of the concept of realism,
have been an anti-realist of a fairly thoroughgoing
kind; and it was surely an imperfect perception that
this was the natural consequence of his principal
contention that made it seem so obviously correct
to classify the phenomenalist as an opponent of
realism.
For all that, philosophers have frequently failed
to distingush between a reductive thesis and the
repudiation of a truth-conditional meaning-theory
of the standard kind; it is the latter which is con­
stitutive of anti-realism. Not only is a reductive
thesis by itself insufficient for a rejection of real­
ism: it is also unnecessary. Realism requires us to
hold both that, for statements of the given class, we
have a notion of truth under which each statement
is determinately either true or false, and also that an
understanding of those statements consists in a
knowledge of the conditions under which they are
true. Either proposition may be denied without
appeal to a reductive thesis. To speak more exactly,
almost any anti-realist doctrine seems to lend itself
to expression by means of a reductive thesis: but, in
some cases, this thesis proves to be only a loose and
inessential formulation of the doctrine, while in
others it plays an essential role.
To illustrate this, let us examine in more detail
the case of neutralism with regard to the future.
The neutralist does not believe that there is any
definite future course of events which renders
every statement in the future tense determinately
either true or false. There is a wide variety of
different forms of neutralism; but it is common to
a great many of them that, if a future-tense state­
ment is (now) true, then it can be so only in virtue
of something that lies in the present. This is, as it
stands, a reductive thesis; but it is only a very rare
type of neutralist who will combine this thesis with
the view that it is solely by grasping how a future­
tense statement is determined as having present
truth that we attain an understanding of such state­
ments. A neutralist of this type (an example of
which is provided by Peter Geach) in effect holds
that the only intelligible use we have for the future
tense is that in which it expresses present tenden­
cies; there is therefore no difficulty whatever for
him in allowing that something was going to hap­
pen, but is now no longer going to happen. There
can be no disputing that we do have such a use of
the future tense, exemplified by a newspaper \nannouncement reading 'The marriage arranged
between X and Y will not now take place'; a Gea­
chian neutralist differs from everyone else in main­
taining that it is the on(y coherent use of the future
tense that we have. He is thus in some difficulty
how to explain the use of the future tense to make
bets; it is not apparent why, on his view, a bet about
what will happen in two years' time should not be
settled immediately.
If the present truth or falsity of a future-tense
statement depends only on what lies in the present,
the possibility is open that such a statement may be
true at one time but not at another; or, to speak
more precisely, it is possible that some future-tense
statement, made at some time, is rightly assessed at
that time as not being true then, although, when
made at another time, is then rightly assessed as
being true at that time. If a sentence contains only
an indexical temporal indicator, such as 'a week
from today', and the identity of the statement
made by means of it is taken as fixed by the identity
of the sentence used, then, of course, this possib­
ility will be admitted by everyone, whatever his
metaphysical view of the future; but a neutralist
admits the possibility even for a statement made by
means of a sentence containing a non-indexical
temporal indicator like 'in the year 2001'. Most
neutralists will, however, wish to place some
restriction upon such possibilities; and, if any
restriction is imposed, and if an awareness of that
restriction is essential to an understanding of the
future tense, it ceases to hold good that an under­
standing of future-tense statements consists solely
in a knowledge of what will confer on them present
truth. Typically, a neutralist will hold that, once a
future-tense statement is true, it cannot at any later
time cease to be true. Such a neutralist will regard a
future-tense statement as acquiring truth only at a
time at which there is something more than a mere
tendency for things to go that way, something that
confers a certain kind of physical necessity upon
the statement. (Necessity of this kind is thought of
as possessed by all true present-tense and past­
tense statements, but only by some future-tense
ones, those, namely, which follow from some true
present-tense statements together with some gen­
erallaws of nature. ) On his conception, a future­
tense statement that is not at present either true or
false may later become true, either at the time to
which it refers or at some intervening time; but,
unlike a Geachian neutralist, he does not allow that
a future-tense statement may be true now, but later
cease to be true or even become false. For such a
Realism
neutralist, then, in order to understand statements
in the future tense, one must indeed know the sort
of thing that can confer on them present truth,
namely physical necessity; but one must know
more besides. One must also know that, if a
future-tense statement is now true, it is necessarily
true, in the relevant sense of 'necessarily'; that is,
one must know the connection between what may
render such a statement true now and what may
render it true at a later time, and, in particular, at
the time to which it refers; and one must know that,
by the time to which it refers, it will have become
determinately either true or false. (We are here
considering only statements whose reference is to
a definite future time. ) An admission by a speaker
of the possibility that a future-tense statement,
although now true, might later cease to be true
would serve, on this view, to show that he did not
fully understand the central use of the future tense,
even if he rightly judged of the present truth or
otherwise of any such statement. From this it fol­
lows that, for such a neutralist, an understanding of
future-tense statements does not consist solely in
knowing what is required to confer on them pre­
sent truth; one must also know the connection
between their truth at one time and their truth at
a later time.
A neutralist of this kind diverges from a realistic
view of statements about the future not only, and
not principally, because he rejects the principle of
bivalence for them, but because he holds that, for
an understanding of them, we need to appeal, not
to the notion of a statement's simply being true, but
to that of its being true at one or another time. He is
a believer in variable truth-value in a sense stronger
than that in which this can be said of one who
accepts that there is a definite future course of
events, but employs a tense logic. A tense logic
differs from a representation of temporal indicators
as arguments for predicates in that the temporal
indicators, figuring as sentential operators in the
tense logic, can be indefinitely iterated. This
requires that a sentence - that to which such an
operator can be applied - be regarded, not as being
simply true or false, but as being true at certain
times and false at others, the atomic sentences thus
being taken as present-tensed. The metaphysical
implications of this device for handling temporal
reference, considered in itself, are, however, mini­
mal. It appears as no more than a recognition of the
indexical character of some temporal indicators,
which makes iteration significant in the way that
compound tenses like the future perfect and \nMichael Dummett
pluperfect are significant; when the temporal refer­
ence is non-indexical, the tense logic may admit the
sentence to be either true at all times or false at all
times, or, in other words, simply true or simply
false. A neutralist of the kind we are considering
may also be said to believe in variable truth-value in
a sense more serious than that in which a Geachian
neutralist does so. A Geachian neutralist allows
that a sentence in the future tense, with a non­
indexical temporal indicator, may be used at one
time to say something true and at another time to
say something false; but, just because, on his view,
there is no constraint on the different truth-values
the sentence may have at different times, there is
no serious sense in which he is taking it to make
the same statement on the different occasions of
utterance.
A neutralist of our kind can be said to hold a
reductive thesis; but it is quite wrong to compare
him with an anti-realist who derives from a reduct­
ive thesis the failure of bivalence, since the neutra­
list does not regard the meanings of future-tense
statements as given by the conditions under which
they are (now) true. A better representation of the
theory of meaning he favours for future-tense
statements is a variant on a semantic theory in
terms of possible worlds. A 'world' here consists
of the actual present state and past history of the
world, together with some complete possible future
history of it, where the notion of possibility is
correlative to that of necessity as employed by the
neutralist: a future event is possible if it does not
follow from the present state of the world, taken
together with the laws of nature, that it will not
occur. The central notion for such a semantic the­
ory is not that of a statement's being true abso­
lutely, but of its being true in a 'world'. The set of
possible 'worlds' continually diminishes with the
passage of time; that is to say, the various 'worlds'
may be regarded as forming paths in a (mathemat­
ical) tree, the nodes of the tree - the points at
which the paths diverge - corresponding to a
state of a 'world' at a particular time, each state
being common to many 'worlds'. A statement may
therefore be said to be true in a 'world' W at a
particular time t just in case it is true in every
'world' V such that the state of Vat t is the same
as the state of Wat t. It is the basic contention of the
neutralist that no one 'world' is the actual world;
there is no actual future course of events. But, at
any time, we may pick out an actual state as being
the state-of-the-world at that time: hence, at any
time, we may characterize as assertable those state-
ments which are true at that time in any 'world' of
which the actual state is a state. When the meaning­
theory of our neutralist is represented in such a
manner, no reductive thesis can be attributed to
him at all: he cannot even formulate a reductive
thesis, since he admits no notion of absolute truth,
but only the notions of being true in a 'world',
being true in a 'world' at a time, and being actually
true at present. He cannot, therefore, strictly
speaking, be said to reject the principle of bival­
ence, which requires the notions of absolute truth
and falsity for its formulation; we can, indeed,
loosely describe him as rejecting it, on the ground
that, while he holds each statement to be either true
or false in each 'world', he denies that, for each
particular time, each statement is either true in a
given 'world' at that time or false in that 'world' at
that time, and hence, in particular, that each state­
ment is actually either true or false at present. His
rejection of realism is more accurately described as
consisting in a repudiation of two-valued semantics
that results from his having discarded altogether
the notion of a statement's being absolutely true.
One form which an anti-realistic view may take
is, thus, the replacement of the notion of absolute
truth-value by a notion of relativized truth-values.
The resultant semantic theory may still be object­
ivist, in that the (relativized) truth-value of a state­
ment need not depend on our knowledge of it or
our capacity to know it: in the foregoing example,
there may be many statements that are actually now
true even though we do not know that they are and
perhaps can never know. Another type of anti­
realism, perhaps the most interesting, consists in
rejecting an objectivist semantics, even though it
may still be allowed that to understand a statement
is to know the condition for it to be true. The
notion of truth admitted in such a meaning-theory
will be one closely linked to our recognition of
truth. Now this tendency is already evident in
many reductive theses that afford a ground for
rejecting bivalence. The reductive thesis is often
arrived at by considering on what basis we are
accustomed to assert a statement of the given
class, and then declaring that such a statement
can be true only if there is such a basis for an
assertion of it. Thus, we assert subjunctive condi­
tionals on the basis of general laws; we make asser­
tions about the past on the basis of memories,
records, and other present traces; we make psycho­
logical statements on the basis of behaviour; and we
make statements about the physical world on the
basis of observation. The thought underlying the \nreductive thesis is that, since our use of statements
of the given class is governed by a knowledge of the
kind of basis on which they may be asserted, a grasp
of their meaning could not involve a notion of truth
as attaching to them independently of such a basis.
But, in most of these cases, the reductive thesis,
while leading to a rejection of bivalence, does not
call in question an objectivist theory of meaning; a
statement of the given class may still be considered
as determinately either true or not true. The mere
existence of a basis for asserting a particular state­
ment, the existence of something such that, if we
knew it, we should take ourselves as entitled to
assert that statement, is sufficient for its truth; it
is not required that we should know that there is
such a basis, or even be in a position to discover the
fact. If, then, statements of the reductive class -
statements to the effect that there is a basis for
assertion - are themselves realistically interpreted,
it will follow that each statement of the given class
will be determinately either true or not true.
Sometimes, however, it does not work in this
way. Consider, once again, the case of mathemat­
ical statements. A Platonist will admit that, for a
given statement, there may be neither a proof nor a
disproof of it to be found; but there is no intellig­
ible anti-realist notion of truth for mathematical
statements under which a statement is true only
if there is a proof of it, but may be true because
such a proof exists, even though we do not know
it, shall never know it, and have no effective means
of discovering it. The reason is evident: we can
introduce such a notion only by appeal to some
Platonistic conception of proofs as existing inde­
pendently of our knowledge, that is, as abstract
objects not brought into being by our thought.
But, if we admit such a conception of proofs, we
can have no objection to a parallel conception of
mathematical objects such as natural numbers, real
numbers, metric spaces, etc. ; and then we shall
have no motivation for abandoning a realistic, that
is, Platonist, interpretation of mathematical state­
ments in the first place.
If we wish to say that a mathematical statement
can be true only if there exists a proof of it, we have,
therefore, only two choices. We can interpret
'exists' as meaning concrete existence, our actual
possession of a proof; in this case 'is true' becomes a
tensed predicate of mathematical statements, a
statement being able to change from not being
true to being true, although not conversely. Each
statement is then either true or not true at any
given time, although it may be neither true nor
Realism
false, where its falsity involves the existence of a
disproof; but there will be no question of its being
objectively true, although we (collectively) are un­
aware of its truth. Alternatively, we may construe
'exists' and therefore 'is true', as tenseless. We
shall, in this case, have to interpret 'exists' con­
structively; we can then rule out the possibility of a
statement's being neither true nor false, since its
not being true would be tantamount to its being
false, but we cannot assert, in advance of a proof or
disproof of a statement, or an effective method of
finding one, that it is either true or false. Because,
on this second interpretation, 'exists' is understood
constructively, we shall still be unable to conceive
of a statement as being true although we shall never
know it to be true, although we can suppose true a
statement as yet unproved.
Instead of allowing ourselves to be entangled in
these difficulties, it seems better to represent a
constructivist theory of meaning for mathematical
statements as dispensing with the notion of truth
altogether. This notion is replaced, as the central
concept of the meaning-theory, by that of some­
thing's being a proof of a statement, as explained
earlier in connection with Heyting's semantics for
intuitionistic mathematics in terms of construc­
tions. In the present context, what is important
about such a shift is that it no longer appears that
a first step towards this anti-realistic interpretation
of mathematical statements consisted in the adop­
tion of a reductive thesis: just as with the neutralist,
no reductive thesis can even be formulated, since
the notion of truth is unavailable. The difference is
that the neutralist meaning-theory remained
objectivist in the modified sense that there may
be something, of which we are not aware, which
would justify the assertion of some future-tense
statement if we were aware of it; whereas the only
thing which will justify the assertion of a mathe­
matical statement is the existence of a proof, and,
when 'existence' is not interpreted Platonistically,
this is something of which we cannot be unaware.
The possibility of stating the anti-realist view of
mathematics without formulating a reductive the­
sis at all is closely connected with there being an
objection, of the second of the types we listed, to a
proposal to translate mathematical statements into
statements about proofs. We listed three generic
types of objection to reductionism: one of the sec­
ond type rested on the claim that statements of the
reductive class are not intelligible antecedently to
those of the given class; for example, that state­
ments about mathematical proofs cannot be \nMichael Dummett
understood independently of the statements
proved. A case in which this objection does not
appear to arise is that of a reductive thesis about
psychological statements, the reductive class con­
sisting of statements about behaviour. Here it
seems natural to say that statements reporting
someone's behaviour can be understood independ­
ently of statements ascribing to him a mental state
or psychological character: we can even state the
quality of an action, as brave, generous, prudent, or
the like, without presuming an understanding of an
ascription of the corresponding character-trait to
an individual. An actual theory of meaning for
psychological statements, based on the reductive
thesis, will require a detailed scheme for assigning,
to each psychological statement, a range of state­
ments about behaviour, or of sets of such state­
ments, the truth of anyone of which would
establish the truth of the psychological statement;
this would hold good even if the thesis did not
amount to a full-fledged reductionism, so that an
actual translation was not in question. Such a
scheme might be very complicated and very hard
to construct; it would remain that, in so far as our
interest lay in explaining psychological statements,
we could, in constructing it, take a theory of mean­
ing for statements about behaviour as already
given, just because they were assumed to be intel­
ligible in advance of the psychological statements.
When, as in the mathematical case, the meanings
of statements of the reductive class cannot be taken
as given in advance of those of the given class, the
problem of giving a meaning-theory for the latter is
quite different. We have, in such a case, simultan­
eously to devise theories of meaning for state­
ments of the reductive class and for those of the
given class. For instance, we have, for each math­
ematical statement A, to characterize what, in gen­
eral, is to count as a proof of A: this will obviously
depend, in some systematic manner, on the com­
position of the statement A, on its internal struc­
ture. What we have to do, therefore, is first to lay
down, for each atomic statement, what is to count
as a proof of it, and then to give, by means of a
stipulation relating to each mode of sentence-com­
position - the use of the various sentential oper­
ators and of each type of quantifier - an inductive
characterization of what is to count as a proof of a
complex statement. For each mode of sentence­
composition, we shall assume it known what is to
count as a proof of the immediate constituents of a
sentence so formed (in the case of a quantified
sentence, of its instances); and we shall, in terms
of that, state what is to count as a proof of such a
sentence. A simple example would be the stipula­
tion that a proof of an existential statement '3xA (x)
is to be a proof of some statement of the formA (t),
where t is a term, together with a proof that t stands
for some element of the domain of the variable x.
We shall, by this procedure, have gone a long
way towards explaining the meanings, not only of
statements of the reductive class, but of those of the
given class itself. In the general case, we shall have
explained what it means to say that something is a
ground for asserting an arbitrary statement of the
given class. If the reductive thesis is to the effect
that a statement of the given class is true if and only
if there exists a ground for asserting it, and if a
statement that there exists such a ground is
regarded as determinately true or false, or at any
rate as capable of being true independently of our
knowledge, what remains will be to explain the
meaning, that is, the truth-conditions, of such an
existential statement: when this has been done, we
shall have explained simultaneously the meanings
of statements of the reductive class and of the given
class. In the mathematical case, however, this final
step is redundant, because we are not considering a
proof as something that may exist independently of
our having constructed it or having an effective
method of constructing it. Hence, once we have
laid down, for an arbitrary mathematical statement,
what is to count as a proof of it, we have, from the
constructivist standpoint, thereby determined the
meanings of all mathematical statements. Con­
structively regarded, the meaning of such a state­
ment is given as soon as we know when we are
entitled to assert it. We shall be entitled to assert
it just in case we possess a proof of it; and, for each
statement, it has been inductively stipulated what
is to count as such a proof. It is for this reason that,
in a case ofthis kind, the reductive thesis falls away
as irrelevant. There are not, in a case like this, two
separate tasks, to explain the meanings of state­
ments of the reductive class and to explain, in
terms of them, the meanings of statements of the
given class. There is only one task, to explain
simultaneously the meanings of statements of
both kinds; and, in executing this task, we do not
need to appeal to or to introduce any notion of
truth for statements of the given class - in the
example, for mathematical statements - considered
as attaching to them independently of our being
aware of grounds for asserting them.
The constructivist's view of mathematical state­
ments can be formulated by enunciating, as a first \nstep in his argument, a reductive thesis concerning
them, and it is quite natural to express it in this
way. But what makes it natural is the analogy with
anti-realist views of other classes of statements; and
this analogy we have seen to be in part misleading.
What makes it misleading is that we do not end up
with any objectivist notion of truth for mathemat­
ical statements; for that very reason, the reductive
thesis is not an essential ingredient of the construct­
ivist view. It follows that, just as a reductive thesis
need not lead to an anti-realistic interpretation of
statements of the given class, so an anti-realist view
need not incorporate any reductive thesis. An anti­
realist view can be arrived at by means of an argu­
ment intended to show directly, without the
mediation of a reductive thesis, that, for statements
of the given class, we possess no legitimate object­
ivist notion of truth, no notion of truth transcend­
ing our capacity to recognize such statements as
true, and, a. fortiori, no notion of truth subject to
the principle ofbivalcnce. It must be admitted that,
save in relation to mathematics, an anti-realist view
resting on a non-objectivist semantics has seldom
been formulated; but that may be largely because
the distinction between the different possible
forms that a rejection of realism may take was
unclear to those who were disposed to reject it.
We can at least conceive of a version of anti­
realism of this kind for statements about physical
reality, one that does not rest upon any reductive
thesis in the sense in which a constructivist inter­
pretation of mathematical statements does not
really rest upon a reductive thesis. Even if such a
view has never been adopted, even if no one ever
does adopt it, it will remain of philosophical inter­
est to consider how it might be rebutted, just as
philosophers concern themselves with the refuta­
tion of solipsism or other extreme sceptical opin­
ions. Phenomenalism embodied a reductionist
thesis, and it was therefore integral to it to maintain
that sense-datum statements could be understood
antecedently to the material-object statements that
were to be translated into them. It was, indeed, this
ingredient of phenomenalism that was subject to
the heaviest criticisms, criticisms that eventually
brought about its downfall. But an anti-realism
about the physical world which did not rest upon
a reductive thesis would adopt just the opposite
view: there would be no reductive class of state­
ments intelligible independently of material-object
statements. Instead, the claim would be that a
theory of meaning for statements about physical
reality would have to take, as its central notion, not
Realism
that of the truth of such a statement, but that of
conclusive ground for asserting it. The meaning of
such a statement would have to be given by speci­
fying, in accordance with its composition, what was
to count as such a ground. Such a specification
would have to relate to our faculties of observation;
but, since not every statement about physical real­
ity is capable of serving as a report of observation, it
would have to relate also to those means of estab­
lishing such statements as true which involve infer­
ence, either deductive or inductive. Very likely,
since we do not often expect to attain certainty
about the truth of statements concerning the phy­
sical world, it would be necessary to consider the
meanings of such statements as given, not in terms
only of what counted as a conclusive ground for
asserting them, but in terms of a ground of the
strongest attainable kind: given such a ground for
asserting a given statement, we can rule out the
possibility that we shall subsequently be presented
with stronger contrary grounds, but cannot rule
out the possibility that we shall meet with contrary
grounds of equal strength. Or perhaps we might
have to invoke some weaker notion yet. It is not to
my purpose here to go into the difficulties which
would attend the construction of a theory of mean­
ing of this kind. My intention is only to indicate the
possibility of such a position, which represents a
form of anti-realism not vulnerable to many of the
objections successfully brought against phenomen­
alism. In the present context, an important feature
of it is that, since, unlike mathematical statements,
statements about physical reality have grounds of
so various a kind that we have no single word for
them corresponding to 'mathematical proof, it
would be highly unnatural to express an anti-realist
view of this kind by means of a reductive thesis.
The most important point is that, natural or un­
natural, such a way of expressing it would be to a
high degree misleading.
We saw that there are two genera of realists,
those that accept an irreducibility thesis for state­
ments of the given class, whom we termed naive
realists, and those that propound some reductive
thesis for them, whom we termed sophisticated real­
ists. In just the same way, there are two principal
genera of anti-realists, though many species within
each genus. One genus consists of those who arrive
at their anti-realist position via some reductive
thesis, which constitutes an indispensable ingredi­
ent of their theory of meaning for statements of the
given class. Such anti-realists we may term reduct­
ive anti-realists; examples are phenomenalists and \nMichael Dummett
behaviourists. The other genus consists of those
whose anti-realist view does not rest upon any
reductive thesis; these we might term outright
anti-realists. Various as they are, there belong to
this genus most neutralists about the future, math­
ematical intuitionists, and adherents of Wittgen­
stein's account of ascriptions of inner sensations.
By and large, their views tend to be more interest­
ing than those of reductive anti-realists.
I have taken realism as requiring acceptance, in
all its details, of a classical two-valued semantics
and of a truth-conditional theory of meaning based
on that semantics. This might be objected to, on
two counts. It might be said, first, that what is
essential to realism is that the meaning of a sen­
tence be regarded as given in terms of what has to
hold for it to be true, absolutely and timelessly,
where the notion of truth is understood in an
objectivist way: but that the mechanism whereby
the condition for the truth of a sentence is deter­
mined in accordance with its composition is, in
some respects at least, metaphysically irrelevant.
Granted that, if we are to have a realistic interpre­
tation, this mechanism must involve the notion of
reference, there is no necessity that the sentential
operators be truth-functional in the sense of being
definable by two-valued truth-tables. There is a
weaker and a stronger sense in which someone
may be said to know the meaning of a sentence.
In the weaker sense, all that is required is that he
know its content when used as a complete utter­
ance, for instance that he grasp the significance of
an assertion made by uttering just that sentence. If
the meaning of the sentence is to be explained in
truth-conditional terms, then, in order to know its
meaning in this weaker sense, it is sufficient that
someone should know no more than under what
conditions it is true and under what conditions it is
not true. In the stronger sense, however, a speaker
may be said to know the meaning of a sentence only
when he also knows the contribution which that
sentence makes to the meaning of a more complex
sentence of which it is a constituent, that is, the
contribution that it makes to determining the con­
dition for the more complex sentence to be true. It
does not, however, violate the general principle of a
truth-conditional meaning-theory that the know­
ledge, in the weaker sense, of the meaning of a
sentence should not suffice for the knowledge of
its meaning in the stronger sense. There is no
reason why a subsentence of a complex sentence
should contribute to determining the condition for
the truth of the complex sentence only via the
condition for the subsentence to be true or not to
be true: it may well contribute in some more com­
plicated way. The truth or otherwise of the com­
plex sentence may depend, not just on whether or
not the subsentence is true, but on whether it fails
to be true for a reason of one kind or for a reason of
another kind. When this is so, we shall need a
many-valued semantics to explain the sentential
operators or other devices for forming complex
sentences: the different undesignated values will
represent different ways in which a sentence may
fail to be true; if there are also distinct designated
values, they will represent different ways in which
a sentence may succeed in being true. Whether or
not a complex sentence is true will then depend,
not just on whether its constituents are true or not,
that is, on whether they have designated or unde­
signated values, but on the different ways in which
they succeed in being or fail to be true, in other
words, on the specific values that they have. It will
remain that, to know the meaning of any sentence
in the weaker sense, that is, to grasp its content
when it stands on its own, it is necessary to know
only the condition for it to have some designated
value, the condition, namely, for it to be true; if we
want to know the meaning of the sentence only in
this weaker sense, we shall not need to know the
conditions for it to have specific undesignated
values or specific designated ones. Now our objec­
tor's claim is that, in order to have a realistic inter­
pretation of a class of sentences, all that need be
assumed is that to know the meaning of a sentence
in the weaker sense, to know its content, is to know
the condition for it to be true: the details of the
mechanism by which this condition is determined
in accordance with the way the sentence is put
together out of atomic sentences are of no meta­
physical importance.
The second prong of this objection is a protest
against the assumption that I have hitherto made,
that realism demands an unqualified assent to the
principle of bivalence. A formulation of the prin­
ciple invokes not only the concept of truth but also
that of falsity; and, it is objected, while the concept
of truth usually has a fairly natural application to
the statements of any given class, that of falsity
depends for its application on much more ad hoc
conventions. In most cases that I have here dis­
cussed, in fact in all save that of subjunctive con­
ditionals, I equated the falsity of a statement with
the truth of its negation, that is, of what looks at
first sight like its negation. The reductive thesis
then led to the conclusion that not every statement \nneed be either true or false. But, the objector says,
this same conclusion could have been expressed
less dramatically by saying that what looked like
the negation was not the real negation; and, if we so
expressed it, we should have no reason for claiming
any departure from realism. Since whether or not
someone is a realist cannot depend on the partly
arbitrary question how he chooses to apply the
word 'false', it follows that not every repudiation
of the principle of bivalence is incompatible with
realism: we have to distinguish those grounds for
rejecting bivalence which are compatible with real­
ism from those which are genuinely incompatible
with it. One type of violation of bivalence that
would be perfectly compatible with realism would
occur if we adopted a many-valued semantics, of
the kind which the first part of the objection main­
tained to be consistent with realism, but gave the
name 'falsity' to just one out of several undesign­
ated values. A motive for doing so might be to
enable us to identify some unary sentential opera­
tor as a negation operator, one that converted every
true sentence into a false one and every false sen­
tence into a true one. In any case, the objector may
add, it is foolish to attach much importance, when
treating of sentences of natural language, to the
principle that a sentence is false just in case its
negation is true, or, at least, to treat it as a guide
to when a sentence should be called 'false'. The
reason is that we do not, in natural language, have a
sentential negation operator; we cannot, therefore,
be guided mechanically by syntactic form in decid­
ing what is the negation of any sentence, but have
to reflect. The principle connecting falsity and
negation can serve only to guide us what to take
the negation of some sentence to be, once we have
already decided when to call it 'false': it cannot
serve the converse purpose.
This two-pronged objection expresses opinions
that I once held. I used to think that one could
classify semantic theories involving departures
from the principle of bivalence into those which
did and those which did not entail a rejection of
realism. I no longer think that this can be done by
appeal just to the form of the semantic theory: any
modification of the principle of bivalence, or, more
generally, of the standard two-valued semantics,
involves potentially a rejection of some realistic
view. Anti-realism, which, as we have seen, can
assume a wide variety of forms, is, as such, a
negative doctrine: it is correlative to a correspond­
ing species of realism. Where we are disposed to
interpret sentences of a certain range in accordance
Realism
with a two-valued semantics, any divergent way of
understanding them will appear to us an anti-real­
ist doctrine; where we have no such inclination,
the observation that some departure from the
two-valued semantics is called for will not seem
anti-realist in character, but will appear merely to
be a comment on the underlying semantic mechan­
ism of those sentences. There need be no differ­
ence, however, in the form of the semantic theory
proposed in each case: the difference may lie solely
in our having had, in the one case but not in the
other, a disposition to treat those sentences at their
face-value, as it were, that is, to apply to them the
simplest form of semantic theory, the two-valued
one. Whenever some non-classical semantics or
some non-truth-conditional meaning-theory is
proposed, there is a possible form of realism to
which the proposal stands in opposition, which
would be embodied in a truth-conditional mean­
ing-theory based on a two-valued semantics. In
some cases, this possible realistic view would lack
all plausibility; in others, it may be merely out of
fashion; and in others again, it may be a live alter­
native. It will depend on which of these states of
affairs obtains whether the proposal strikes us as
anti-realist in character: but the question is external
to the form of meaning-theory that has been
proposed.
Admittedly, we need to reflect in order to decide
what is the negation of a sentence of a given form:
for this reason, to equate the falsity of a sentence
with the truth of its negation is not to appeal to a
mere syntactic criterion, but, rather, to what we
intuitively regard as the condition for the sentence
to be false, since the principle that the negation of a
statement is true if and only if the statement is false
is what guides us in deciding what to recognize as
being the negation of a given statement. But, for
that very reason, an appeal to the concept of nega­
tion, as applied to sentences of natural language, is
an appeal to our intuitive conception of the condi­
tions under which they are rightly said to be false.
Hence, if some reductive thesis has the conse­
quence that some sentence need not be either true
or false, when its falsity is equated with the truth of
what is ordinarily taken to be its negation, that
result does not merely reflect an arbitrary decision
to apply the word "false" to that sentence in a
particular way; rather, it undermines a realistic
interpretation which we are unreflectively disposed
to adopt for that and similar sentences. In any case,
the fact that natural language does not possess a
sentential negation operator ought not to be \nMichael Dummett
overstressed. Natural language does possess a regu­
lar means for negating a predicate, a means which
breaks down principally in the presence of modal
auxiliaries like 'must' and 'may'. Reflection is
needed to decide what is the negation of a quanti­
fied sentence: but, when we have what is appar­
ently a singular term as the grammatical subject,
there is normally no difficulty in saying what would
ordinarily be taken as the negation of that sentence,
namely the result of negating the predicate. If we
accept some reductive thesis for a class of state­
ments that yields an objectivist semantics for those
statements, we could indeed propose to use the
word 'false' so that a statement was false just in
case it was not true, thus saving the principle of
bivalence at the cost of divorcing the concept of
falsity from that of the truth of what would ordin­
arily be taken as the negation of the statement.
Contrary to what the objector maintains, however,
such a proposal would not enable us to preserve a
realistic interpretation of statements of that class. If
what appears to be the negation of a singular state­
ment is declared not to be its real negation, this can
be explained in either of two ways: either what was
apparently a singular term is not genuinely one,
and then we must abandon a semantic account
which involves assigning a reference to that expres­
sion; or the operator which apparently negated the
predicate does not function in an ordinary two­
valued manner. In either case, although we have
formally preserved the principle of bivalence, we
shall have had in some way to diverge from the
two-valued semantics; and we shall thus have aban­
doned a purely realistic interpretation of state­
ments of the given class. We shall, in particular,
have opened the way for the introduction of a
'genuine' negation operator which carries a sen­
tence in the given class into one not in that class,
i. e. one under which the given class is not closed;
and it was integral to the realistic account of state­
ments of that class to suppose it closed under
negation.
The distinction between any form of objectivist
semantics and a non-objectivist semantics is,
indeed, the most important one: an adherent of a
non-objectivist semantics could not count as a real­
ist from any perspective, whereas an adherent of
an objectivist semantics is an anti-realist only to the
extent that a straightforward two-valued semantics
holds any attraction. Consider someone who
believes that there is no one intended model for
set theory, so that the central notion for a semantics
for set-theoretical statements is not that of simply
being true, but that of being true in a model
belonging to some class K; a set-theoretical state­
ment will be absolutely true only if it is true in all
models belonging to K, so that there will be some
set-theoretical statements that are neither abso­
lutely true nor absolutely false. The sentential
operators and quantifiers are to be interpreted in
the two-valued manner relatively to each model.
Compared with the intuitionists' account of math­
ematical statements, a proponent of such a view is
very little removed from an out-and-out Platonist;
for him, each set-theoretical statement is determin­
ately either true or false in each particular model,
independently of our knowledge. There is, how­
ever, nothing to distinguish this conception for­
mally from that of a neutralist about the future,
who thinks that there is no one actual future course
of events, but is prepared to treat the sentential
operators and quantifiers occurring in a future­
tense statement as to be interpreted in a two-valued
manner relatively to each possible future course of
events. In both cases, we shall have a classical logic
for set-theoretical statements and for future-tense
statements respectively, since, in each case, the
semantic values which a sentence may assume
form a Boolean algebra, although not the two-ele­
ment one: in both cases, therefore, the law of
excluded middle will hold, although not the prin­
ciple of bivalence as stated in terms of absolute
truth and absolute falsity. We shall certainly regard
the neutralist as an anti-realist, since the concep­
tion under which every statement about the future
already has a determinate truth-value exerts a
strong attraction. The idea that there is some one
intended model of set theory has less power; but
the view proposed is, nevertheless, an anti-realist
one when contrasted with a wholly realistic view of
set theory, one according to which every set-theor­
etical statement is absolutely true or absolutely
false, because, in making such statements, we
have in mind some one particular abstract struc­
ture, even though we have not fully succeeded in
characterizing it, and, perhaps, cannot ever do so.
Whenever we allow that the truth-condition of a
complex sentence depends on more than the con­
ditions for its constituent sentences to be true or
not to be true, we create the possibility for a dis­
agreement between a realistic and a non-realistic
interpretation. We shall have a realistic interpreta­
tion whenever it is held that the mechanism
whereby the truth-condition of a sentence is deter­
mined could be explained by means of the two­
valued semantics, with, perhaps, some slight \nadjustment of the syntactic analysis of the sentence.
It was already remarked that a tense logic, when not
founded upon any neutralist view of the future or
any anti-realist view of the past, does not involve
any divergence from realism, even though it
requires a non-two-valued semantics, namely a
semantics in terms of relativized truth-values, of a
sentence's being true or false at each particular
time. This, we saw, was because the tense logic
could be viewed as a variation upon a two-valued
semantics for a language in which temporal indic­
ators appeared as arguments of predicates. What
makes this possible is that we should treat the
temporal indicators in such a language as genuinely
having reference: so the tense logic does not appear
to involve any genuine departure from realism.
Now, formally speaking, a semantics for a language
containing modal operators appears very similar:
we again employ a notion of relativized truth­
values, relativized in this case to possible worlds
rather than to times. When this kind of semantics
was first introduced, therefore, it might have
seemed natural to say that it did not involve any
departure from realism either. In line with the
objection we are considering, it might have been
claimed that this semantics embodied a divergence
from two-valued semantics with no metaphysical
implications: obviously, the truth-condition of a
modal statement could not depend solely on the
conditions for its constituent subsentences simply
to be true; but that would not affect the fact that we
were regarding their meanings as determined by
their truth-conditions, with respect to a notion of
truth under which each was determinately either
true or false. But, in saying this, we should have
been wrong. A semantics of possible worlds brings
with it the possibility of a new form of realism,
concerning possible worlds, as advocated, for
example, by David Lewis. To be a realist about
possible worlds, to believe that there really are such
things as possible worlds, is, as Lewis says, to treat
the adverb 'actually' as indexical, as indicating
position in modal space in the way that 'here'
indicates position in physical space. And to do
this is to regard modal logic as strictly comparable
with tense logic. To treat modal statements in
terms of a semantics of possible worlds is, on this
view, no more than a variation on a treatment of
them by means of a two-valued semantics for a
language in which each predicate has an additional
argument-place for a possible world; in such a
language, a variable ranging over possible worlds
would need to be explained in the same way as any
Realism
other sort of individual variable, namely by ulti­
mate appeal to the notion of reference to a possible
world. To reject realism about possible worlds is, in
effect, to deny that a straightforward two-valued
semantic theory could be given for such a language:
to speak of possible worlds is only afafon de parler,
and there is no such thing as reference to a poss­
ible world. To know whether or not we have a
realistic interpretation of some class of statements,
it is necessary to look, not merely at the formal
structure of the semantic theory, but at the entire
meaning-theory constructed on it as foundation.
Even then, we shall not classify a given interpreta­
tion as anti-realistic unless there is some form of
realism with which to contrast it. The mere possib­
ility of a view compared to which a given inter­
pretation would be anti-realistic supplies no
guarantee that such a view will ever actually be
proposed: probably, when the semantics of possible
worlds was first introduced, it appeared unthink­
able that anyone would adopt a realistic view of
possible worlds. But we can be secure that our
interpretation of some class of statements will
never appear an anti-realistic one, when compared
with some other view, only if that interpretation
embodies a completely unmodified two-valued
semantic theory.
What is sound about the objection is that it is not
the mere adherence to or rejection of the principle
of bivalence that marks the difference between a
realistic and an anti-realistic interpretation.
Impressed by the fact that many philosophical
views which involved rejecting some form of real­
ism turned on, or at least naturally led to, a repu­
diation of bivalence, I have been guilty in the past
of speaking as though what characterizes anti-real­
ism is the rejection of bivalence, so that, provided
one accepts bivalence, one is a realist. The price of
adopting this excessively simple criterion was to be
forced to distinguish between metaphysically sig­
nificant and metaphysically insignificant grounds
for rejecting bivalence: for instance, it did not
appear that one who, like Frege and Strawson,
held that a singular statement containing an
empty proper name was neither true nor false
need be any less of a realist than one who, like
Russell, declared that it was false, on the ground
that the proper name was a disguised definite
description, to be interpreted according to Rus­
sell's theory of descriptions. Another price of
adopting bivalence as the shibboleth for discrimin­
ating realists from anti-realists was the necessity to
admit different senses of 'realism', since some \nMichael Dummett
philosophical debates over certain forms of realism
(for example, the realism concerning universals
which is opposed by nominalism) patently did not
involve any disagreement about bivalence. The
mistake lay in concentrating on only one feature
of the two-valued semantics. There really is noth­
ing to choose between the Russell view and the
Frege-Strawson view of sentences containing
empty proper names in respect of realism. This is
not, however, because the topic is metaphysically
neutral. Both views stand in opposition to a realism
of a Meinongian kind, which would take all proper
names as referring to objects, whether existent or
non-existent, and would construe statements of the
form 'a is P as meaning 'a exists and is P. Russell's
theory departs from Meinong's idea that reference
can be ascribed to every proper name by declaring
that ordinary proper names are not, as they appear,
genuine singular terms, and, being definite
descriptions, are not to be explained in terms of
the notion of reference at all. The Frege-Strawson
account departs from it by invoking the distinction
between sense and reference to explain how a genu­
ine singular term may lack a reference, and by
repudiating bivalence. We do not see either theory
as anti-realist, because we no longer take Meinon­
gian realism seriously, and our attention is concen­
trated upon the disagreement between Russell on
the one hand and Frege and Strawson on the other.
But it is a mistake to say that the dispute has
nothing to do with any question concerning real­
ism; and still more of a mistake to say that we can
recognize this to be so from some formal character­
istics of the competing views.
We have, up to now, been considering realism
solely as a semantic doctrine, a doctrine about the
sort of thing that makes our statements true when
they are true: the fundamental thesis of realism, so
regarded, is that we really do succeed in referring
to external objects, existing independently of our
knowledge of them, and that the statements we
make about them carry a meaning of such a kind
that they are rendered true or false by an objective
reality the constitution of which is, again, independ­
ent of our knowledge. Very often, however, real­
ism, or, to speak more exactly, naive realism, is
taken as also having an epistemological component:
it is considered to be part of a naive realist view that
we have a direct acquaintance with the external
objects about which we speak. It is readily under­
standable how this epistemological thesis comes to
be associated with naive realism. Naive realism, as
I characterized it above, embodies an irreducibility
thesis, to the effect that there can be no informative
answer to the question what, in general, makes a
statement of the given class true, when it is true.
We certainly cannot expect that, for any statement
or class of statements we choose to consider, there
will be an informative answer to this question. But,
when it is possible only to give a trivial answer to
the question, there must be a non-trivial answer to
the further question in what our knowledge of the
condition for such a statement to be true consists. If
this question, too, admitted only a trivial answer,
then we should have no account of the meanings of
such statements, that is, no account of what a
speaker knows when he understands statements of
this class; and this would be absurd, because a
knowledge that we are able to acquire must be a
knowledge of which we can give an account. Now
realism is primarily a semantic doctrine; but, as we
have seen, this should not be interpreted as mean­
ing that a realistic interpretation of some class of
statements consists simply in the adoption of a
certain semantic theory, in the sense in which
logicians speak of a semantic theory. A semantic
theory in this sense gives an outline sketch of the
manner in which a sentence is determined as true,
when it is true, in accordance with its composition;
it is plausible only in so far as it is possible to
construct, on the semantic theory as base, a com­
plete theory of meaning. A theory of meaning must
do much more than simply analyse the way in
which a sentence is determined as true, when it is
true, in accordance with its composition: it has,
among other things, to say what a speaker knows
when he understands an expression of the lan­
guage, and to explain how the speaker's under­
standing of an expression determines it as having
whatever semantic value it has, its semantic value
being that whereby it contributes to determining
the truth or otherwise of any sentence in which it
occurs. Hence, in so far as the meaning-theory
takes a truth-conditional form, in so far as it
equates the understanding of a sentence with a
knowledge of the condition that must obtain for
the sentence to be true, it has to explain in what a
speaker's knowledge of that condition consists.
When it is possible to give a non-trivial answer to
the question in virtue of what a sentence of a
certain form is true, if it is true, we have already
an explanation of what a speaker must know in
knowing the condition for a sentence of that form
to be true. But, when no non-trivial answer can be
given, a further explanation must be supplied by
the meaning-theory. The simplest way in which \nthe meaning-theory can do this will consist in attri­
buting to the speaker a capacity, in favourable
circumstances, to recognize the condition as
obtaining or not obtaining. Just because we cannot
state informatively what will render the sentence
true, when it is true, the faculty of recognition thus
attributed to the speaker will be a faculty of unmed­
iated recognition; neither the speaker nor the
meaning-theorist can say whereby he recognizes
the condition as obtaining. That which renders
the sentence true is the very thing of which we are
directly aware when we recognize it as being true.
Now the claim that we possess such a faculty for
direct recognition of a condition of a certain kind is
an epistemological one; and we see, from this, why
epistemology enters into the matter. Realism and
anti-realism are metaphysical doctrines; and it has
been an implicit contention of the present analysis
of the concept of realism that metaphysical ques­
tions, at least ones of this type, are at root questions
belonging to the theory of meaning. It is imposs­
ible, however, to keep the theory of meaning ster­
ilized from all epistemological considerations,
because meaning is, ultimately, a matter of know­
ledge. The meaning of an expression is what a
speaker must know if he is to be said to understand
that expression; the meaning-theory for a language
displays what anyone must know if he is to be said
to know, or to be able to speak, that language. For
this reason, the purely semantic explanation pre­
viously given of what naive realism consists in does
not completely tally with the way in which the term
'naive realism' has traditionally been used: it stated
only part of what has usually been taken as involved
in being a naive realist. For example, a realistic
interpretation of statements about the past involves
accepting the principle of bivalence as applied to
them: they are determinately true or false, inde­
pendently of whether we know their truth-values
or, in a particular case, have any means of knowing.
Anyone who takes this view - and very few philo­
sophers have dared to contradict it - is unlikely to
admit any reductive thesis for statements about the
past, considered as a class; there will be no non­
trivial answer to the question what, in general,
renders a past-tense statement true if it is true. By
our original criterion, therefore, the standard view
of statements about the past should count as a
naively realistic one. It would usually be thought,
however, that more was required for naive realism
about the past: namely, a view to the effect that we
are directly acquainted with past states of affairs,
that memory affords us direct contact with them.
Realism
It is not altogether easy to see what this addi­
tional epistemological component of naive realism,
as ordinarily understood, amounts to. It might be
said that our knowledge of the past in memory is
indeed direct, in the sense that a report of memory
is not ordinarily the conclusion of an inference: I do
not conclude to the truth of the past-tense state­
ment because that is the most plausible explanation
of the memory-experience that I have. On occa­
sion, indeed, something like this may happen. I may
have the impression that I remember a certain
event, then feel uncertain that I have not made a
mistake of memory, and finally conclude that
I must have remembered correctly, on the ground,
say, that I have hardly ever made mistakes of that
particular kind, or that I should be unlikely to have
thought of such a curious event had I not actually
witnessed it. But a case of this kind must necessa­
rily be exceptional: we could not suppose ourselves
to know enough about the past to make any such
inferences if we did not take most of our memories
to be correct; in fact, if all memory is called in
question, we are left without any knowledge of
the past at all. The claim that, in memory, we are
in direct contact with the past event must, how­
ever, mean more than just that reports of memory
are not, in general, based on inference, since the
same may be said of knowledge based on the testi­
mony of others. On many occasions, I may doubt
whether someone else is to be trusted in what he
asserts; he does not know enough about the subject,
he has proved unreliable in the past, he is not
always veracious. On other occasions, I may at
first entertain such doubts, and then set them at
rest by some particular consideration: the indi­
vidual in question is unlikely to lie to me, and,
although he has made mistakes, he has always
been right on questions of this specific kind. In
such a case, I may be said to conclude to the truth
of what he says on the basis of an inductive infer­
ence. But the normal case is not of that kind: for, if
I call in doubt the truth of everything for which
I have only the authority of others, I should simply
know far too little about the world to be able to
judge, on an inductive basis, of the reliability of any
but a very few of the things that are said to me. It is
our normal practice to accept other people's asser­
tions, just as it is our normal practice to take what
we remember to have happened as having hap­
pened. Just as it is only when we have a special
reason for mistrusting our own memories that we
look for further grounds for supposing things to
have been as we remember them, so it is only when \nMichael Dummett
we have a special reason for doubting the truth of
what someone else says that we look for further
grounds for accepting it. This is not due to laziness,
or because 'life is too short': without its being
ordinary practice to take what another asserts as
true, we could not have a language; part of what a
child has to learn in learning language is to accept
and act on what other people say. Lying subverts
the institution of language: if most members of a
society started to lie most of the time, they would
cease to be able to communicate. For the same
reason, it is a priori impossible that most assertions
should be mistaken.
For present purposes, the point is that 'direct
knowledge', as the naive realist speaks of it, must
mean more than 'knowledge not arrived at as the
conclusion of an inference'. When I accept a state­
ment on the testimony of another, I am not norm­
ally concluding to its truth on the strength of an
inference: nevertheless, that is the prime case of
knowing something indirectly, of knowing it 'not of
my own knowledge', as the lawyers say. What the
naive realist appears to mean in speaking of direct
knowledge is that a Cartesian doubt is excluded. If
my knowledge of the past, in memory, is the out­
come of a direct contact that I now make with the
past event, then it must be senseless to suppose that I
should have this memory even though the past
event did not occur. Thus, for the naive realist,
the connection between that which renders a state­
ment true and our knowledge of its truth is an
intimate one, just as it is for the anti-realist: from
what it is like to know it to be true, we see just what
it is for it to be true. Only, they draw opposite
conclusions. The anti-realist draws the conclusion
that the statement cannot be true unless we know it
to be true, at least indirectly, or unless we have the
means to arrive at such knowledge, or at least
unless there exists that which, if we were aware of
it, would yield such knowledge. The naive realist
believes that the statement must be determinately
true or false, regardless of whether we are able, in
the particular case, to perceive that which renders
it true or false; but it is our capacity, in favourable
circumstances, to perceive directly that which
renders true or false other statements of the same
type that constitutes our understanding of what it
is for the given statement to be true or to be false.
The naive realist faces a twofold difficulty. He
has, first, a problem to explain how we ever come to
make a mistake in making a judgement on the
favoured basis: if memory is a direct contact with
past events, how can a mistake of memory occur?
Secondly, he has a problem about the connection
between our mode of coming to know the truth of a
statement and the consequences we take it to have:
if memory is a direct contact with a past event,
which must, therefore, still exist in some manner
if I am to be able now to apprehend it, how can
I know that that event has not changed somewhat
since it originally occurred? The question is, of
course, senseless: but it is difficult to argue it to
be senseless without, at the same time, rendering
senseless the notion of a direct contact with past
events.
A realist who is not, in my sense, a sophisticated
realist, that is, who does not accept any reductive
thesis for statements of the given class, but who
also does not accept the epistemological component
of naive realism, is in an intermediate position: we
might call him a semi-naive realist. The semi-naive
realist has difficulties of his own. He has to explain
in what our knowledge of the condition for a state­
ment of the given class to be true consists; he
cannot, for this purpose, invoke even our most
straightforward means of knowing such statements
to be true in the way that the anti-realist and the
naive realist do; at least, he cannot assign it such a
leading role. He usually has recourse to some type
of analogy; we are supposed to transfer to state­
ments of the given class some feature of our under­
standing of some more primitive class of
statements, where our understanding of these
more primitive statements can be explained in a
naive realist fashion. But I do not wish to go further
into the debate between the protagonists of the
different metaphysical (or metaphysico-epistemo­
logical) positions. My sole aim has been to char­
acterize them; that is, to explain the concept of
realism as applying to philosophical views which
may be adopted on a wide variety of different
questions.
Cartesian doubt has two features. It is doubt
entertained in the teeth of the best possible evid­
ence, unimpaired by any contrary evidence; and it
is all-encompassing. Descartes wished to entertain
every doubt that is not by its nature senseless; and he
wished to doubt simultaneously every proposition
which, taken by itself, it would be possible to
doubt. The naive realist's response is to declare
the doubt senseless; even Cartesian doubt is then
excluded. It is this which gives its special character
to his conception of immediate knowledge, know­
ledge by direct apprehension of that which renders
the proposition true. Without a grasp of this curi­
ous idea, we cannot understand much that is to be \nfound in empiricist epistemology. Consider, for
instance, Locke's doctrine of secondary qualities.
Locke says, of colours, that they 'are nothing in the
objects themselves but powers to produce various
sensations in us'. Aycr, in his The Central Questions
~(Philosophy, 1 attributes to Locke the view that
'colour is nothing in the object itself, without
adding the phrase 'but powers. .. '. At first sight,
this is as unwarranted as if someone, accused of
being nothing but a social climber, should say, 'He
said that I was nothing': we should naturally con­
strue Locke as saying that colours, in the objects,
are only powers to produce sensations, and, in a
later passage, he does precisely so express himself.
Ayer is not misrepresenting Locke, howcver; for
Locke also says, in yet another passage, that colours
'are not really in' the bodies. Now how does it come
about that Locke makes this seemingly unjustifi­
able transition from his own doctrine? If, in the
objects, colours are powers, then the colours are
presumably in the objects, though, indeed, only as
powers: why, then, does Locke contradict himself
by saying that the colours are not in the objects? It
seems that Locke is offering an analysis of the
concept of a colour, considered, at least, as a prop­
erty of an opaque surface, as being a disposition of a
particular type, namely a power: what morc is
added to this analysis by remarking that the colours
are not in the objects? Are the powers, then, not in
the objccts? It is, after all, the body that has the
power: the power is not floating independently in
space, at a location where the body happens to be;
when the body moves, the power moves with it, for
the power, on Locke's formulation, is a power of the
body to produce sensations in us. If, then, the
colour is a power, and the power is in the body,
what can possibly be meant by saying that the
colour is not in the body?
Not surprisingly, it is easy to feel totally baffled
by this notion of Locke's that colours, and other
secondary qualities, are not in the physical objects.
It cannot be understood unless we bear in mind the
epistemological component of naive realism, the
notion of direct contact with, or immediate aware­
ness of, the object and its properties. Locke wishes
to depart from naive realism, so far as secondary
qualities are concerned: but he is attracted to it. A
naive realist about the physical world supposes
that, in perception, we are in direct contact with
physical objects: we know them as they really are.
When, under normal conditions, I perceive an
object, a Cartesian doubt is impossible, according
to the naive realist: it would be senseless, given my
Realism
perceptual state, to suppose that the object was not
present or was otherwise than I perceive it to be;
mistakes occur only because perception does not
always take place under normal conditions. My
ability to judge the truth of material-object state­
ments on the basis of observation constitutes, for
the naive realist, my knowledge of what has to be
the case for those statements to be true: so the very
meaning of an ascription of perceptible qualities to
an object is given by reference to the process of
perceptual recognition of those qualities, and can
only be so given. Now a disposition of any kind is
not a quality of which we can be directly aware in
such a way; a disposition is something that is man­
ifested on some occasions and not on others, and
may be variously manifested in differing circum­
stances. For instance, our concept of colour, as a
property of an opaque surface, is not to be
explained, as the naive realist is forced to suppose,
solely in terms of the appearance of a surface 'under
normal conditions'; it is not irrelevant to that con­
cept that there is a connection between the colour
of a surface and its appearance under various
abnormal conditions, under a coloured light,
under excessive or inadequate illumination, or
from too far away to allow resolution into its dif­
ferently coloured regions. Now, as Locke under­
stands the word 'colour', a colour is a disposition,
and is really in the object. But, as a naive realist
understands the word 'colour', a colour cannot be a
disposition, for then perception, under normal
conditions, would not be an immediate awareness
of the object as it really is: so, as the naive realist
understands 'colour', Locke's view entails that
objects do not have colours. It is the conflation of
these two conceptions of what the word 'colour'
means that produces Locke's contradictory
remarks.
The naive realist's notion of immediate aware­
ness, consisting in a direct contact between the
knowing subject and the object of his knowledge,
is probably in all cases incoherent: it is certainly
extremely difficult to formulate it intelligibly. The
proper response to Cartesian doubt is to deny, not
the meaningfulness of each individual expression
of doubt, but the possibility of professing simultan­
eously every doubt which, taken by itself, is
meaningful, if neurotic: it is the generality of Car­
tesian doubt, not its contempt for evidence, which
is the point at which it should be attacked. Bertrand
Russell maintained that we could not know for
certain that the world was not created two minutes
ago, complete with all our apparent memories and \nMichael Dummett
with all the apparent traces of past events. Most
philosophers do not trouble themselves with a
Cartesian doubt of this kind; it is too absurd to
entertain seriously, but they tacitly agree with Rus­
sell that, if someone succumbed to it, philosophy
could do nothing to dispel it. Many years ago,
I heard Professor Anscombe argue that what
makes such thoroughgoing Cartesian doubt absurd
is that, if we came across a society of people in
whose language there was an inflexion of the verb
such that we could establish no correlation between
the sentences containing verbs in this inflexion to
which they assented and what had previously hap­
pened, we could not intelligibly suppose that this
inflexion represented their past tense, but that their
memories were hopelessly astray. This argument
was being advanced from a Wittgensteinian stand­
point, but it agrees equally with that of Quine and
many others; and it is surely fundamentally correct.
Naive realism, as traditionally understood, was a
doctrine advanced by philosophers to whom epi­
stemological considerations were of paramount
Note
A. J. Ayer, The Central Questions of Philosophy
(London: Weidenfeld and Nicholson, 1973).
importance, and one of whose primary objectives
was to defeat scepticism; being an incoherent doc­
trine, it failed as a weapon in this particular battle,
and this led to too easy a victory for idealism. In
more recent philosophy, it has been realism, in a
semi-naive or sophisticated form, which has, for
the most part, attained too easy a victory. Many of
the problems expressible as disputes for and against
one or another species of realism are still Ii ve issues,
or ought to be. In tackling them, we need a clear
formulation of what realism consists in, and a
clear view also of the various forms which it can
take, and the various forms which a denial of real­
ism can take. In most of these disputes, naive
realism, as traditionally conceived with its epi­
stemological component, is no longer a serious
contender. This very fact may, but ought not to
be allowed to, obscure the importance of the dis­
tinction between the sophisticated realist and what,
in the later part of this essay, I have been calling the
semi-naive realist; above all, it should not lead us to
mistake the sophisticated realist for the anti-realist. \n44
Hilary Putnam
Lecture I: Is There Still Anything to Say
about Reality and Truth?
The man on the street, Eddington reminded us,
visualizes a table as 'solid' - that is, as most(y solid
matter. But physics has discovered that the table is
mostly empty space: that the distance between the
particles is immense in relation to the radius of the
electron or the nucleus of one of the atoms of which
the table consists. One reaction to this state of
affairs, the reaction of Wilfrid Sellars, l is to deny
that there are tables at all as we ordinarily conceive
them (although he chooses an ice cube rather than a
table as his example). The commonsense concep­
tion of ordinary middle-sized material objects such
as tables and ice cubes (the 'manifest image') is
simply false in Sellars's view (although not without
at least some cognitive value - there are real objects
that the 'tables' and 'ice cubes' of the manifest
image 'picture', according to Sellars, even if these
real objects are not the layman's tables and ice
cubes). I don't agree with this view of Sellars's,
but I hope he will forgive me if I use it, or the
phenomenon of its appearance on the philosophical
scene, to highlight certain features of the philo­
sophical debate about 'realism'.
First of all, this view illustrates the fact that
Realism with a capital 'R' doesn't always deliver
Originally published in The Many Faces of Realism
(1987), pp. 3-40, 87-8. Reprinted by permission of
Open Court, a division of Carus Publishing.
what the innocent expect of it. If there is any appeal
of Realism which is wholly legitimate, it is the
appeal to the commonsense feeling that of course
there are tables and chairs, and any philosophy that
tell us that there really aren't - that there are really
only sense data, or only 'texts', or whatever, is more
than slightly crazy. In appealing to this common­
sense feeling, Realism reminds me of the Seducer
in the old-fashioned melodrama. In the melo­
dramas of the 1890s the Seducer always promised
various things to the Innocent Maiden which he
failed to deliver when the time came. In this case
the Realist (the evil Seducer) promises common
sense (the Innocent Maiden) that he will rescue
her from her enemies (Idealists, Kantians and
Neo-Kantians, Pragmatists, and the fearsome
self-described 'Irrealist' Nelson Goodman) who
(the Realist says) want to deprive her of her good
old ice cubes and chairs. Faced with this dreadful
prospect, the fair Maiden naturally opts for the
company of the commonsensical Realist. But
when they have traveled together for a little
while, the 'Scientific Realist' breaks the news that
what the Maiden is going to get isn't her ice cubes
and tables and chairs. In fact, all there really is - the
Scientific Realist tells her over breakfast - is what
'finished science' will say there is - whatever that
may be. She is left with a promissory note for She
Knows Not What, and the assurance that even if
there aren't tables and chairs, still there are some
Dinge an sich that her 'manifest image' (or her 'folk
physics', as some Scientific Realists put it) 'pic­
ture'. Some will say that the lady has been had. \nHilary Putnam
Thus, it is clear that the name 'Realism' can be
claimed by or given to at least two very different
philosophical attitudes (and, in fact, to many). The
philosopher who claims that only scientific objects
'really exist' and that much, if not all, of the com­
monsense world is mere 'projection' claims to be a
'realist', but so does the philosopher who insists
that there really are chairs and ice cubes (and some
of these ice cubes really are pink), and these two
attitudes, these two images of the world, can lead to
and have led to many different programs for philo­
sophy.
Husserl2 traces the first line of thought, the line
that denies that there 'really are' commonsense
objects, back to Galileo, and with good reason.
The present Western world view depends, accord­
ing to Husserl, on a new way of conceiving 'exter­
nal objects' - the way of mathematical physics. An
external thing is conceived of as a congeries of
particles (by atomists) or as some kind of extended
disturbance (in the seventeenth century, a 'vortex',
and later, a collection of 'fields'). Either way, the
table in front of me (or the object that I 'picture as'
a table) is described by 'mathematical formulas', as
Husserl says. And this, he points out, is what above
all came into Western thinking with the Galilean
revolution: the idea of the 'external world' as some­
thing whose true description, whose description 'in
itself, consists of mathematical formulas.
It is important to this way of thinking that cer­
tain familiar properties of the table - its size and
shape and location - are 'real' properties, describ­
able, for example, in the language of Descartes'
analytic geometry. Other properties, however, the
so-called 'secondary' properties, of which color is a
chief example, are not treated as real properties in
the same sense. No 'occurrent' (non-dispositional)
property of that swarm of molecules (or that
space-time region) recognized in mathematical
physics can be said to be what we all along called
its color.
What about dispositional properties? It is often
claimed that color is simply a function of reflect­
ancy, that is, of the disposition of an object (or of
the surface of an object) to selectively absorb cer­
tain wavelengths of incident light and reflect
others. But this doesn't really do much for the
reality of colors. Not only has recent research
shown that this account is much too simple
(because changes of reflectancy across edges turn
out to play an important role in determining the
colors we see), but reflectancy itself does not have
one uniform physical explanation. A red star and a
red apple and a reddish glass of colored water are
red for quite different physical reasons. In fact,
there may well be an infinite number of different
physical conditions which could result in the dis­
position to reflect (or emit) red light and absorb
light of other wavelengths. A dispositional prop­
erty whose underlying non-dispositional 'explana­
tion' is so very non-uniform is simply incapable of
being represented as a mathematical function of the
dynamical variables. And these - the dynamical
variables - are the parameters that this way of
thinking treats as the 'characteristics' of 'external'
objects.
Another problem3 is that hues turn out to be
much more subjective than we thought. In fact,
any shade on the color chart in the green part of
the spectrum will be classed as 'standard green' by
some subject - even if it lies at the extreme 'yellow­
green' end or the extreme 'blue-green' end.
In sum, no 'characteristic' recognized by this
way of thinking - no 'well-behaved function of
the dynamical variables' - corresponds to such a
familiar property of objects as red or green. The idea
that there is a property all red objects have in
common - the same in all cases - and another
property all green objects have in common - the
same in all cases - is a kind of illusion, on the view
we have come more and more to take for granted
since the age of Descartes and Locke.
However, Locke and Descartes did give us a
sophisticated substitute for our pre-scientific
notion of color; a substitute that has, perhaps,
come to seem mere 'post-scientific common
sense' to most people. This substitute involves
the idea of a sense datum (except that, in the
seventeenth-and eighteenth-century vocabulary,
sense data were referred to as 'ideas' or 'impres­
sions'). The red sweater I see is not red in the way
I thought it was (there is no 'physical magnitude'
which is its redness), but it does have a disposition
(a Power, in the seventeenth-and eighteenth-cen­
tury idiom) to affect me in a certain way - to cause
me to have sense data. And these, the sense data, do
truly have a simple, uniform, non-dispositional
sort of 'redness'.
This is the famous picture, the dualistic picture
of the physical world and its primary qualities, on
the one hand, and the mind and its sense data, on
the other, that philosophers have been wrangling
over since the time of Galileo, as Husserl says. And
it is Husserl's idea - as it was the idea of William
James, who influenced Husserl-that this picture is
disastrous. \nBut why should we regard it as disastrous? It was
once shocking, to be sure, but as I have already
said, it is by now widely accepted as 'post-scientific
common sense'. What is real~y wrong with this
picture?
For one thing, solidity is in much the same boat
as color. If objects do not have color as they
'naively' seem to, no more do they have solidity as
they 'naively' seem to. 4 It is this that leads Sellars
to say that such commonsense objects as ice cubes
do not really exist at all. What is our conception of a
typical commonsense object if not of something
solid (or liquid) which exhibits certain colors?
What there really are, in Sellars's scientific meta­
physics, are objects of mathematical physics, on the
one hand, and 'raw feels', on the other. This is
precisely the picture I have just described as 'dis­
astrous'; it is the picture that denies precisely the
common man's kind of realism, his realism about
tables and chairs.
The reply to me (the reply a philosopher who
accepts the post-Galilean picture will make) is
obvious: 'You are just nostalgic for an older and
simpler world. This picture works; our acceptance
of it is an "inference to the best explanation". We
cannot regard it as an objection to a view that it
does not preserve everything that laymen once
falsely believed. '
If it is an inference to the best explanation, it is a
strange one, however. How does the familiar expla­
nation of what happens when I 'see something red'
go? The light strikes the object (say, a sweater), and
is reflected to my eye. There is an image on the
retina (Berkeley knew about images on the retina,
and so did Descartes, even if the wave aspect of
light was not well understood until much later).
There are resultant nerve impulses (Descartes
knew there was some kind of transmission along
the nerves, even if he was wrong about its nature -
and it is not clear we know its nature either, since
there is again debate about the significance of
chemical, as opposed to electrical, transmissions
from neuron to neuron. ) There are events in the
brain, some of which we understand thanks to the
work of Hubel and Wiesel, David Marr, and
others. And then - this is the mysterious part -
there is somehow a 'sense datum' or a 'raw feel'.
This is an explanation?
An 'explanation' that involves connections of a
kind we do not understand at all ('nomological
danglers', Herbert Feigl called them 5) and con­
cerning which we have not even the sketch of a
theory is an explanation through something more
Pragmatic Realism
obscure than the phenomenon to be explained. As
has been pointed out by thinkers as different from
one another as William James, Husserl, and John
Austin, every single part of the sense datum story is
supposition - theory - and theory of a most pecu­
liar kind. Yet the epistemological role 'sense data'
are supposed to play by traditional philosophy
required them to be what is 'given', to be what we
are absolute~y sure of independently of scientific the­
ory. The kind of scientific realism we have inher­
ited from the seventeenth century has not lost all its
prestige even yet, but it has saddled us with a
disastrous picture of the world. It is high time we
looked for a different picture.
Intrinsic properties: dispositions
I want to suggest that the problem with the 'Objec­
tivist' picture of the world (to use Husserl's term
for this kind of scientific realism) lies deeper than
the postulation of 'sense data'; sense data are, so to
speak, the visible symptoms of a systemic disease,
like the pock marks in the case of smallpox. The
deep systemic root of the disease, I want to suggest,
lies in the notion of an 'intrinsic' property, a prop­
erty something has 'in itself, apart from any con­
tribution made by language or the mind.
This notion, and the correlative notion of a
property that is merely 'appearance', or merely
something we 'project' onto the object, has proved
extremely robust, judging by its appeal to different
kinds of philosophers. In spite of their deep dis­
agreements, all the strains of philosophy that
accepted the seventeenth-century circle of prob­
lems - subjective idealists as well as dualists and
materialists - accepted the distinction, even if they
disagreed over its application. A subjective idealist
would say that there are only sense data (or minds
and sense data, in some versions), and that 'red' is
an intrinsic property of these objects, while persist­
ence (being there even when we don't look) is
something we 'project'; a dualist or a materialist
would say the 'external' objects have persistence as
an intrinsic property, but red is, in their case,
something we 'project'. But all of these philo­
sophers have the distinction. Even Kant, who
expresses serious doubts about it in the first Cri­
tique (to the point of saying that the notion of a
'Ding an sich' may be 'empty'), makes heavy use of
it in the second Critique.
Putting aside the Berkeleyan view (that there
aren't really any external objects at all) as an aber­
rant form of the seventeenth-century view, we may \nHilary Putnam
say that the remaining philosophers all accept the
account of 'redness' and 'solidity' that I have been
describing; these are not 'intrinsic properties' of
the external things we ascribe them to, but rather
(in the case of external things) dispositions to affect
us in certain ways - to produce certain sense data in
us, or, the materialist philosophers would say, to
produce certain sorts of 'states' in our brains and
nervous systems. The idea that these properties are
'in' the things themselves, as intrinsic properties, is
a spontaneous 'projection'.
The Achilles' heel of this story is the notion of a
disposition. To indicate the problems that arise -
they have preoccupied many first-rate philosoph­
ical minds, starting with Charles Peirce's - let me
introduce a technical term (I shall not introduce
much terminology in this lecture, I promise! ). A
disposition that something has to do something
no matter what, I shall call a strict disposition. A
disposition to do something under 'normal condi­
tions', I shall call an 'other things being equal' dis­
position. Perhaps it would be wise to give examples.
The disposition of bodies with non-zero rest
mass to travel at sub-light speeds is a strict disposi­
tion; it is physically impossible for a body with
non-zero rest mass to travel at the speed of light.
Of course, the notion of a 'strict disposition' pre­
supposes the notion of 'physical necessity', as this
example illustrates, but this is a notion I am allow­
ing the 'scientific realist', at least for the sake of
argument. What of the disposition of sugar to dis­
solve in water?
This is not a strict disposition, since sugar which
is placed in water which is already saturated with
sugar (or even with other appropriate chemicals)
will not dissolve. Is the disposition of sugar to
dissolve in chemical~y pure water, then, a strict dis­
position?
'This is also not a strict disposition'; the first
counterexample I shall mention comes from ther­
modynamics. Suppose I drop a sugar cube in water
and the sugar cube dissolves. Consider sugar which
is in water, but in such a way that while the situa­
tion is identical with the situation I just produced
(the sugar is dissolved in the water) with respect to
the position of each particle, and also with respect
to the numerical value of the momentum of each
particle, all the momentum vectors have the exactly
opposite directions from the ones they now have.
This is a famous example: what happens in the
example is that the sugar, instead of staying dis­
solved, simply forms a sugar cube which spontan­
eously leaps out of the water! Since every normal
state (every state in which sugar dissolves) can be
paired with a state in which it 'undissolves', we see
that there are infinitely many physically possible
conditions in which sugar 'undissolves' instead of
staying in solution. Of course, these are all states in
which entropy decreases; but that is not imposs­
ible, only extremely improbable!
Shall we say, then, that sugar has a strict dis­
position to dissolve unless the condition is one in
which an entropy decrease takes place? No, because
if sugar is put in water and there is immediately a
flash freeze, the sugar will not dissolve if the freez­
ing takes place fast enough. .. .
The fact is that what we can say is that under
normal conditions sugar will dissolve if placed in
water. And there is no reason to think that all the
various abnormal conditions (including bizarre
quantum-mechanical states, bizarre local fluctu­
ations in the space-time, etc. ) under which sugar
would not dissolve if placed in water could be
summed up in a closed formula in the language of
fundamental physics.
This is exactly the problem we previously
observed in connection with redness and solidity!
If the 'intrinsic' properties of 'external' things are
the ones that we can represent by formulas in the
language of fundamental physics, by 'suitable func­
tions of the dynamical variables', then solubili~y is
also not an 'intrinsic' property of any external
thing. And, similarly, neither is any 'other things
being equal' disposition. The Powers, to use the
seventeenth-century language, have to be set over
against, and carefully distinguished from, the
properties the things have 'in themselves'.
Intrinsic properties: intentionality
Well, what of it? Why should we not say that
dispositions (or at least 'other things being equal'
dispositions, such as solubility) are also not 'in the
things themselves' but rather something we 'pro­
ject' onto those things? Philosophers who talk this
way rarely if ever stop to say what projection itself is
supposed to be. Where in the scheme does the
ability of the mind to 'project' anything onto any­
thing come in?
Projection is thinking of something as having
properties it does not have, but that we can imagine
(perhaps because something else we are acquainted
with really does have them), without being con­
scious that this is what we are doing. It is thus a
species of thought - thought about something. Does
the familiar 'Objectivist' picture have anything to \ntell us about thought (or, as philosophers say, about
'intentionality', that is, about aboutness)?
Descartes certainly intended that it should. His
view was that there are two fundamental substances
- mind and matter - not one, and, correspondingly
there should be two fundamental sciences: physics
and psychology. But we have ceased to think of
mind as a separate 'substance' at all. And a 'funda­
mental science' of psychology which explains the
nature of thought (including how thoughts can be
true or false, warranted or unwarranted, about
something or not about something) never did
come into existence, contrary to Descartes' hopes.
So to explain the features of the commonsense
world, including color, solidity, causality - I
include causality because the commonsense notion
of 'the cause' of something is a 'projection' if dis­
positions are 'projections'; it depends on the notion
of 'normal conditions' in exactly the same way - in
terms of a mental operation called 'projection' is to
explain just about every feature of the common­
sense world in terms of thought.
But wasn't that what idealists were accused of
doing? This is the paradox that I pointed out at
the beginning of this lecture. So far as the com­
monsense world is concerned (the world we experi­
ence ourselves as living in, which is why Husserl
called it the Lebenswelt), the effect of what is called
'realism' in philosophy is to deny objective reality,
to make it all simply thought. It is the philosophers
who in one way or another stand in the Neo-Kant­
ian tradition - James, Husserl, Wittgenstein - who
claim that commonsense tables and chairs and sen­
sations and electrons are equally real, and not the
metaphysical realists.
Today, some metaphysical realists would say
that we don't need a perfected science of psycho­
logy to account for thought and intentionality,
because the problem is solved by some philosoph­
ical theory; while others claim that a perfected
'cognitive science' based on the 'computer model'
will solve the problem for us in the near or distant
future. I obviously do not have time to examine
these suggestions closely today, but I shall indicate
briefly why I believe that none of them will with­
stand close inspection.
Why intentionality is so intractable
The problem, in a nutshell, is that thought itself
has come to be treated more and more as a 'projec­
tion' by the philosophy that traces its pedigree to
the seventeenth century. The reason is clear: we
Pragmatic Realism
have not succeeded in giving the theory that
thought is just a primitive property of a mysterious
'substance', mind, any content. As Kant pointed
out in the first Critique, we have no theory of this
substance or its powers and no prospect of having
one. If, unlike the Kant of the first Critique (as
I read the Critique of Pure Reason), we insist on
sticking to the fundamental 'Objectivist' assump­
tions, the only line we can then take is that mental
phenomena must be highly derived physical phenom­
ena in some way, as Diderot and Hobbes had already
proposed. By the 'fundamental Objectivist
assumptions', I mean (I) the assumption that
there is a clear distinction to be drawn between
the properties things have 'in themselves' and the
properties which are 'projected by us' and (2)
the assumption that the fundamental science - in
the singular, since only physics has that status
today - tells us what properties things have 'in
themselves'. (Even if we were to assume, with
Wilfrid Sellars, that 'raw feels' - fundamental sen­
suous qualities of experience - are not going to be
reduced to physics, but are in some way going to be
added to fundamental science in some future cen­
tury, it would not affect the situation much; Sellars
does not anticipate that intentionality will turn out
to be something we have to add to physics in
the same way, but rather supposes that a theory
of the 'use of words' is all that is needed to account
for it. )
Modern Objectivism has simply become Mater­
ialism. And the central problem for Materialism is
'explaining the emergence of mind'. But if
'explaining the emergence of mind' means solving
Brentano's problem, that is, saying in reductive
terms what 'thinking there are a lot of cats in the
neighborhood' is, and what 'remembering where
Paris is' is, etc. , why should we now think that's
possible? If reducing color or solidity or solubility
to fundamental physics has proved impossible, why
should this vastly more ambitious reduction pro­
gram prove tractable?
Starting in the late 1950s, I myself proposed a
program in the philosophy of mind that has
become widely known under the name 'Function­
alism'. The claim of my 'Functionalism' was that
thinking beings are compositionally plastic - that is,
that there is no one physical state or event (i. e. , no
necessary and sufficient condition expressible by a
finite formula in the language of first-order funda­
mental physics) for being even a physically possible
(let alone 'logically possible' or 'metaphysically
possible') occurrence of a thought with a given \nHilary Putnam
propositional content, or of a feeling of anger, or of
a pain, etc. Ajortiori, propositional attitudes, emo­
tions, feelings, are not identical with brain states, or
even with more broadly characterized physical
states. When I advanced this claim, I pointed out
that thinking of a being's mentality, affectivity, etc.
as aspects of its organization to function allows one
to recognize that all sorts of logically possible 'sys­
tems' or beings could be conscious, exhibit men­
tality and affect, etc. in exactly the same sense
without having the same matter (without even con­
sisting of 'matter' in the sense of elementary parti­
cles and electromagnetic fields at all). For beings of
many different physical (and even 'non-physical')
constitutions could have the same functional orga­
nization. The thing we want insight into is the
nature of human (and animal) functional organiza­
tion, not the nature of a mysterious 'substance', on
the one hand, or merely additional physiological
information on the other.
I also proposed a theory as to what our organiza­
tion to function is, one I have now given up - this
was the theory that our functional organization is
that of a Turing machine. I have given this up
because I believe that there are good arguments to
show that mental states are not only composition­
ally plastic but also computationally plastic. What
I mean by this is that physically possible creatures
who believe that there are a lot of cats in the
neighborhood, or whatever, may have an indefinite
number of different 'programs'. The hypothesis that
there is a necessary and sufficient condition for the
presence of a given believe in computational (or
computational cum physical) terms is unrealistic in
just the way that the theory that there is a necessary
and sufficient condition for the presence of a table
in phenomenalistic terms is unrealistic. Such a
condition would have to be infinitely long, and
not constructed according to any effective rule, or
even according to a non-effective prescription that
we could state without using the very terms to be
reduced. I do not believe that even all humans who
have the same belief (in different cultures, or with
different bodies of knowledge and different con­
ceptual resources) have in common a physical cum
computational feature which could be 'identified
with' that belief. The 'intentional level' is simply
not reducible to the 'computational level' any more
than it is to the 'physical level'. 6
If this is right, then the Objectivist will have to
conclude that intentionality too must be a mere
'projection'. But how can any philosopher think
this suggestion has even the semblance of making
sense? As we saw, the very notion of 'projection'
presupposes intentionality!
Strange to say, the idea that thought is a mere
projection is being defended by a number of philo­
sophers in the United States and England, in
spite of its absurdity. The strength of the 'Objecti­
vist' tradition is so strong that some philosophers
will abandon the deepest intuitions we have about
ourselves-in-the-world, rather than ask (as Husserl
and Wittgenstein did) whether the whole picture is
not a mistake. Thus it is that in the closing decades
of the twentieth century we have intelligent philo­
sophers 7 claiming that intentionality itself is some­
thing we project by taking a 'stance' to some parts
of the world (as if 'taking a stance' were not itself an
intentional notion! ), intelligent philosophers claim­
ing that no one really has propositional attitudes
(beliefs and desires), that 'belief and 'desire' are
just notions from a false theory called 'folk psy­
chology', and intelligent philosophers claiming
there is no such property as 'truth' and no such
relation as reference, that 'is true' is just a phrase
we use to 'raise the level oflanguage'. One of these
- Richard Rorty - a thinker of great depth - sees
that he is committed to rejecting the intuitions that
underly every kind of realismS (and not just meta­
physical realism), but most of these thinkers write
as if they were savinI( realism (in its Materialist
version) by abandoning intentionality! It's as if it
were all right to say 'I don't deny that there is an
external world; I just deny that we think about it'!
Come to think of it, this is the way Foucault wrote,
too. The line between relativism Ii la franfaise and
Analytic Philosophy seems to be thinner than
anglophone philosophers think! Amusingly
enough, the dust-jacket of one of the latest attacks
on 'folk psychology, 9 bears an enthusiastic blurb in
which a reviewer explains the importance of the
book inside the dust-jacket by saying that most
people believe that there are such things as beliefs!
'The trail oj the human serpent is liver all'
If seventeenth-century Objectivism has led twen­
tieth-century philosophy into a blind alley, the
solution is neither to fall into extreme relativism,
as French philosophy has been doing, nor to deny
our commonsense realism. There are tables and
chairs and ice cubes. There are also electrons and
space-time regions and prime numbers and people
who are a menace to world peace and moments of
beauty and transcendence and many other things.
Myoid-fashioned story of the Seducer and the \nInnocent Maiden was meant as a double warning; a
warning against giving up commonsense realism
and, simultaneously, a warning against supposing
that the seventeenth-century talk of 'external
world' and 'sense impressions', 'intrinsic proper­
ties', and 'projections', etc. , was in any way a Res­
cuer of our commonsense realism. Realism with a
capital 'R' is, sad to say, the foe, not the defender,
of realism with a small 'r'.
If this is hard to see, it is because the task of
overcoming the seventeenth-century world picture
is only begun. I asked ~ as the title of this lecture ~
whether there is still anything to say, anything
really new to say, about reality and truth. If 'new'
means 'absolutely unprecedented', I suspect the
answer is 'no'. But if we allow that William James
might have had something 'new' to say ~ some­
thing new to us, not just new to his own time ~ or,
at least, might have had a program for philosophy
that is, in part, the right program, even if it has not
been properly worked out yet (and may never be
completely 'worked out'); if we allow that Husserl
and Wittgenstein and Austin may have shared
something of the same program, even if they too,
in their different ways, failed to state it properly;
then there is still something new, something unfin­
ished and important to say about reality and truth.
And that is what I believe.
The key to working out the program of preser­
ving commonsense realism while avoiding the
absurdities and antinomies of metaphysical realism
in all its familiar varieties (Brand X: Materialism:
Brand Y: Subjective Idealism; Brand Z: Dual­
ism. .. ) is something I have called internal realism.
(I should have called it pragmatic realism! ) Internal
realism is, at bottom, just the insistence that real­
ism is not incompatible with conceptual relativity.
One can be both a realist and a conceptual relativist.
Realism (with a small 'r') has already been intro­
duced; as was said, it is a view that takes our
familiar commonsense scheme, as well as our
scientific and artistic and other schemes, at face
value, without helping itself to the notion of the
thing 'in itself. But what is conceptual relativity?
Conceptual relativity sounds like 'relativism',
but has none of the 'there is no truth to be
found. .. "true" is just a name for what a bunch
of people can agree on' implications of 'relativism'.
A simple example will illustrate what I mean. Con­
sider 'a world with three individuals' (Carnap often
used examples like this when we were doing induc­
tive logic together in the early 1950s), XI, Xz, X3.
How many o~jects are there in this world?
Pragmatic Realism
Well, I said 'Consider a world with just three
individuals', didn't I? So mustn't there be three
objects? Can there be non-abstract entities which
are not 'individuals'?
One possible answer is 'no'. We can identify
'individual', 'object', 'particular', etc. , and find no
absurdity in a world with just three objects which
are independent, unrelated 'logical atoms'. But
there are perfectly good logical doctrines which
lead to different results.
Suppose, for example, that, like some Polish
logicians, I believe that for every two particulars
there is an object which is their sum. (This is the
basic assumption of 'mereology', the calculus of
parts and wholes invented by Lezniewski. ) If I
ignore, for the moment, the so-called null object,
then I will find that the world of 'three individuals'
(as Carnap might have had it, at least when he was
doing inductive logic) actually contains seven
objects:
WORLD 1 WORLD 2
XI, XZ, X3 x], XZ, X3, XI + xz,
XI + x3, Xz + X3,
Xl + Xz + X3
(A world d la Carnap) ('Same' world d la Polish
logician)
Some Polish logicians would also say that there
is a 'null object', which they count as a part of every
object. If we accepted this suggestion, and added
this individual (call it 0), then we would say that
Carnap's world contains eight objects.
Now, the classic metaphysical realist way of
dealing with such problems is well known. It is to
say that there is a single world (think of this as a
piece of dough) which we can slice into pieces in
different ways. But this 'cookie cutter' metaphor
founders on the question, 'What are the "parts" of
this dough? ' Ifthe answer is that 0, Xl, X2, X3, Xl +
X2, XI +X3, XZ+X3, Xl +XZ+X3 are all the different
'pieces', then we have not a neutral description, but
rather a partisan description ~ just the description
of the Warsaw logician! And it is no accident that
metaphysical realism cannot really recognize the
phenomenon of conceptual relativity ~ for that
phenomenon turns on the fact that the logical prim­
itives themselves, and in particular the notions of object
and existence, have a multitude of different uses rather
than one absolute 'meaning '.
An example which is historically important, if
more complex than the one just given, is the
ancient dispute about the ontological status of the \nHilary Putnam
Euclidean plane. Imagine a Euclidean plane. Think
of the points in the plane. Are these parts of the
plane, as Leibniz thought? Or are they 'mere lim­
its', as Kant said?
If you say, in this case, that these are 'two ways of
slicing the same dough', then you must admit that
what is a part of space, in one version of the facts, is
an abstract entity (say, a set of convergent spheres­
although there is not, of course, a unique way of
construing points as limits) in the other version.
But then you will have conceded that which entities
are 'abstract entities' and which are 'concrete
objects', at least, is version-relative. Metaphysical
realists to this day continue to argue about whether
points (space-time points, nowadays, rather than
points in the plane or in three-dimensional space)
are individuals or properties, particulars or mere
limits, etc. My view is that God himself, if he
consented to answer the question, 'Do points really
exist or are they mere limits? ', would say 'I don't
know'; not because his omniscience is limited, but
because there is a limit to how far questions make
sense.
One last point before I leave these examples:
given a version, the question 'How many objects
are there? ' has an answer, namely 'three' in the case
of the first version ('Carnap's world') and 'seven'
(or 'eight') in the case of the second version ('The
Polish logician's world'). Once we make clear how
we are using 'object' (or 'exist'), the question 'How
many objects exist? ' has an answer that is not at all a
matter of 'convention'. That is why I say that this
sort of example does not support radical cultural
relativism. Our concepts may be culturally relative,
but it does not follow that the truth or falsity of
everything we say using those concepts is simply
'decided' by the culture. But the idea that there is
an Archimedean point, or a use of 'exist' inherent
in the world itself, from which the question 'How
many objects really exist? ' makes sense, is an illu­
sIon.
If this is right, then it may be possible to see how
it can be that what is in one sense the 'same' world
(the two versions are deeply related) can be
described as consisting of 'tables and chairs' (and
these described as colored, possessing dispositional
properties, etc. ) in one version and as consisting of
space-time regions, particles and fields, etc. in
other versions. To require that all of these must be
reducible to a single version is to make the mistake
of supposing that 'Which are the real objects? ' is a
question that makes sense independently of our
choice of concepts.
What I am saying is frankly programmatic. Let
me close by briefly indicating where the program
leads, and what I hope from it.
Many thinkers have argued that the traditional
dichotomy between the world 'in itself and the
concepts we use to think and talk about it must be
given up. To mention only the most recent ex­
amples, Davidson has argued that the distinction
between 'scheme' and 'content' cannot be drawn;
Goodman has argued that the distinction between
'world' and 'versions' is untenable; and Quine has
defended 'ontological relativity'. Like the great
pragmatists, these thinkers have urged us to reject
the spectator point of view in metaphysics and
epistemology. Quine has urged us to accept the
existence of abstract entities on the ground that
these are indispensable in mathematics, 1O and of
microparticles and space-time points on the ground
that these are indispensable in physics; and what
better justification is there for accepting an onto­
logy than its indispensability in our scientific prac­
tice? , he asks. Goodman has urged us to take
seriously the metaphors that artists use to restruc­
ture our worlds, on the ground that these are an
indispensable way of understanding our experi­
ence. Davidson has rejected the idea that talk of
propositional attitudes is 'second class', on similar
grounds. These thinkers have been somewhat hesi­
tant to forthrightly extend the same approach to
our moral images of ourselves and the world. Yet
what can giving up the spectator view in philosophy
mean if we don't extend the pragmatic approach to
the most indispensable 'versions' of ourselves and
our world that we possess? Like William James
(and like my teacher Morton White ll), I propose
to do exactly that. In the remaining lectures, I shall
illustrate the standpoint of pragmatic realism in
ethics by taking a look at some of our moral images,
and particularly at the ones that underlie the central
democratic value of equaliZY. Although reality and
truth are old, and to superficial appearances 'dry',
topics, I shall try to convince you in the course of
these lectures that it is the persistence of obsolete
assumptions about these 'dry' topics that sabotages
philosophical discussion about all the 'exciting'
topics, not to say the possibility of doing justice to
the reality and mystery of our commonsense world.
Lecture II: Realism and Reasonableness
Some questions in philosophical logic are able to
divide philosophers into warring camps. Since the \nmiddle of the twentieth century, this has been the
case with the question of the status of dispositional
statements (and with the closely related question of
the status of counterfactual conditionals). For some
philosophers, dispositions are simply part of 'the
furniture of the universe'; for others, the use of a
dispositional notion in a philosophical analysis is a
sign of 'low standards', of willingness to 'explain
the obscure by the still more obscure'; while for
still others (perhaps the silent majority), disposi­
tional notions are unavoidable in what we do but
troubling to the conscience. This is a relatively new
state of affairs: the writers who make up the canon
of 'Modern Philosophy' (or at least of seventeenth­
century to mid-nineteenth-century philosophy) all
availed themselves of the notion of a Power (i. e. , a
dispositional property) without any visible pangs of
conscience.
Perhaps this is not surprising, as it is only since
the appearance of mathematical logic that we have
realized how hard it is to give an interpretation of
counterfactual conditionals and of dispositional
predicates in truth-functional12 terms. But, in a
way, it should have been realized a long time ago
that the talk of Powers in 'modern' philosophy was
problematical, for such talk is a hang-over from
medieval philosophy, not something that belongs
in its own right to the new picture. The heart of the
new picture is the new conception of the 'external'
world, the conception of the external world as
governed by strict laws of the form with which we
are familiar from the work of Newton and his
successors. It is this conception that motivates the
division of properties into primary and secondary,
or into intrinsic properties of the external things
and powers to affect the mind of the observer.
A world governed by a system of differential equa­
tions is one thing; a medieval (or an Aristotelian)
world governed by Substantial Forms which man­
ifest themselves as 'tendencies' rather than as
exceptionless laws is something else. The Cartesian
picture is confused. It exhibits both modern phy­
sicalist and medieval 'tendency-ist' forms of expla­
nation in an unhappy coexistence. The new image
of nature - the World Machine - ought to have no
place for the classical 'tendencies'.
In the previous lecture this was argued with the
aid of the example of the color predicate 'red'.
Something is red if it has a certain tendency - the
tendency to produce certain 'sense impressions'
(according to the seventeenth-and eighteenth-cen­
tury story), or a certain 'brain state' (an alternative
to the dualist story that goes back at least as far as
Pragmatic Realism
Diderot if not to Hobbes), or (in a story which is
overly simple but at least avoids the mind-body
problem) if it has the tendency to selectively absorb
and reflect certain wavelengths of light. But what
does 'have the tendency' mean? Tendencies, as
I said in yesterday's lecture, do not exemplify the
operation of strict laws (in the modern sense of
'strict law'); they are sloppy things, that manifest
themselves 'under normal conditions'. To analyze
the dispositional idiom, we need an analysis of the
phrase 'under normal conditions', or something
similar, and, in fact, the attempts to produce a
theory which have been made by contemporary
authors13 involve such notions as the 'similarity'
of a whole possible world with another whole world
- notions which attempt to express, or at least to
substitute for, the desired notion of a 'normal' state
of affairs. But the currently most fashionable of
these - the notion of 'similarity' of possible worlds
- only illustrates the distance of counterfactual
(and dispositional) talk from the world picture of
physics - illustrates it by introducing a metaphysical
primitive which sticks out like a sore thumb.
Other philosophers content themselves with
introducing dispositional predicates one by one,
as needed, without any attempt to analyze or
account for the general dispositional idiom. Some­
times this can be justified (from an 'Objectivist'
point of view) by showing that the predicate so
introduced is coextensive with a non-dispositional
(perhaps a structural) predicate. But most disposi­
tional notions - e. g. , 'red', 'poisonous', 'tending to
say da if the linguist says gavagai and both of them
are watching a rabbit' - are almost certain not to be
coextensive with predicates definable in the lan­
guage of fundamental physics.
Certain other philosophers have suggested that
dispositional predicates are not, in general, the
sorts of predicates for which one ought to expect
there to be necessary and sufficient conditions.
Perhaps such a word as 'poisonous' is only partly
defined; perhaps when we encounter a new sub­
stance that human beings are capable of ingesting
or breathing or touching, we just extend the notion
of being poisonous as we extend our other notions
(including the notion of what is 'normal') in the
given circumstances. 14 Other philosophers have
suggested that such dispositional statements as 'X
is poisonous' do not predicate a property at all; they
are ways in which we perform the speech act of
licensing an inference. As the late]. L. Mackie put it,
such statements can be assertible under appropri­
ate conditions without possessing any property a \nHilary Putnam
realist would recognize as 'truth'. (They are 'not
simply true', he claimed. IS) What many of these
theories have in common is a denial that the seman­
tics of dispositional sentences is the classical
bi valent truth-conditional semantics. Either disposi­
tional sentences aren't 'simply true' and 'simply
false' at all, these authors say, or else they are true
and false only in certain cases (the cases in which
the dispositional predicate has been defined), and
remain to be given a truth-value in all other cases.
(On either form of the view, the dispositional pre­
dicate lacks a well-defined extension. )
As I mentioned in the last lecture, similar issues
arise in connection with the notions of causality and
of explanation (conceived of as a relation between
events or between 'situations', rather than as a
relation between statements). Like dispositions,
causal and explanatory relations may be strict (the
event or 'situation' described as the cause may be
connected by strict laws with the event or situation
which is taken to be the effect) or may be loose (the
event or situation described as the cause may bring
about the effect only 'under suitable circum­
stances'). And the loose causal relations are, once
again, an embarrassment from the point of view of
the 'Objectivist' picture - the picture of nature as
the World Machine.
If we could define in physicalistic terms what it
is for a feature of a situation to be only an 'attendant
circumstance', we might be able to explain 'X
brought about Y' as meaning that given the attend­
ant circumstances, it followed from physical laws
that Y would happen if X did; but unfortunately,
an intrinsic distinction between situations which
are capable of being 'bringers about' and situations
which are only attendant 'circumstances' has much
more to do with medieval (and Aristotelian)
notions of 'efficient causation' than with post­
Newtonian ones. And once again, some philoso­
phers have proposed either to reject the loose causal
and explanatory relations altogether, 16 while others
have proposed that the loose causal and explanat­
ory relations 17 have only 'assertibility conditions'
and not 'truth conditions'.
My own view - the view I began to sketch out for
you in the last lecture - differs from all of these.
These authors all assume we can make the distinc­
tion between what is 'simply true' and what has
only 'assertibility conditions', or the cut between
what is already true or false and what is an 'exten­
sion of previous use' (albeit one that we all make
the same way), or between what is a 'projection'
and what is an independent and unitary property of
things in themselves. I think that, epistemically at
least, the attempt to draw this distinction, to make
this cut, has been a total failure. The time has come
to try the methodological hypothesis that no such
cut can be made.
I recall a conversation with Noam Chomsky
many years ago in which he suggested that philo­
sophers often take perfectly sensible continua and
get in trouble by trying to convert them into
dichotomies. Consider, for example, the con­
tinuum between the relatively 'subjective' (or, at
least, interest-and culture-relative) and the relat­
ively 'objective' (or, at least, interest-and culture­
independent). Prephilosophically, most of us
would probably agree on the ordering of the fol­
lowing properties along this continuum:
Being very amusing (as in 'the behavior of
young babies is often very amusing').
2 Being a region of space which contains at least
one hydrogen atom (assume classical physics
for this one - no relativity or quantum
mechanics, please! ).
3 Being soluble.
4 A single case counterfactual conditional - e. g. ,
the property we predicate of a particular match
at a particular time when we say it would have lit
ifit had been struck at that time.
5 Meaning 'Do you speak French? ' (predicated
of a particular utterance).
I suppose the average person might rank these
predications as follows (taking the left-hand end of
the line to represent the 'subjective' and the right­
hand end to represent the 'objective'):
Being Counter- Meaning Being Contains
amusing factual soluble hydrogen
(A plausible objective-subjective ranking)
Yet as soon as we are asked to make a 'Dedekind
cut' - to turn this ranking into a dichotomy - we
find that there is no agreement at all in our philo­
sophical intuitions. Quine, for example, would put
the cut between (5) and (3) - counting both dis­
positional predicates (such as 'soluble') and non­
dispositional predicates from fundamental physics
as 'objective' and all the others as more or less
subjective (or 'second class', in his terminology).
Some philosophers might disagree with me on the
position of the meaning-assignment (5) - some
counting it as more 'objective' than the assignment
of solubili~y to a substance - and draw the line after \n(1), (4), and (3). Philosophers who are 'comfort­
able' with counterfactuals would make still another
choice for the location of the 'cut', placing it imme­
diately after (1) - i. e. , counting 'amusing' as sub­
jective and all the rest as 'objective'. But my own
view, as I have said (and perhaps Chomsky's as
well, if I understood him aright) is that the enter­
prise isn't worth the candle. The game is played
out. We can make a rough sort of rank ordering
(although even here there are disagreements), but
the idea of a 'point at which' subjectivity ceases and
Objectivity-with-a-capital-O begins has proved
chimerical.
If this is right, then a number of other famous
dichotomies must be abandoned. Two of these
have already been mentioned, namely:
Projection/Property of the thing in itself
and
'Power' /Property of the thing in itself
The rejection of these three dichotomies is the
essence of the 'internal realism' I have been defend­
ing over the years.
My rejection of these dichotomies will trouble
many, and it should. Without the constraint of
trying to 'save the appearances', philosophy
becomes a game in which anyone can - and, as a
rule does - say just about anything. Unless we take
our intuitions seriously, we cannot do hard philo­
sophy at all. So I respect philosophers who insist
that the traditional dichotomies are deeply intuit­
ive, and who 'need a lot of convincing' before they
will give them up.
But if philosophy which simply scorns our intu­
itions is not worth the candle, philosophy which
tries to preserve all of them becomes a vain attempt
to have the past over again. There are phenomena
which really do challenge our intuitions - the phe­
nomenon Husser! described in Crisis of the Euro­
pean Sciences, the breakdown of the great
seventeenth-century project of trying to turn phy­
sics into metaphysics ('Objectivism') - the break­
down I described in the preceding lecture - is one
such. On the one hand, seventeenth-century
science succeeded in smashing the medieval founda­
tions of knowledge - and not just of knowledge,
but of religion, politics, and morality as well. On
the other hand, the line of thinking that said, 'Well,
if science smashed all that, well and good. Science
will give us better in its place, ' now looks tired. (It
Pragmatic Realism
already seemed tired to Kant - and not because
Kant was a foe of science or Enlightenment; on the
contrary, he was a great scientist and a great man of
the Enlightenment. ) Science is wonderful at
destroying metaphysical answers, but incapable of
providing substitute ones. Science takes away
foundations without providing a replacement.
Whether we want to be there or not, science has
put us in the position of having to live without
foundations. It was shocking when Nietzsche said
this, but today it is commonplace; our historical
position - and no end to it is in sight - is that of
having to philosophize without 'foundations'.
The impossibility of imagining what credible
'foundations' might look like is one phenomenon,
but not the only phenomenon, that challenges our
'intuitions'. Since the end of the nineteenth cen­
tury science itself has begun to take on a 'non­
classical' - that is, a non-seventeenth-century
appearance. In the last lecture I described the phe­
nomenon of conceptual relativity - one which has
simple illustrations, like the ones I used, but which
has become pervasive in contemporary science.
That there are ways of describing what are (in
some way) the 'same facts' which are (in some
way) 'equivalent' but also (in some way) 'incompat­
ible' is a strikingly non-classical phenomenon. Yet
contemporary logicians and meaning-theorists
generally philosophize as if it did not exist. If
claiming to abandon all our 'intuitions' is mere
show, retaining all of them would require us to
philosophize as if the phenomena I just reminded
you of did not exist. The task of the philosopher, as
I see it, is to see which of our intuitions we can
responsibly retain and which we must jettison in a
period of enormous and unprecedented intellect­
ual, as well as material, change.
If I reject the dichotomies I depicted, it is not,
then, because I fail to recognize their intuitive
appeal, or because that intuitive appeal counts for
nothing in my eyes. It is rather because these
dichotomies have become distorting lenses which
prevent us from seeing real phenomena - the phe­
nomena I have been describing - in their full extent
and significance.
Yet I still term myself a 'realist' - even if! spell it
all in lower case - and can one be any sort of a
realist without the dichotomies? In particular, is
not the dichotomy between what is a 'human pro­
jection' - what is not 'simply true', what has
'assertibility conditions' rather than 'realist truth
conditions' - and what is in the things 'in them­
selves' constitutive of realism? \nHilary Putnam
Part of my answer to that question was given in
the first lecture. Far from being constitutive of
commonsense realism, that dichotomy tends to
undermine it, as I tried to show. But another part
of the answer must consist in showing that the
rejection of this dichotomy is not a simple capitula­
tion to garden-variety cultural relativism, or to the
idea that every conceptual scheme is as good as
every other.
What is strange about the fear that only the
Metaphysical Realist can save fair Common Sense
from Demon Relativism is that even Metaphysical
Realists recognize that the writ of rationality runs
farther than what they are pleased to call 'realist
truth'. Mackie did not think that ordinary-lan­
guage causal statements, e. g. , 'The failure of the
safety valve caused the boiler to explode', are 'sim­
ply true', but he would certainly have distinguished
between 'reasonable' and 'unreasonable' ones. Per­
haps such statements have only 'assertibility' con­
ditions rather than 'truth' conditions, perhaps they
are used to issue 'inference licenses' rather than to
'describe', but that does not make them arbitrary. If
we license one another to expect X to dissolve
when put in water when X is a piece of sugar, this
is part of a practice whose success we can explain;
and if we issued the same license when X was a
piece of steel, nature would show us our mistake. In
the same way, Quine denies that 'X means Do you
speak French? ' states a 'fact', even when X is the
familiar French utterance, Parlez-vous franfais? ;
but he would certainly answer the question 'What
does Parlez-vous franfais? mean? ' with 'It means
Do you speak French? ' and not with 'It means
Coachman, stop, the road is jerky; look out! you will
lose the turkey'. That one answer to this sort of
question has 'heuristic' value and the other does
not is something he himself points out. (I am not
claiming that Quine is a 'metaphysical realist',
in my sense, since he does not accept the cor­
respondence theory of truth; but his 'robust real­
ism' has an important feature in common with
metaphysical realism - namely, the existence of a
sharp line between what there is a 'fact of the
matter' about, and what has only 'heuristic' value,
or value when our interests are less than 'theor­
etical'. )
In sum, my own position involves the denial of
yet another dichotomy:
(TYPE OF STATEMENT)
Possesses only assertibility vs Possesses truth
conditions conditions
We can know that it is 'true', speaking with the
vulgar, that the water would have boiled if I had
turned on the stove, without having the slightest
idea whether this 'truth' is 'realist truth' (Mackie's
'simply true') or only an idealization of 'warranted
assertibility'. Nor need we suppose the question
makes sense. Rejecting the dichotomy within
kinds of 'truth' - kinds of truth in the common­
sense world - is not the same thing as saying 'any­
thing goes'.
Reality without the dichotomies
How can one assure oneself that this is not sheer
linguistic idealism? Perhaps the best place to start is
with the explanation of internal realism that I gave
in the first lecture. That explanation certainly
sounds like 'linguistic idealism'; according to me,
how many objects there are in the world (and even
whether certain objects - individual space-time
points, in the second of the examples I used -
exist at all as individual 'particulars') is relative to
the choice of a conceptual scheme. How can one
propound this sort of relativistic doctrine and still
claim to believe that there is anything to the idea of
'externality', anything to the idea that there is
something 'out there' independent of language
and the mind?
Well, it really isn't so hard. Look again at the
picture I showed you:
WORLD I WORLD 2
x), Xl, x3 Xl, xl, x3, Xl + Xl,
xl + X3, xl + X. l,
Xl + Xl + X3
(A world d la Carnap) ('Same' world d la Polish
logician)
How we go about answering the question 'How
many objects are there? ' - the method of 'count­
ing', or the notion of what constitutes an 'object' -
depends on our choice (call this a 'convention'); but
the answer does not thereby become a matter of
convention. If I choose Carnap's language, I must
say there are three objects because that is how many
there are. If I choose the Polish logician's language
(this is the language of a Polish logician who has not
yet invented the 'null object' 0, remember), I must
say there are seven objects, because that is how many
objects (in the Polish logician's sense of 'object')
there are. There are 'external facts', and we can
say what they are. What we cannot say - because it
makes no sense - is what the facts are independent of
all conceptual choices. \nA metaphor which is often employed to express
this is the metaphor of the 'cookie cutter'. The
things independent of all conceptual choices are
the dough; our conceptual contribution is the
shape of the cookie cutter. Unfortunately, this
metaphor is of no real assistance in understanding
the phenomenon of conceptual relativity. Take it
seriously, and you are at once forced to answer the
question, 'What are the various parts of the
dough? ' If you answer, that (in the present case)
the 'atoms' of the dough are Xl, xz, x3, and the
other parts are the mereological sums containing
more than one 'atom', then you have simply
adopted the Polish logician's version. Insisting
that this is the correct view of the metaphysical
situation is just another way of insisting that mer­
eological sums real~y exist. But internal realism
denies that this is more the 'right' way to view the
situation than is insisting that only Carnap's 'indi­
viduals' really exist. The metaphysician who takes
the latter view can also explain the success of
the Polish logician's version, after all: he can say
that when the Polish logician says, as it might be,
that
(I) There is at least one object which is partly red
and partly black,
this is to be understood as a usefulJafon de parler,
rather than as something which is 'literally true'.
Under an adequate translation scheme (and such a
scheme can be easily given in a recursive way, in
the case of the kind of first-order language that
Carnap had in mind in these simple examples), (I)
turns out to say no more than
(II) There is at least one red object and there is at
least one black object
says when written in the Carnapian language. (To
verify this, assuming that 'red' and 'black' are pre­
dicates of Carnap's language, observe that the only
way a Polish logician's object - a mereological sum
- can be partly red is by containing a red atom, and
the only way it can be partly black is by containing a
black atom. So if (I) is true in the Polish logician's
language, then there is at least one red atom and at
least one black atom - which is what (II) says in
Carnap's language. Conversely, if there is at least
one black atom and at least one red atom, then their
mereological sum is an 'object' - in the Polish
logician's sense - which is partly red and partly
black. ) To claim that such a translation scheme
Pragmatic Realism
shows what is 'really going on' is just a way
of insisting that mereological sums don't 'really
exist'.
The cookie cutter metaphor denies (rather than
explaining) the phenomenon of conceptual relativ­
ity. The other way of dealing with our little ex­
ample - producing a translation scheme which
reinterprets the logical connectives (in this case, exist­
ence), in such a way that each statement in the
'richer' language can be 'translated' into the more
'parsimonious' language - may also be used to deny
the phenomenon of conceptual relativity; but it is,
nonetheless, more sophisticated than the cookie
cutter metaphor. The cookie cutter metaphor
assumes that all existence statements that we
count as true in our several versions really are
true; it's just that the variables of quantification
pick out different mereological sums as their ranges
in the case of different languages. The device of
reinterpretation goes beyond this in recognizing that
one person's 'existence' claim may be another per­
son's something else.
Sometimes it is suggested that in such cases we
should not be 'neutrals'; we should always adopt
the more parsimonious version. 'If we don't have to
postulate such strange discontinuous objects as
mereological sums, then should't we take that as a
reason for concluding that they don't really exist,
that they are just (at best) aJafon de parler? '
To this metaphysical move there is, inevitably,
an equally metaphysical rejoinder: 'Aren't almost
all the "objects" we talk about - chairs and tables,
our own bodies, countries, not to mention such
scientific objects as solar systems and galaxies -
"strange discontinuous objects"? It hardly follows
that they don't really exist. Yet, if my body exists, if
this chair exists, if the solar system exists, then why
should we not say that the discontinuous object
consisting of my nose and the EifJel Tower also
exists? This is an unnatural object to talk about,
to be sure, but what has the "naturalness" of an
object to do with its existence? '
What is right with the second of the ways we
considered of reconciling the two versions or
'worlds' - reinterpreting the existential quantifier
- is that the notions of 'object' and 'existence' are
not treated as sacrosanct, as having just one poss­
ible use. It is very important to recognize that the
existential quantifier itself can be used in different
ways - ways consonant with the rules of formal
logic. What would be wrong, were we to do it,
would be to accept this idea, and then go on to
single out one use of the existential quantifier - the \nHilary Putnam
use in Carnap's version - as the only metaphysic­
ally serious one. But go one step farther: take the
position that one may either treat Carnap's version
as 'correct' and interpret the Polish logician's ver­
sion as a fa{on de parler in the manner illustrated by
the reinterpretation of (I) as (II), or treat the Polish
logician's version as 'correct' and interpret Car­
nap's version as a language in which the range of
the individual variables is restricted to atoms (as
suggested by the cookie cutter metaphor). That is,
take the position that one will be equally 'right' in
either case. Then you have arrived at the position
I have called 'internal realism'!
What is wrong with the notion of objects existing
'independently' of conceptual schemes is that there
are no standards for the use of even the logical
notions apart from conceptual choices. What the
cookie cutter metaphor tries to preserve is the naive
idea that at least one Category - the ancient cat­
egory of Object or Substance - has an absolute
interpretation. The alternative to this idea is not
the view that, in some inconceivable way, it's alljust
language. We can and should insist that some facts
are there to be discovered and not legislated by us.
But this is something to be said when one has
adopted a way of speaking, a language, a 'concep­
tual scheme'. To talk of 'facts' without specifying
the language to be used is to talk of nothing; the
word 'fact' no more has its use fixed by Reality
Itself than does the word 'exist' or the word
'object'.
Of course, the adoption of internal realism is the
renunciation of the notion of the 'thing in itself.
And here lies the connection between the almost
trivial example we have been discussing and the
profound metaphysical dichotomies (or would-be
dichotomies) we discussed earlier. Internal realism
says that the notion of a 'thing in itself makes no
sense; and not because 'we cannot know the things
in themselves'. This was Kant's reason, but Kant,
although admitting that the notion of a thing in
itself might be 'empty', still allowed it to possess a
formal kind of sense. Internal realism says that we
don't know what we are talking about when we talk
about 'things in themselves'. And that means that
the dichotomy between 'intrinsic' properties and
properties which are not intrinsic also collapses -
collapses because the 'intrinsic' properties were
supposed to be just the properties things have 'in
themselves'. The thing in itself and the property
the thing has 'in itself belong to the same circle of
ideas, and it is time to admit that what the circle
encloses is worthless territory.
A dichotomy whose relation to these notions may
be somewhat less evident is the dichotomy between
'truth-conditional semantics' and 'assertibility­
conditional semantics'. Yet what could ground the
claim that certain sorts of statements, for example,
'If! had put a pan of water on the stove and turned
on the flame, the water would have boiled', have
only 'assertibility conditions' and not 'truth condi­
tions'? What, that is, but a preconceived idea of
what is and is not 'ontologically queer', that is, what
is and is not capable of being a part of the world as
the world as the world is 'in itself? As I argued in
yesterday's lecture, the problem with that precon­
ceived idea, in its Humean as well as in its Cartesian
version, was its inability to tell any story about the
mind (or, if you prefer, about 'intentionality')
which was not riddled with contradictions or
saddled with arbitrary and unconvincing posits;
and I argued that this remains its problem today.
What does the world look like without the
dichotomies? It looks both familiar and different.
It looks familiar, insofar as we no longer try to
divide up mundane reality into a 'scientific image'
and a 'manifest image' (or our evolving doctrine
into a 'first-class' and a 'second-class' conceptual
system). Tables and chairs (and yes, pink ice cubes)
exist just as much as quarks and gravitational fields,
and the fact that this pot of water would have
boiled if I had put it on the stove and turned on
the flame is as much a 'fact' as is the circumstance
that the water weights more than eight ounces. The
idea that most of mundane reality is illusion (an
idea which has haunted Western philosophy since
Plato, in spite of Aristotle's valiant counterattack)
is given up once and for all. But mundane reality
looks different, in that we are forced to acknow­
ledge that many of our familiar descriptions reflect
our interests and choices.
Imagine that the escape valve on a pressure
cooker sticks and the pressure cooker explodes.
We say - and the conceptual relativist regards
this as a perfectly 'true' statement, without making
any fuss about whether it is 'simply true' or only a
'good inference license' - 'The stuck valve caused
the pressure cooker to explode'. We do not say
'The presence of fl. caused the pressure cooker to
explode', where fl. is, say, an arbitrary irregularly
shaped piece of the surface of the cooker, O. l cm in
area. Yet, in the physics of the explosion, the role
played by the stuck valve is exactly the same as the
role of fl. : the absence of either would have per­
mitted the steam to escape, bringing down the
pressure and averting the explosion. \nWhy, then, do we speak of one of these things
and not the other as 'causing' the explosion? Well,
we know that the valve 'should have' let the steam
escape - that is its 'function', what it was designed
to do. On the other hand, the surface element ~
was not doing anything 'wrong' in preventing the
steam from escaping; containing the steam is the
'function' of the surface of which ~ is a part. So
when we ask 'Why did the explosion take place? ',
knowing what we know and having the interests we
do have, our 'explanation space' consists of the
alternatives:
(1) Explosion taking place
(2) Everything functioning as it should
What we want to know, in other words, is why
(1) is what happened, as opposed to (2). We are
simply not interested in why (1) is what happened
as opposed to such alternatives as:
(3) The surface element ~ is missing, and no
explosion takes place.
This 'explanatory relativity' is parallelled by a
relativity in our use of such locutions as 'caused'
and 'the cause'. Since the question 'Why did the
pressure cooker explode? ' assumes an explanation
space which does not include the alternative (3), or
similar alternatives, we understand such factors as
the presence of ~ to be 'background conditions'
and not 'causes'.
This relativity of causes to interests, and to back­
ground conditions not mentioned in the 'hard
science' explanation of the event in question, does
not make causation something we simply legislate.
Given our interests and what we regard as the
relevant background conditions, it would be simply
false to say that it was the wall of the pressure
cooker that caused the explosion (unless it hap­
pened to be defective, and it should happen to be
the defect and not the condition of the valve that
'explains' the explosion). Our conceptual scheme
restricts the 'space' of descriptions available to us;
but it does not predetermine the answers to our
questions.
It is understandable, however, that many philo­
sophers should read a different moral into this
story. Does not the situation lend itself naturally
to a dichotomy? Should we not regard the 'hard
science' description of the situation (, The pressure
increased in the closed container until a certain
coefficient was exceeded. The material then rup-
Pragmatic Realism
tured. .. ') with its exact laws and numerical coeffi­
cients as the description of the 'objective facts', and
regard the singling out of the bit of material, or
whatever, that kept the valve from working as 'the
cause' as semi-magical Stone Age thinking? If we
want to be generous and leave a place for this useful
way of speaking, while denying that there exists a
distinction between 'causes' and 'background con­
ditions' in Nature itself, we can just say that causal
statements have 'assertibility' conditions in ordin­
ary language but not, strictly speaking, 'truth con­
ditions'.
The problem with all this - the problem I dis­
cussed in the first lecture - is that if the causes/
background conditions distinction is fundament­
ally subjective, not descriptive of the world in
itself, then current philosophical explanations of
the metaphysical nature of reference are bankrupt.
John Barwise and John Perry, for example, tell us
that what links certain states of affairs to certain
mental states is that the states of affairs cause those
states; this is the intentional link, at least in certain
metaphysically basic cases. Clark Glymour and
Michael Devitt (independently) both tell us that
words are connected to their referents by
'causal connection'. Richard Boyd tells us that
'the causal theory of reference is correct because
the causal theory of knowledge is correct'. But the
notions on which causal theories of knowledge and
reference depend - the difference between a cause
and a mere background condition, the legitimacy of
counterfactuals - are precisely what is called into
question by the 'inference licence' interpretation of
causal statements and counterfactuals. If these
notions are 'saved' only to the extent of being
treated as heuristics (as 'projections', in the
terminology of the first lecture), then it cannot
also be held that they explain how reference
comes to exist in the world as the world is 'in itself.
Nor would dualism help, if we were willing to
adopt it. For what description do we have of the
mind 'in itself? Kant's exposure of the bankruptcy
of 'rational psychology' still stands.
Rather than succumb to the temptation to repeat
verbatim all the proposals of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, we have to recognize that
such familiar statements as the statement that the
stuck valve caused the pressure cooker to explode
reflect both the way things are and our interests
and assumptions about the way things are without
giving in to the temptation to suppose that the
philosophically relevant description of 'the way
things are' is something other than 'the valve \nHilary Putnam
stuck and caused the pressure cooker to explode'
(or whatever the example may be). Given a lan­
guage, we can describe the 'facts' that make the
sentences of that language true and false in a 'tri­
vial' way - using the sentences of that very lan­
guage; but the dream of finding a well-defined
Universal Relation between a (supposed) totality
of all facts and an arbitrary true sentence in
Notes
Wilfrid Sellars, Science, Perception, and Reality
(Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1963).
2 Edmund Husser! , The Crisis of the European Sciences
and Transcendental Phenomenology, trans. David
Carr (Evanston, Ill. : Northwestern University Press,
1970).
3 See C. L. Hardin's 'Are "Scientific" objects
colored? ', Mind, 93122 (Oct. 1964), pp. 491-500.
4 The commonsense notion of 'solidity' should not be
confused with the physicist's notion of being in 'the
solid state'. For example, a sand dune is in the 'solid
state' but is not solid in the ordinary sense of the term,
while a bottle of milk may be solid, but most of its
contents are not in the solid state.
5 Herbert Feigl, 'The "mental" and the "physical" " in
Feigl, Scriven, and Maxwell (eds), Minnesota Studies
in the Philosophy of Science, vol. 2: Concepts, Theories
and the Mind-Body Problem (Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 1958), pp. 370-497.
6 This is argued in my Representation and Reali~y (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1988).
7 D. C. Dennett, Content and Consciousness (Atlantic
Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1969).
8 Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979).
9 Stephen Stich, From Folk Psychology to Cognitive
Science: The Case Against Belief(Cambridge, Mass. :
MIT Press, 1983).
10 W. V. Quine, 'On what there is', this volume, ch. I.
an arbitrary language is just the dream of an abso­
lute notion of a fact (or of an object') and of an
absolute relation between sentences and the facts
(or the objects) 'in themselves'; the very dream
whose hopelessness I hoped to expose with the
aid of my little example involving three Carnapian
individuals and seven non-empty mereological
sums.
II White has advocated doing this ear! y and late: Toward
Reunion in Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard
University Press, 1956); What Is and What Ought to
Be Done (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).
12 In logic a way of connecting statements is called
'truth-functional' if the truth-value of the resulting
statement can be determined given just the truth­
values of the components. Counterfactual condi­
tionals all have false antecedents, and typically they
have false consequents as well; yet some of them are
true and some false. Thus the counterfactual is not a
truth-function of its parts.
13 David Lewis, CounterJactuals (Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press, 1973).
14 This idea was implicit in Carnap's treatment of dis­
positional predicates via 'reduction sentences' in
'Testability and meaning', Philosophy of Science 3
(1936) pp. 420-68, 4 (1937) pp. 1--40.
15 J. L. Mackie, The Cement of the Universe (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1974).
16 E. g. , Hempel proposed to count as complete 'explana­
tions' only those explanations which fit his strict
Deductive-Nomological Model. (Cf. Hempel and C.
P. Oppenheim, 'The logic of scientific explanation',
repro in H. Feigl and M. Brodbeck (eds), Readings in
the Philosophy of Science. (New York: Appleton-Cen­
tury-Crofts, 1953), pp. 319-52.
17 Mackie (Cement of the Universe) referred to the notion
we use in these as our 'paleolithic' notion of causation. \n45
Ernest Sosa
Exceptional among contemporary philosophers,
Hilary Putnam has long defended a philosophy
sane enough to hold not only water, but also people
and even values. Having once championed hard
realism, he has moved steadily away from any
scientism that would have physical science deter­
mine fully our world view and its ontology to the
detriment of our lifeworld. In several fascinating
papers and books, he has developed an alternative
realism called first "internal" and more recently
"pragmatic. "
Putnam has been at pains to distinguish his view
from Rortean relativism and from the excesses of
recent French philosophy, but he has also warned
repeatedly against naive belief in a ready-made
world with "in-itself' categories. According to his
own preferred via media, the mind and the world
jointly constitute both the mind and the world. It is
not immediately obvious what this amounts to in
prosaic detail, however, and there is no better way
to find out than to examine his arguments.
Putnam argues against "metaphysical realism"
and in favor of his own "internal (or pragmatic)
realism. " Both the view and the arguments, how­
ever, have provoked much controversy. Donald
Davidson, l for example, finds Putnam's version
of antirealism objectionable, and indeed incoher­
ent. By 'internal realism' Putnam seems to have in
Originally published in Journal of Philosophy 90
(1993), pp. 605-26. Copyright © by Ernest Sosa
and the Journal of Philosophy, Inc. Reprinted by per­
mission of the author and Columbia University.
mind not just that the truth of sentences or utter­
ances is relative to a language. That much is, as
Davidson indicates, "familiar and trivially cor­
rect. " But, Davidson continues, "Putnam seems
to have more in mind - for example that a sentence
of yours and a sentence of mine may contradict
each other, and yet each be true 'for the speaker'.
It is hard to think in what language this position can
be coherently, much less persuasively, expressed. ,, 2
What argument might lead to such a view?
Putnam has several arguments, actually, but four
stand out. First, the "model-theoretic" argument;
second, the argument from the nonobjectivity of
reference and of the sort of causation involved in
contemporary accounts of reference; third, the
argument from the unlikelihood of scientific con­
vergence on a finished science that provides an
objective and absolute conception of reality; and,
finally, the argument from the nonabsoluteness of
objecthood and of existence.
The model-theoretic argument has been most
extensively discussed and has elicited much criti­
cism. It seems to me that on this argument we have
reached an impasse. The critics charge that what­
ever it is that constitutes reference can on its own
secure reference between our words and the pertin­
ent items in the objective, independent world: for
example, if a certain causal relation is what consti­
tutes reference, then the existence of that causal
relation between a word of ours and a certain item
would be sufficient on its own to bring it about that
the reference relation holds between the word and
the item. Most emphatically, according to the \nErnestSosa
critics, it is not required, as Putnam seems to
believe, that we accept a theory about the relevant
causal relation and about how it constitutes refer­
ence, a theory about which one could then with
Putnam raise questions concerning how its words
secure their reference, how the word 'causation' in
it, for example, acquires its own reference. Putnam
for his part accuses his critics of begging the ques­
tion in supposing that the relevant causal relation
can on its own, objectively and independently,
secure reference relations between our words and
corresponding items in ready-made reality. And he
accuses his critics of superstitious belief in essen­
tialism, and in a magical theory of reference.
Here I shall put that controversy aside, as one
with little prospect of any new progress or insight
beyond what is already contained in the extensive
journal literature about it. 3 In what follows, I
would like to discuss instead, and in turn, the
other three arguments that sustain Putnam's prag­
matic realism.
1 Perspectival Causation, Reference,
Truth, and Reality
One place where this argument is presented in
detail by Putnam is his paper "Why there isn't a
ready-made world. ,, 4 Here is a thumbnail sketch:
P I Truth depends on, and is constituted by,
reference (at least in part).
2 Reference depends on, and is constituted by,
causation (at least partly).
3 Causation is radically perspectival.
4 Reference is radically perspectival (from
2, 3).
5 Truth is radically perspectival (from 1, 4).
6 Reality is "internal" to one's perspective
(from 5).
This can be spelled out a bit further as follows.
When a belief or a sentence is true, that depends on
and derives from what that belief or that sentence
refers to. But when a belief or sentence refers to
something, it does so, surely, in virtue of some
appropriate causal relation holding between it and
its referent. Causation is not an absolute relation,
however, not a relation that holds in metaphysical
reality independently of any perspective. For
Earthians it may be a discarded cigarette that
causes a forest fire, while for Martians it is the
presence of oxygen. Strictly speaking 'X causes
Y' is true or false not absolutely, but only relative
to perspective. At least that seems clear with regard
to the less-than-total causation needed for an
appropriate pairing of referents with referring
terms. For example, we need to pair the term
'window' with windows and the term 'draft' with
drafts, so we cannot stop with the total causation
that relates, on one side, both the felt draft and the
seen window (and much else) and, on the other,
your utterance of 'Please close the window'.
If the sort of causation constitutive of reference
is thus radically perspectival (perspective-relative),
however, then reference is similarly perspectival,
and so then must truth be, since reference is in turn
constitutive of truth. But in that case reality itself
must be also perspectival, also relative to perspect­
ive, and in that sense "internal" to perspective, and
not wholly external.
What seems most questionable in that argument,
put briefly and bluntly, is the move from the per­
spectival character of truth to the perspectival
character of reality itself. Consider for comparison
our vocabulary of indexicals and the associated
perspectival concepts of oneself and of the tem­
poral present. It may well be that these are import­
ant and ineliminable components of any adequate
conceptual scheme (adequate for us limited
humans, anyhow). Suppose that our concepts and
our conceptual scheme are thus importantly pers­
pectival. Would it follow that reality itself must
be similarly perspectival? This seems implausible
when we consider the following.
Take a world W defined by two people (Paul and
Mary) and the postural state (standing, not-stand­
ing) of each, such that in W Paul is standing while
Mary is sitting. In W, therefore, the sentence 'I am
standing' is true relative to Paul, but false relative
to Mary. And, more generally: whatever is true in a
certain world W relative to a certain perspective
and whatever is false in W relative to a certain
perspective is as it is in that world as a necessary
consequence of how things are in that world abso­
lutely and nonperspectivally.
It is true that our talk and even, granted, our
thought is in fact largely perspectival. It may
well be, moreover, that the perspectival character
of our thought is not eliminable except (at best)
with a very high practical and intellectual cost.
But from the fundamentally and ineliminably
perspectival character of our thought it does not
follow that reality itself is fundamentally pers­
pectival. Everything that is true relative to a pers­
pective and everything that is false relative to a
perspective may be as it is as a necessary con-\nsequence of the absolute and non perspectival char­
acter of things.
Perhaps it is true that our concepts of reference
and truth are ineliminably perspectival. Even so, it
still would not follow that reality itself could not be
largely as it is independently of us and our thought,
in the sense that plenty of reality could have existed
propertied and interrelated very extensively just as
it is in fact propertied and interrelated even if we
had never existed to have any thoughts, and even if
no other finite thinkers had taken our place. What
is more, our perspectival references and truths may
be seen to derive necessarily from absolute and
un perspectival reality.
2 Objectivity, Absoluteness, and the
Many Faces of Realism
What the metaphysical realist holds is that we
can think and talk about things as they are,
independently of our minds, and that we can
do this by virtue of a 'correspondence' relation
between the terms in our language and some
sorts of mind-independent entities. 5
But reference, like causality, is a flexible, inter­
est-relative notion [and so, therefore, is cor­
respondence]: what we count as referring to
something depends on background knowledge
and our willingness to be charitable in
interpretation. To read a relation so deeply
human and so pervasively intentional into the
world and to call the resulting metaphysical
picture satisfactory (never mind whether or
not it is 'materialis~') is absurd. "
But, again, why must the metaphysical realist
"read into the world" any such relation of refer­
ence or of correspondence (or of causal explana­
tion)? What the metaphysical realist is committed
to holding is that there is an in-itself reality inde­
pendent of our minds and even of our existence,
and that we can talk about such reality and its
constituents by virtue of correspondence relations
between our language (and/or our minds), on the
one hand, and things-in-themselves and their
intrinsic properties (including their relations),
on the other. This does not commit the meta­
physical realist to holding that reference itself (or
correspondence, or causal explanation) is among
the objective properties constitutive of in-itself
reality.
Putnam's Pragmatic Realism
Bernard Williams7 apparently reaches just that
conclusion and adopts the view that it opens up.
Putnam responds as follows: .. . Williams's suggestion is that the intentional
(or the "semantic") is itself perspectival, and
the absolute conception will someday explain
why this kind of talk is useful (as it explains
why talk of "grass" and "green" is useful, even
though "grass" and "green" are not notions
that figure in the absolute conception of the
world). But. .. the absolute conception of the
world was defined in terms of the idea that some
statements describe the world with a minimum
of "distortion, " that they describe it "as it is, "
that they describe it "independently of perspect­
ive" - and what does any of this talk mean,
unless something like a correspondence theory
of truth is in place? Williams tacitly assumes a
correspondence theory of truth when he defines
the absolute conception, and then forgets that
he did this when he suggests that we do not
need to assume that such semantic notions as
the "content" of a sentence will turn out to
figure in the absolute conception itself. 8
It is hard to see this bit of reasoning as anything
more than a fallacy. From the fact that the abso­
luteness that applies to conceptions is a perspectival
concept, it simply does not follow that any absolute
conception itself must include any perspectival
concept, not even the concept of absoluteness.
(My copy of Principia Mathematica is mine, and
the concept of what is one's own is a perspectival
concept, but it does not follow that my copy of PM
must include the concept of what is one's own. )
Putnam does argue further that Williams must
make room in his absolute conception itself for
notions of reference and correspondence (and of
absoluteness itself). Putnam writes that "if, as Wil­
liams believes, the fact that we are 'fated' to accept
the sentence 'Snow is white' is explained by some­
thing 'out there', then the correspondence too must
be 'out there, ., ,9 And his argument here seems to
turn on an assumption that only an objective,
non perspectival correspondence could do the
explanatory work that Williams requires. Only
such an objective relation of correspondence
could possibly explain why it is that we accept
certain truths, and why it is that they are rightly
assertible, when all this is so because the truths in
question correspond to the way things (mind-inde­
pendently) are. This seems inconclusive, however. \nErnest Sosa
Prima facie, it would seem I can explain why I
return a book to you by saying that it is yours. I
can explain why I reach for some water by saying
that I am thirsty. And so on. Why assume that
perspectival concepts have no legitimate place in
explanations?
There is nevertheless an argument open to Put­
nam against William's view if the latter includes
commitment to "objectivism, " which is defined by
Putnam in The Many Faces of Realism (TMFR)lO
as the view that what really has a place in objective
reality is only what is included in the ontology and the
ideology of "finished science, " only what the absolute
conception recognizes. ll It is not at all clear that
Williams himself would accept objectivism, but in
Putnam's own mind objectivism and absolutism
are closely connected, as emerges clearly in
TMFR. In any case, the argument against object­
ivism is as follows. The objectivist believes that
only what would be reflected in finished science is
truly real (the rest will amount at most to heuristic­
ally or practically valuable talk, and cannot truly
represent reality). But, as we have seen, perspecti­
val concepts like those of reference, correspond­
ence, and causal explanation will not be reflected in
finished science, in the science to be converged
upon by all determined inquirers, whatever their
perspective or context. So the objectivist seems
committed by Putnam's reasoning to holding that
he is not really thinking at all, nor referring to
anything (assuming, again, that Putnam's reason­
ing about reference, correspondence, and causal
explanation is correct). Thus Putnam's complaint
in TMFR: "It's as if it were all right to say 'I don't
deny that there is an external world; I just deny that
we [truly really] think about it, !, ,12
In TMFR, Putnam also returns to his argument
against metaphysical realism via appeal to inten­
tionality, aboutness, reference, and correspond­
ence. And again his reasoning goes in outline like
this:
(a) The only viable form of metaphysical realism
is objectivism (or materialism or scientific
realism).
(b) For objectivism only properties that figure in
strict and exceptionless laws are real prop­
erties of things in themselves (and these are
presumably laws that would be part of fin­
ished science) - though perhaps we might
admit also properties based on strict laws in
the way strict dispositional properties might
be so based.
(c) But clearly there is little prospect that the
mind can be viewed as constituted or char­
acterized by such properties. Sensa have no
place in any actual science, much less in fin­
ished science. 13 If we think of (some) mental
properties in terms of dispositions, and of
these in terms of conditionals, we find that
the conditionals involved are all "in normal
conditions, " ceteris paribus sorts of condi­
tionals; and none of these has a place in
finished science. 14 As for reference, about­
ness, and correspondence, the most promis­
ing account of these acceptable to an
objectivist (materialist, scientific realist) is
in terms of causation. But the causation
involved would be relative to interests and
background conditions (in the way we
have seen in earlier discussion) and hence
perspectival in a way antithetical to finished. 15 sCience.
Let us now consider this line of reasoning, which
connects realism thus with objectivism.
In TMFR, four dichotomies are decisively
rejected. First these three:
01 Subjective (interest-and culture-relative)
versus objective (interest-and culture-inde­
pendent).
02 Projection [property attributed falsely, etc. ]
versus property of the thing in itself.
03 Power [dispositional property] versus prop-
erty of the thing in it-self. 16
About these we are told: "The rejection of these
three dichotomies is the essence of. .. 'internal
realism, ., ,17 And then a fourth dichotomy is also
targeted:
04 Statement possessing only assertibility con­
ditions versus statement possessing truth
conditions. IS
How are we to understand the technical terms
used in the formulation of these four dichotomies?
Here is a proposal:
(i) ¢ is a subjective property =or ¢ is postulated
by a particular language or conceptual
scheme.
(ii) ¢ is a property of the thing in itself
(an intrinsic, objective property) =or ¢ is a
property that is not just subjective but would
be postulated by finished science.
(iii) x is a subjective individual =or x is among
the individuals or is a member of a kind of \nindividual postulated by some particular lan­
guage or conceptual scheme.
(iv) x is a thing in itself (an objective individual)
=Dr x is among the individuals or is a mem­
ber of a kind of individual postulated by
finished science.
(v) Statement (J has assertibility conditions in a
particular language or conceptual scheme
L =Df L contains criteria or rules that spe­
cify conditions within which (J would be
correctly assertible.
(vi) Statement (J has truth conditions =Dr (J
has assertibility conditions within finished
science (i. e. , (J attributes an intrinsic, object­
ive property with respect to things in them­
selves or objective individuals).
We can understand the emphasis that Putnam
places on rejection of these dichotomies above, and
on how that rejection defines his own internal or
pragmatic realism, if we focus on how all four of
them involve the notion of an intrinsic property of
things-in-themselves, about which Putnam has this
to say: "The deep systemic root of the disease [of
objectivism or scientific realism, and hence of
metaphysical realism], I want to suggest, lies in
the notion of an 'intrinsic' property, a property
something has 'in itself, apart from any contribu­
tion made by language or the mind. ,, 19
Perhaps our definitions may help clarify Put­
nam's rationale for rejecting the four dichotomies,
and the content and motivation for his own internal
or pragmatic realism, as well as his emphasis on
conceptual relativity, as put, for example, in the
following passage: "The key to working out the
program of preserving commonsense realism
while avoiding the absurdities and antinomies of
metaphysical realism in all its familiar vari­
eties. .. is something I have called internal realism.
(I should have called it pragmatic realism! ) Inter­
nal realism is, at bottom, just the insistence that
realism is not incompatible with conceptual relat­
ivity. ,, 2o
Putnam's rejection of the dichotomies derives,
on the present suggestion, from his rejection of the
possibility that there are things-in-themselves with
intrinsic properties. For if there is no possibility
that there are any such things or properties, then
there are no objective things-in-themselves, no
intrinsic, objective properties of things-in-them­
selves, and no statements with truth conditions.
All this may be seen through the definitions
above. And it then follows that none of the dicho-
Putnam's Pragmatic Realism
tomies is real: they are all necessarily empty on one
side.
But just how does Putnam refute the possibility
that there are things-in-themselves with intrinsic,
objective properties. He has argued explicitly as
follows:
[If]. .. it is simply a matter of how we formalize
our language whether we say (with Saul Kripke)
that stones, animals, persons, and so on are not
identical with mereological sums at all, or say (as
suggested by Lewis) that they are mereological
sums (and take care of Kripke's difficulty by
claiming that when we say that "the" stone
consists of different particle-slices in different
possible worlds, then what that means is that the
various modal "counterparts" of the stone in
different possible worlds consists of different
particle slices, and not that the self-identical
stone consists of different particle slices in dif­
ferent possible worlds) - and to me this cer­
tainly looks like a mere choice of a formalism,
and not a question of fact - we will be forced to
admit that it is partly a matter of our conceptual
choice which scientific object a given common­
sense object - a stone or a person - is identified
with. .. Nor is the situation any better in theor­
etical physics. At the level of space-time geo­
metry, there is the well-known fact that we can
take points to be individuals or we can take them
to be mere limits. .. Not only do single theories
have a bewildering variety of alternative rational
reconstructions (with quite different onto­
logies), but there is no evidence at all for the
claim (which is essential to. .. an "absolute con­
ception of the world") that science converges to
a single theory. .. We simply do not have the
evidence to justify speculation as to whether or
not science is "destined" to converge to some
one definite theoretical picture. .. Yet, without
the postulate that science converges to a single
definite theoretical picture with a unique onto­
logy and a unique set of theoretical predicates,
the whole notion of "absoluteness" collapses
[and indeed is]. .. incoherent. Mathematics
and physics, as well as ethics and history and
politics, show our conceptual choices; the world
is not going to impose a single language upon
us, no matter what we choose to talk about. 21
And that suggests the following argument
against things-in-themselves with intrinsic prop­
erties. \nErnest Sosa
(a) There is no real possibility of a finished
sCience.
(b) Things-in-themselves are by definition the
things in the ontology of finished science,
and intrinsic, objective properties are by def­
inition those in the ideology of finished
sCIence.
(c) Hence, there is no possibility that there are
things-in-themselves with intrinsic, objective
properties.
When we take stock, now, we see that we must
learn to live with unfinished science: when we
affirm that there are certain things with certain
properties, our affirmation must be viewed as relat­
ive to a particular language or conceptual scheme.
It may then be viewed as one that, if correct, is
correct by the assertibility rules or criteria of that
language or scheme. I shall return to this form of
reasoning below.
Putnam has further reasoning behind his
rejection of objective or absolute reality, how­
ever; I mean his arguments from the nonabsolute­
ness of existence itself. To this reasoning I turn
next.
3 Nonabsolute Existence and
Conceptual Relativity
Suppose a world with just three individuals Xl, Xz,
X3. Such a world is held by some "mereologists" to
have in it a total of seven things or entities or
objects, namely, Xl, xz, X3, Xl + Xz, Xl + X3,
Xz + X3, Xl + Xz + X3. Antimereologists by con­
trast prefer the more austere ontology that recog­
nizes only the three individuals as objects that
realzy exist in that world. Talk of the existence of
Xl + Xz and its ilk is just convenient abbreviation of
a more complex discourse that refers to nothing but
the three individuals. Thus, suppose Xl is wholly
red and Xz is wholly black. And consider
(1) There is an object that is partly red and partly
black.
(2) There is an object that is red and an object
that is black.
For the antimereologist, statement I is not true, if
we assume that X3 is also wholly red or wholly
black. It is at best a convenient way of abbreviating
the likes of 2.
Putnam has now joined Rudolf Carnap in view­
ing our controversy as follows: .. . the question is one of the choice oflanguage.
On some days it may be convenient to use
[antimereological language]; .. . on other days
it may be convenient to use [mereological] lan­
guage.
22
Take the question
How many objects with a volume of at least 6
cubic centimeters are there in this container?
This question can have no absolute answer on the
Carnap-Putnam view, even in a case where the
container contains a vacuum except for three mar­
bles each with a volume of 6 cubic centimeters. The
antimereologist may say
(3) There are three objects in the box.
But the mereologist will reply:
(4) There are at least seven objects in the box.
The Carnap-Putnam line is now this: which
statement we accept - (3) or (4) - is a matter of
linguistic convenience. The language of mereology
has criteria of existence and identity according to
which sums of individuals are objects. The lan­
guage of antimereology rejects such criteria, and
may even claim that by its criteria only individuals
are objects.
There is a valuable insight here, I believe, but
I am puzzled by the linguistic wrapping in which
it is offered. After all, none of (l )-( 4) mentions
any language or any piece of language, nor does
any of them say that we shall or shall not or should
or should not use any language or bit of language.
So I do not see how our decision actually to use
or not to use any or all of the sentences (l )-( 4)
can settle the question of whether what these sen­
tences say is true or false. And if the point is that
these sentences do not really say anything, then
how can they be incompatible in the first place so
that a conflict or problem can arise that requires
resolution? Also, it is not clear how we gain by
replacing questions about atoms (or the like) with
questions about sentences and our relations to some
specific ones of these sentences. This is all very
puzzling, and we should pause to peer more
closely.
What does the proposed linguistic relativity
amount to? Can it be spelled out more fully and
prosaically? Here, for a start, is a possibility: \nLRl: In order to say anything you must adopt a
language. So you must "adopt a meaning"
even for so basic a term as 'object'. And you
might have adopted another. Thus you
might adopt Carnap language (CL) or you
might adopt Polish logician language (PL).
What you say, i. e. , the utterances you
make, the sentences you affirm, are not
true or false absolutely, but are true or
false only relative to a given language.
Thus, if you say "There are three objects
in this box, " your utterance or sentence
may be true understood as a statement of
CL while it is false understood as a state­
ment in PL.
But under this interpretation linguistic relativity
seems trivially true. Who could deny that inscrip­
tions of shapes and emissions of sounds are not true
or false independently of their meaning, independ­
ently of all relativization to language or idiolect? Of
course, you must "adopt a language" in order to
speak (though such "adoption" need not be a con­
scious and voluntary act), and indeed you might
have adopted another. And it seems quite uncon­
troversial that an utterance of yours might be true
relative to one language while it is false relative to
another.
Perhaps then the point is rather this:
LR2: When we say 'There are 3 objects here, not
8' we are really saying: 'The following is
assertible as true in our CL: "There are 3
objects here, not 8. ",
This is indeed in the spirit ofCarnap's philosophy,
whose Logical Syntax of Language, 23 published in
English in 1937, defends the following theses:
(i) Philosophy, when cognitive at all, amounts
to the logical syntax of scientific language.
(ii) But there can be alternative such languages
and we are to choose between them on
grounds of convenience.
(iii) A language is completely characterized by its
formation and transformation rules.
In that book Carnap also distinguishes between:
(sl) Object sentences: e. g. , 'Five is a prime num­
ber', 'Babylon was a big town'.
(s2) Pseudo-object sentences: e. g. , 'Five is not a
thing but a number', 'Babylon was treated of
in yesterday's lecture'.
Putnam's Pragmatic Realism
(s3) Syntactical sentences: e. g. , '''Five'' is not a
thing-word but a number-word', '''Baby­
lon" occurred in yesterday's lecture'.
And he defends the thesis that (s2) sentences seem
deceptively like (sl) sentences but are really (s3)
sentences in "material mode" disguise.
It was W. V. Quine who in 1934 suggested
"material mode" to Carnap (as Quine himself
reports in the section on "Semantic Ascent" in
Word and Object24 ). Quine agrees that a kind of
"semantic ascent" is possible, as when we shift
from talk of miles to talk of 'mile', but he thinks
this kind of semantic ascent is always trivially avail­
able, not just in philosophy but in science generally
and even beyond. Thus, we can paraphrase 'There
are wombats in Tasmania' as' "Wombat" is true of
some creatures in Tasmania'. Quine does grant that
semantic ascent tends to be especially useful III
philosophy. But he explains why as follows:
The strategy of semantic ascent is that it carries
the discussion into a domain where both parties
are better agreed on the objects (viz. , words)
and on the main terms concerning them.
Words, or their inscriptions, unlike points,
miles, classes, and the rest, are tangible objects
of the size so popular in the marketplace, where
men of unlike conceptual schemes commun­
icate at their best. .. No wonder it helps in
philosophy. 25
The use of this strategy, however, is clearly limited
to discourse about recondite entities of controver­
sial status. No relevant gain is to be expected from
semantic ascent when the subject matter is the
inventory of the marketplace itself. Tables and
chairs are no more controversial than words: in
fact, they seem less so, by a good margin. No
general internal realism, with its conceptual or
linguistic relativity, can be plausibly supported by
the semantic ascent strategy offered by Quine.
In addition, questions of coherence arise con­
cerning LR2. When we say something of the form
'The following is assertible in our CL: .. . ' can we
rest with a literal interpretation that does not
require ascent and relativization? If not, where
does ascent stop? Are we then really saying 'The
following is assertible in our CL: "The following is
assertible in our CL: .. . "'. This way lies vicious
regress. But if we can stop the regress with our
metalinguistic reference to our sentences of CL
(and to ourselves), why can we not stop it with \nErnestSosa
our references to tables and chairs and other med­
ium-sized dry goods?
An additional interpretation of Putnam's linguis­
tic or conceptual relativism would have it say this:
LR3: When we see that finished science might
well be a chimera, that our best attitude to
it is that of agnosticism, we must not assert
the claims of our present, unfinished
science as if they amounted to truths
about an in-itself reality and its intrinsic
properties (which would require us to
know that our claims would be found also
in finished science - and who could pos­
sibly know about that? ). Rather, we should
rest content with the assertibility of our
assertions in our unfinished conceptual or
linguistic frameworks. But of course what
is assertible in one framework may not be
so in another. So we have to learn to live
with our relativism. It is all pretty much
like our claim that one must drive on the
right, whose assertibility in the relevant
American frameworks is not impugned by
the fact that the opposite is assertible in the
relevant British frameworks, nor by the
absence of any "finished millenary legal
system" that would include driving on the
right as one of its requirements.
There is much to be discussed about this form
of argument. But I would like to focus on one
main presupposition required if it is put forward
as a form of reasoning that would apply quite gen­
erally, whatever sphere may be involved. The argu­
ment, which I shall call Putnam's master argument
(PMA) against realism, runs more simply as fol­
lows:
PMA I Realism (in general) is acceptable only if
scientific realism is acceptable.
2 Scientific realism is not acceptable, if
only because of the history of science
induction, which precludes any reason­
able expectation of convergence on one
final ontology and ideology.
3 Therefore, realism is unacceptable: we
cannot accept that there are any things­
in-themselves with intrinsic properties;
we can accept at best a view of things
constitutive of our present conceptual or
linguistic framework, but we must not
suppose that this would gain conver-
gence among persistent, un defective
inquirers, etc.
Here again there is much to be discussed, for
example, about the relation between convergence
and the existence of things-in-themselves, inde­
pendently of the mind, with intrinsic properties
in no way contributed by any speakers or thinkers.
In any case, one premise of the argument that
seems immediately dubious is the first. A large
fragment of our commonsense view of ourselves
and things around us seems quite safe from any­
thing like the history of science induction. Surely,
there is a great deal in our ordinary outlook that we
share in common with groups widely divergent
from us in place, time, and culture. Concerning
all of that, nothing like the history of science induc­
tion stands in the way of convergence. Suppose we
granted that the acceptability of (the certainty or at
least the likelihood of) convergence is relevant to
the acceptability of ordinary realism. And suppose
we granted further that, given the history of science
induction, we cannot plausibly expect that there
would be any relevant sort of convergence in
science: that here we must remain at best agnostic.
Even so, that would not establish internal realism
with its conceptual or linguistic relativity, as pres­
ently understood in line with interpretation LR3
above. 26
There is hence reason to doubt the linguistic
turn taken by Carnap and now Putnam. We have
found no very plausible way to conceive of the turn
so that it discloses an attractive new direction in
metaphysics. The only direction that seems cer­
tainly right and clearly defensible is that provided
by our first interpretation above (interpretation
LRI), but that also seemed trivially right, and not
something anyone would deny, not even the most
hard-line metaphysical realist. Nevertheless, it still
seems to me that there is a valuable insight in
Putnam's now repeated appeal to the contrast
between the Carnapian conceptual scheme and
that of the Polish logician. But, given our recent
reflections, I would like to put the insight without
appeal to language or to any linguistic relativity.
The artifacts and even the natural objects that
we recognize as existing at a time are normally
composed of stuff or of parts in certain ways, and
those which we see as enduring for an interval are
normally not only thus composed of stuff or of
parts at each instant of their enduring; but also
the stuff or parts thus composing them right up
to t must be related in certain restricted ways to the \nstuff or parts that compose them right after t, for
any time t within the history of such an enduring
object.
Thus, the existence of a snowball at a time t and
location 1 requires that there be a round quantity of
snow at 1 and t sufficiently separate from other
snow, etc. ; and for that snowball to endure through
an interval I, it is required that for every division of
I into a sequence of subintervals Il, 12, .. ., there
must be a corresponding sequence of quantities of
snow QI, Q2, .. ., related in certain restricted ways.
By all this I mean to point to our "criteria of
existence and perdurance for snowballs. "
I spoke of a snowball, its existence and perdur­
ance, and what that requires of its sequence of
constituent quantities of snow. In place of these, I
might have talked of chains and constituent links,
of boxes and constituent sides, or of a great variety
of artifacts or natural entities such as hills or trees;
or even - especially - of persons and their consti­
tuent bodies. In every case, there are criteria of
existence and of perdurance for an entity of the
sort in question such that necessarily an entity of
the sort exists at t (perdures through I) if and only
if its criteria of existence are satisfied at t (its
criteria of perdurance are satisfied relative to I).
Thus, necessarily a snowball exists at t if and only if
at t a quantity of snow is round and separate from
other snow; and a snowball perdures through I if
and only if for any subdivision of I into a sequence
of subintervals Il, 12, .. ., there must be a corres­
ponding sequence of round, etc. , quantities of
snow QI, Q2, .. ., such that, for all i, Qj satisfies
the conditions for being successor of Qj - 1 in the
constitution of the "life" of a snowball. And sim­
ilarly for chains, boxes, hills, trees, and persons.
I am supposing a snowball to be constituted by a
certain piece of snow as constituent matter and the
shape of (approximate) roundness as constituent
form. That particular snowball exists at that time
because of the roundness of that piece of snow.
More, if at that time that piece of snow were to
lose its roundness, then at that time that snowball
would go out of existence.
Compare now with our ordinary concept of a
snowball, the concept of a snowdiscall, defined as
an entity constituted by a piece of snow as matter
and as form any shape between being round and
being disc-shaped. At any given time, therefore,
any piece of snow that constitutes a snowball con­
stitutes a snowdiscall, but a piece of snow might at
a time constitute a snowdiscall without then con­
stituting a snowball. For every round piece of snow
Putnam's Pragmatic Realism
is also in shape between disc-shaped and round
(inclusive), but a disc-shaped piece of snow is of
course not round.
Any snowball SB must hence be constituted by a
piece of snow PS which also then constitutes a
snowdiscall SD. Now, SB is distinct (a different
entity) from PS, since PS would survive squashing
and SB would not. By similar reasoning, SD also is
distinct from PS. And, again by similar reasoning,
SB must also be distinct from SD, since enough
partial flattening ofPS will destroy SB but not SD.
Now, there are infinitely many shapes 51, 52, .. .,
between roundness and flatness of a piece of snow,
and, for each i, having a shape between flatness and
5i would give the form of a distinctive kind of
entity to be compared with snowballs and snowdis­
calls. Whenever a piece of snow constitutes a snow­
ball, therefore, it constitutes infinitely many
entities all sharing its place with it.
Under a broadly Aristotelian conception, there­
fore, the barest flutter of the smallest leaf hence
creates and destroys infinitely many things, and
ordinary reality suffers a sort of "explosion. "
We might perhaps resist this "explosion" of our
ordinary world by embracing conceptual relat­
ivism. Constituted, supervenient entities do not
just objectively supervene on their requisite, con­
stitutive matters and forms, outside all conceptual
schemes, with absolute independence from the
categories recognized by any person or group. Per­
haps snowballs do exist relative to all actual con­
ceptual schemes ever, but not relative to all
conceivable conceptual schemes. Just as we are
not willing to countenance the existence of snow­
discalls, just so another culture might have been
unwilling to countenance snowballs. We do not
countenance snowdiscalls, because our conceptual
scheme does not give to the snowdiscall form
(being in shape between round and disc-shaped)
the status required for it to be a proper constitutive
form of a separate sort of entity - at least not with
snow as underlying stuff.
That would block the explosion of reality, but
the price is conceptual relativity. Supervenient,
constituted entities do not just exist or not in
themselves, free of any dependence on or relativity
to conceptual scheme. What thus exists relative to
one conceptual scheme may not do so relative to
another. In order for such a sort of entity to exist
relative to a conceptual scheme, that conceptual
scheme must recognize its constituent form as an
appropriate way for a separate sort of entity to be
constituted. \nErnestSosa
Must we now conceive of the existence even of
the conceptual scheme itself and of its framers and
users as also relative to that conceptual scheme?
And are we not then caught in a vicious circle? The
framers exist only relative to the scheme, and this
they do in virtue of the scheme's giving their con­
stituent form-cum-matter the required status. But
to say that the scheme gives to this form-cum­
matter the required status - is that not just to say
that the framers of that scheme do so? Yet are not
the framers themselves dependent on the scheme
for their existence relative to it?
Answer: existence relative to a conceptual
scheme is not equivalent to existence in virtue of
that conceptual scheme. Relative to scheme C the
framers of C exist in virtue of their constitutive
matter and form, and in virtue of how these satisfy
certain criteria for existence and perdurance of
such subjects (among whom happen to be the fra­
mers themselves). This existence of theirs is in that
way relative to C but not in virtue of C. There is
hence no vicious circularity.
The picture then is roughly this. Each of us
acquires and develops a view of things that includes
criteria of existence and perdurance for categories
of objects. When we consider whether an object of
a certain sort exists, the specification of the sort will
entail the relevant criteria of existence and perdur­
ance. And when we correctly recognize that an
object of that sort does exist, our claim is elliptical
for ". .. exists relative to this our conceptual
scheme. "
Again, this is not the only conceivable view of the
matter. We could try to live with the explosion.
And that does seem almost inevitable if we view it
this way: a sort of object 0-a constituted, super­
venient sort - comes with a sort of constituent
matter M, or sorts of constituent matters MI,
M2, .. ., and a sort of constituent form F. These
- M (or MI, M2, .. . ) and F - we may take to be
given independently of any acceptance by anyone
of any criteria of existence or perdurance. For
the sake of argument, then, we are accepting as
given the sorts of items - MI, M2, .. . - that will
play the role of constituent matters, and also the
property or relation - F - that will play the role of
constituent form. And presumably whether or not
any particular sequence of matters (ml, m2, .. . ) of
sorts MI, M2, .. ., respectively, does or does not
satisfy form F is also generally independent of
whether or not we accept any criteria of existence
or perdurance, and indeed independent of whether
anyone does so.
Suppose there is a time t when our conceptual
scheme C first recognizes the appropriate criteria
of existence and perdurance. According to our
conceptual relativism, prior to that time t there
were, relative to C, no objects of sort 0, and in
particular object 0 did not exist. But if there were
no objects of sort 0, such as 0, relative to our
scheme C, then why complicate our own scheme
by supplementing it with criteria of existence and
perdurance which do give standing to objects of
sort O? After all, it is not as though we would fail to
recognize the existence of something already in
existence. By hypothesis there are no objects ~f sort
0, not right up to that time t, anyhow.
On the other side, there is the threat of explod­
ing reality, however. Ifwe allow the satisfaction by
any sequence S of any form F of the appropriate
polyadicity and logical form to count as a criterion
of existence for a corresponding sort of object, then
reality right in us, before us, and all around us is
unimaginably richer and more bizarre than we have
ever imagined. And anyway we shall still face the
problem of giving some explanation for why we
focus so narrowly on the objects we do attend to,
whose criteria of existence and perdurance we do
recognize, to the exclusion of the plethora of other
objects all around and even in the very same place.
A third option is a disappearance or elimination
theory that refuses to countenance supervenient,
constituted objects. But then most if not all of
ordinary reality will be lost. Perhaps we shall
allow ourselves to continue to use its forms of
speech". .. but only as a convenience or abbrevia­
tion. " But in using those forms of speech, in speak­
ing of snowballs, chains, boxes, trees, hills, or even
people, we shall not believe ourselves to be seri­
ously representing reality and its contents. "As a
convenience": to whom and for what ends? "As an
abbreviation": of what?
With alternatives so grim, we are encouraged to
return to our relativistic reflections. Our concep­
tual scheme encompasses criteria of existence and
of perdurance for the sorts of objects that it recog­
nizes. Shall we say now that a sort of object ° exists
(has existed, exists now, or will exist) relative to a
scheme Cat t if and only if, at t, C recognizes sort °
by allowing the corresponding criteria? But surely
there are sorts of objects that our present concep­
tual scheme does not recognize, such as artifacts yet
uninvented and particles yet undiscovered, to take
only two obvious examples. Of course, we allow
there might be and probably are many such things.
Not that there could be any such entities relative to \nour present conceptual scheme, however, for by
hypothesis it does not recognize them. So are
there sorts of objects - constituted sorts among
them, as are the artifacts at least - such that they
exist but not relative to our present scheme C? In
that case we are back to our problem. What is it for
there to be such objects? Is it just the in-itself
satisfaction of constitutive forms by constitutive
matters? That yields the explosion of reality.
Shall we say then that a constituted, superveni­
ent sort of object 0 exists relative to our present
scheme C if and only if 0 is recognized by C
directly or recognized by it indirectly through
being recognized by some predecessor or successor
scheme? That, I fear, cannot suffice, since there
might be sorts of particles that always go undiscov­
ered by us, and sorts of artifacts in long disap­
peared cultures unknown to us, whose conceptual
schemes are not predecessors of ours.
Shall we then say that what exists relative to our
present scheme C is what it recognizes directly,
what it recognizes indirectly through its predeces­
sors or successors, and what it would recognize if we
had developed appropriately or were to do so now,
and had been or were to be appropriately situated?
This seems the sort of answer required, but it
obviously will not be easy to say what appropriate­
ness amounts to in our formula, in its various guises.
Regardless of whatever success may await any
further specification of our formula, there is the
following further objection. Take a sort of object 0
recognized by our scheme C, with actual instances
0[, 02, .. .; for example, the sort Planet, with vari­
ous particular planets as instances: Mercury,
Venus, etc. Its instances, say we, exist, which
amounts to saying that they exist relative to our
scheme. But if we had not existed, there would
have been no scheme of ours for anything to exist
relative to; nor would there have been our actual
scheme C either. For one thing, we may just
assume the contingent existence of our actual
scheme to depend on people's actually granting a
certain status to certain constitutive forms. If we
had not existed, therefore, the constitutive form for
the sort Planet would not have had, relative to our
conceptual scheme, the status required for it to be
possible that there be instances of that sort, par­
ticular planets. And from this it apparently follows
that if we had not existed there would have been no
planets: no Mercury, no Venus, etc.
This objection conceptual relativism can rebut as
follows. While existing in the actual world x we
now have a conceptual scheme Cx relative to which
Putnam's Pragmatic Realism
we assert existence, when we assert it at all. Now,
we suppose a possible world w in which we are not
to be found, in which indeed no life of any sort is to
be found. Still we may, in x: (a) consider alternative
world wand recognize that our absence there
would have no effect on the existence or course of
a single planet or star, that Mercury, Venus, and
the rest, would all still make their appointed rounds
just as they do in x; while yet (b) this recognition,
which after all takes place in x, is still relativized to
Cx, so that the existence in w of whatever exists in
w relative to Cx need not be affected at all by the
absence from w of Cx, and indeed of every con­
ceptual scheme and of every being who could have
a conceptual scheme. For when we suppose exist­
ence in w, or allow the possibility of existence in w,
we do so in x, and we do so there still relative to Cx,
to our present conceptual scheme, and what it
recognizes directly or indirectly, or ideally.
If I am right, we have three choices:
Eliminativism: a disappearance view for which our
ordinary talk is so much convenient abbrevia­
tion. Problem: we still need to hear: "abbrevia­
tion" of what, and "convenient" for what ends
and whose ends? Most puzzling of all is how we
are to take this "abbreviation" - not literally,
surely.
Absolutism: Snowballs, hills, trees, planets, etc. are
all constituted by the in-itself satisfaction of
certain conditions by certain chunks of matter,
and the like, and all this goes on independently
of any thought or conceptualization on the part
of anyone. Problem: this leads to the "explosion
of reality. "
Conceptual relativism: We recognize potential con­
stituted objects only relative to our implicit
conceptual scheme with its criteria of existence
and of perdurance. Problem: is there not much
that is very small, or far away, or long ago, or yet
to come, which surpasses our present acuity and
acumen? How can we allow the existence of
such sorts at present unrecognized by our con­
ceptual scheme?
Right now I cannot decide which of these is least
disastrous. But is there any other option?
4 Conclusion
I have considered four lines of reasoning used by
Putnam in favor of his pragmatic realism. Of these, \nErnestSosa
the fourth seems to me deepest, most richly sug­
gestive, and most effective. The first, the model­
theoretic argument, we put aside. The interest of
the second resides mainly in its exploration of (a)
the sort of causation that is required for a realist
account of reference, and (b) consequences of this
for the perspectival nature of reference and of
truth. My questions arise mainly with the last
step of the argument, where the move is made
from the perspectival status of truth to a cor­
respondingly perspectival character of reality itself,
its internality to conceptual scheme. As for the
third line of reasoning, it merges with the second
to some extent but is separable, and emphasizes a
requirement of scientific convergence or absolut­
ism. According to this line, the very idea of in-itself
reality with intrinsic properties is tied together
with the notion of an absolute conception of the
world to be provided by finished science: an onto­
logy and ideology that would attract convergence
by all persistent and undefective inquirers, given
sufficient time and resources. To the extent that we
must remain agnostic with regard to the possibility
or likelihood of such convergence, therefore, to
that extent must we be equally agnostic with regard
to the very idea of things-in-themselves with their
mind-independent, intrinsic properties. There is
much to discuss about this whole approach, but
one main focus of serious doubt is its assumption
that realism (in general, even commonsense realism
about observable reality) can be upheld only if
scientific realism can be upheld. This runs up
against a problem: the history of science induction
Notes
This paper grew (extensively) from one presented at a
conference, The Philosophy of Hilary Putnam, organized
by the Instituto de Investigaciones Filosoficas, National
University of Mexico. I am very pleased to have been
included in this conference on Hilary Putnam's work and
in his honor.
Donald Davidson, "The structure and content of
truth, " Journal of Philosophy 87/6 (June 1990), pp.
279-328.
2 Ibid. , p. 307.
3 But see the excellent paper by James Van Cleve,
"Semantic supervenience and referential indetermin­
acy, " Journal of Philosophy 8917 (July 1992), pp.
344-61.
4 Hilary Putnam, "Why there isn't a ready-made
world, " in his Realism and Reason (New York: Cam-
that feeds doubt against scientific convergence is inap­
plicable to our commonsense conception of ordinary
reality or anyhow to a substantial enough portion ofit.
I also discussed a fourth line of reasoning used
by Putnam, one that leads to a sort of conceptual
relativity. I questioned the linguistic turn taken by
Putnam's actual reasoning, since there seemed no
good interpretation on which it would avoid both
triviality and absurdity. Nevertheless, the con­
siderations adduced by this line of reasoning con­
tain important insights worth exploring. And in
fact they eventually open a fascinating menu of
ontological possibilities. 27 By extending Putnam's
reasoning, we reach a set of options in contempor­
ary ontology that presents us with a rather trouble­
some trilemma. Which shall we opt for:
eliminativism, absolutism, or conceptual relati­
vism? Putnam's own pragmatic realism is built
around the case that he makes against both elim­
inativism and absolutism, and in favor of his special
sort of conceptual relativism.
Of the four Putnam ian arguments for pragmatic
realism - the model-theoretic argument; the argu­
ment from the perspectival character of causation,
reference, and truth; the argument from agnosti­
cism regarding scientific convergence upon a fin­
ished science; and the argument for conceptual
relativity - this fourth and last of them seems to
me far the most powerful and persuasive. It raises a
threefold issue - the choice between eliminativism,
absolutism, and relativism - still wide open on the
philosophical agenda, and a most exciting issue
before us today.
bridge University Press, 1983), pp. 205-28. Similar
reasoning may also be found in the more recent Real­
ism with a Human Face (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard
University Press, 1991); see, e. g. , ch. II, "Objectivity
and the science/ethics distinction, " and also ch. 5,
"The causal structure of the physical, " on p. 88 of
which we find: ". .. an epistemic distinction between a
'cause' and a 'background condition'. How does the
mind get to be able to refer to the mind-independent
world? Answer 'via the relation of causal connection',
and you have slipped back to treating causation as
something 'out there' and not simply 'epistemic'. "
Here again it is the last move that seems false, and in
step with the misstep to be discussed here.
5 Putnam, "Why there isn't a ready-made world, "
p. 205.
6 Ibid. , p. 225. \n7 Bernard Williams, Descartes: The Project of Pure
Inquiry (New York: Penguin, 1978) and idem, Moral
Luck (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981),
esp. ch. II.
8 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, p. 174.
9 Ibid. , pp. 172-3.
10 Putnam, The Many Faces of Realism (La Salle, Ill:
Open Court, 1987).
II Ibid. , p. 4.
12 Ibid. , p. 16.
13 Ibid. , pp. 7-8.
14 Ibid. , pp. 8-11.
15 Ibid. , pp. 11-16, 39-40; also p. 7.
16 Ibid. , pp. 27-31.
17 Ibid. , p. 28.
18 Ibid. , p. 31.
19 Ibid. , p. 8.
20 Ibid. , p. 17.
Putnam's Pragmatic Realism
21 Putnam, Realism with a Human Face, pp. 170-1.
22 Putnam, "Truth and convention: on Davidson's refu­
tation of conceptual relativism, " Dialectica 41 (1987),
pp. 69-77 at p. 75.
23 Rudolf Carnap, Logical Syntax of Language (New
York: Harcourt Brace, 1937).
24 W. V. Quine, Word and Object, (Cambridge, Mass. :
MIT Press, 1960).
25 Ibid. , p. 272.
26 To mention only one attractive possibility, one
might, with C. Bas van Fraassen, combine both
agnosticism toward theoretical science and common­
sense realism toward observable reality; see, e. g. , his
The Scientific Image (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1980).
27 Closely related issues are explored in my "Subjects
among other things: persons and other beings, " Philo­
sophical Perspectives I (1987), pp. 155-89. \n46
William P. Alston
My topic this evening is realism, which I come not
to bury but to praise. More specifically, I shall be
casting a critical eye on some recent divagations
from the straight and narrow path of realism, and I
shall be considering whether these tempting by­
ways do really exist. My contention shall be that
there is, in truth, but the one path through the
forest, and that what have been taken as alternative
routes, are but insubstantial phantoms.
I
But first I must explain what view this is that will
be so earnestly commended. Many a position wears
the name of "realism, " and with most of them I
shall not be concerned.
As a first shot, let's say that Realism is here being
understood as the view that whatever there is, is
what it is regardless of how we think of it. Even if
there were no human thought, even if there were
no human beings, whatever there is other than
human thought (and what depends on that, causally
or logically) would still be just what it actually is.
As just stated, the position is quite compatible
with there being nothing except human thought
and what depends on that. So watery a potion is
unsuitable for this high occasion. Let's turn it into
Originally published in Proceedings and Addresser of
the American Philosophical Association 52/6 (1979).
pp. 779-808. Reprinted by permission of the author
and the American Philosophical Association.
wine by a codicil to the effect that there is some­
thing independent of human thought.
Realism, so stated, is a bit hard to get hold of. It
will prove useful to concentrate instead on a certain
consequence around which many of the historic
battles have raged. If there is a reality independent
of our thought, it obviously behooves us to find out
as much about it as possible. This means that our
thought and discourse will be (largely) directed to
thinking (saying) it like it is. Believing (saying)
what is true rather than what is false will be the
primary goal of cognition; where we have said what
is true iff what we were talking about is as we have said
it to be. 1 I shall call this the realistic conception of
truth, and where 'true' and its cognates are used in
the sequel without further qualification, this is the
intended meaning. So the consequence in question
is: The prima~y goal of human thought and discourse is
to believe (say) what is true in the realistic sense.
Although this is the full statement of the con­
sequence, I shall be working with a somewhat less
inflated form:
Our statements are issued with a (realistic)
truth claim (a claim to truth in the realist sense).
I agree with Hilary Putnam 2 that a distinguish­
ing feature of the realistic sense of 'true' is that it is
logically possible for even the best attested state­
ment to be false, where the attestation is in terms of
"internal" criteria like coherence with the total
system of beliefs, being self-evident, being a report
of current experience, or being the best explanation
of something or other. That is what is "realistic" \nabout this concept of truth. In the final analysis
what makes our statement true or false is the way
things are (the things the statement is about); not
the reasons, evidence, or justification we have
for it.
Our thesis is marked by exemplary modesty. It
only requires that we hold our statements subject
to assessment in terms of truth and falsity. A bolder
thesis would be that we sometimes succeed in
making statements that are true rather than false.
I shall not be so rash this evening; it will not be
necessary, since the issues I will be considering
concern the viability of the realistic concept of
truth and its attempted substitutes. Therefore it
will be sufficient to consider whether we can, and
whether we must, make statements with that kind
of claim.
But even within this ambit we can distinguish
more and less modest claims. Let me illustrate this
point with respect to singular subject-predicate
statements. Suppose I assert that this cup is
empty. According to the above formulation of the
realist thesis, that statement is true or false,
depending on whether what the statement is
about is as it is said to be. That formulation pre­
supposes that I have succeeded at least to the extent
of picking out a particular referent about which to
make a statement. But even if I had failed in that
referential task (there is nothing that I would be
prepared to recognize as what I was saying to be
empty), I would still be saying something intellig­
ible that could be assessed for its success in "saying
it like it is. " There is, notoriously, controversy over
whether, in that case, I said anything that could be
evaluated as true or false. Be that as it may, a
realistic thesis more modest than ours could be
formulated as follows: a statement is put forward
with the claim that what it is about, if there is
anything it is about, is as it is said to be. I shall
not carry modesty to those lengths in this paper; I
shall be rash enough to assume that we often do
succeed in making a statement about something. If
anyone feels that this unfairly begs an important
question against the anti-realist, he may substitute
the more guarded formulation without disrupting
the ensuing discussion.
Here are a few additional exegetical notes:
(I) I have presented the thesis in terms both of
thought and discourse (beliefs and statements). To
sharpen the focus, I shall henceforward restrict the
discussion to statements. I do this not because I
consider statement more fundamental than belief;
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
my bent is the opposite one. It is rather that state­
ments are more "out in the open" and, hence, the
structure is more readily identified and denom­
inated.
(2) My formulation is limited to statements
that can be said to be about something(s). This
will take in a wider territory than is sometimes
supposed, e. g. , not only singular statements but
also universal and existential generalizations if we
can think of the latter as being "about" all the
values of the variables. Other kinds of statements,
e. g. , subjunctive conditionals, will be harder to fit
into this model. But enough statements clearly do
fit to give our discussion a point.
(3) Whether my version of realism boils down
to a "correspondence" theory of truth depends on
how that term is construed. If correspondence the­
ory of truth merely holds that the truth-value of a
statement depends on how it is with what the
statement is about, rather than on, e. g. , its relations
to other statements, then of course this is a (the)
correspondence theory. But that term is often
reserved for theories that take truth to consist in
some structural isomorphism, or mirroring or pic­
turing relation between statements (propositions)
and facts. Nothing of that sort is implied by my
thesis.
(4) In espousing realism in this fundamental
sense I am not committed to acknowledging the
independent reality of any particular kinds of enti­
ties - material substances, numbers, classes, prop­
erties, facts, propositions, quanta, angels, or
whatever. The thesis is quite neutral as to what is
real; it merely holds that our attempts at knowledge
are to be evaluated in terms of whether we succeed
in picking out something(s) real and saying them to
be as they are. Thus it is not tied to most of the
views called "realism" -"Platonic" realism about
abstract objects, perceptual realism about com­
monsense physical objects, "scientific" realism
about theoretical entities, and so on. These are all
much more specific doctrines than the one being
defended here.
Because of this my thesis is not necessarily opposed
to many of the positions with which realism is
commonly contrasted - idealism (in most uses of
that term), phenomenalism, verificationism, even
conventionalism as applied to some restricted
domain, such as scientific theories. If idealism is
the view that reality is basically mental or spiritual
in character, whether this be a Berkeleyan, Leibn­
izian, or Hegelian3 version of that thesis, then \nWilliam P. Alston
idealism allows particular statements (about spirits,
monads, the Absolute, or whatever) to be true or
false in a realistic sense. If you're attributing to the
Absolute characteristics it really has, you are speak­
ing truly; if not, not.
I note in this connection that in the March 1979
issue of the Journal of Philosophy an excellent arti­
cle by Colin McGinn, entitled "An a priori argu­
ment for realism" begins with the sentence:
Except in the vulgar sense, one is not a realist
tout court; one is a realist with respect to some or
other type of subject matter - or better, with
respect to particular classes of statements.
As Thomas Reid said, in connection with Hume's
contract between the vulgar and the philosophical
opinions concerning the immediate objects of per­
ception, "In this division, to my great humiliation,
I find myself classed with the vulgar. "
Realism, as I have defined it, may seem to the
uninitiated to be so minimal as to be trivially true.
But notoriously, even so minimal a doctrine as this
has been repeatedly denied; and the denials sup­
ported by elaborate and ingenious argumentation.
Nineteenth-century idealism and pragmatism were
in good part devoted to attacking realism and
searching for an alternative. Thus F. H. Bradley
tells us that truth is "that which satisfies the intel­
lect, ,, 4 "an ideal expression of the Universe, at once
coherent and comprehensive, "s and Brand Blan­
shard that a proposition is true if it coheres with an
all comprehensive and fully articulated whole. 6
From the pragmatist side, C. S. Peirce's well­
known view is that "the opinion which is fated to
be ultimately agreed to by all who investigate, is
what we mean by the truth, ,, 7 while William James
writes that "true ideas are those that we can assim­
ilate, validate, corroborate, and verify. "g John
Dewey holds true ideas to be those that are instru­
mental to "an active reorganization of the given
environment, a removal of some specific trouble
and perplexity. ,, 9 These philosophers would make
the truth of the statement that snow is white to
consist in something other than snow's being white.
More recently, Hilary Putnam, who for years had
been presenting a highly visible target to the anti­
realist, has now been kind enough to turn the other
cheek and present an equally prominent target to
the realist. In his recent Presidential Address to the
Eastern Division, 1O he argues that it is incoherent
to suppose that a theory that satisfies all epistemic
criteria might be false.
After having dominated the field for some time,
the idealist and pragmatist movements provoked a
vigorous realist reaction in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century in the redoubtable persons
of Frege, Husserl, Moore, and Russell. It is not my
intention this evening to do an instant replay of
these epic battles, even though it might result in
changing some earlier calls by the arbiters of philo­
sophic fashion. Rather, I shall look at some recent
anti-realist tendencies. Though these are by no
means unconnected with their distinguished pre­
cedents, they also present some apparently new
features.
My procedure will be as follows. First, I shall
look at some anti-realist arguments, or trends of
thought, and find them lacking in merit. Second, I
shall consider some attempts to work out a non­
realist position, and conclude that no coherent
alternative has been provided. At that point the
defense will rest.
II
A
Under the first rubric I will begin by taking a very
brief look at the Quinean theses of indeterminacy
of translation and inscrutability of reference. I have
no time to enter the formidable thickets of Quine an
exegesis, and so I refrain from asking whether
Q! Iine is a realist, or whether Quine himself takes
these theses to have an anti-realist thrust. But they
have frequently been so taken, a tendency encour­
aged by Quine's use of the label "ontological relat­
ivism. " Just what bearing do these celebrated
doctrines have on the matter? It seems to me some­
what less direct than ordinarily supposed. They
don't exactly contradict realism; rather, they strike
at a presupposition of the question for which real­
ism is one possible answer. They make, or seem to
make, it impossible to raise the question. What
indeterminacy of translation and inscrutability of
reference most directly imply is that our thought
and discourse is irremediably indeterminate in a
throughgoing and shocking fashion. To wit, there
is no particular determinate content to any asser­
tion. Because of the indeterminacy of translation,
there are indefinitely many versions of what it is I
am saying about an object in any assertion I make.
And because of inscrutability of reference, there
are indefinitely many versions of what I would be
saying it about if there were any particular thing I \nwere saying. Viewed in a larger context, this is
simply an extreme version of forms of indeterm­
inacy that have long been recognized as affecting
much of our speech. It is un controversial that
people frequently use words in an ambiguous or
confused manner, so that there is no precise answer
to the question: "What is he saying? " And again it
is uncontroversial that there are breakdowns in
reference in which it is in principle indeterminate
to what the speaker meant to be referring. Quine is
simply holding, with what justice I shall not
inquire, that such indeterminacies ineluctably
affect all speech. Now it has long been recognized
by realists that a statement will have a definite
truth-value only to the extent that it has a definite
content. If! am not saying anything definite, it will
be correspondingly indefinite whether what I say is
true or false. If, e. g. , the meaning of 'religion' does
not involve precise necessary and sufficient condi­
tions for something's being a religion, then there
is no definite answer to the question whether
the Ethical Culture movement is a religion. Since
the Quinean doctrines under consideration
imply that all our utterances are in this condition,
they imply that the issue of realism cannot arise
anywhere in human discourse. Anti-realism goes
down the drain along with realism. For the remain­
der of this section I shall concentrate on arguments
that have been thought to support an anti-realist
answer to the question to which realism is another
answer.
B
Next let's take a brief look at some echoes of nine­
teenth-century idealism - the attack on the
"Given. " This familiar theme of Hegelianism and
pragmatism has reappeared in partially novel garb
in the work of Quine, Sellars, and others. As in the
previous century, it is denied that there are any
fixed immutable certainties, any statements totally
immune to revision or rejection, any points at
which an objective fact itself is directly given to
us, so that all we need to do is to note it. Since it is
assumed, wrongly in my opinion, that unless a
statement satisfies these descriptions it cannot be
justified save by its support from other statements,
these denials issue in some form of a coherence or
contextualist epistemology. Insofar as there is
novelty in the recent attack on fixed, isolated,
intuitive certainties, it comes from the "linguistic
turn, " e. g. , the resting of epistemic status on con­
ditions of assertability in a language community.
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
So far this is epistemology. What does it have to
do with truth and reality? Not all the recent oppon­
ents of the given have followed their idealist and
pragmatist forebears in rejecting a realist concep­
tion of truth. The story of where Sellars, e. g. ,
stands on this matter is too complex to be gone
into here. But at least one contemporary thinker
has drawn anti-realist morals from this epistemo­
logy. In his book, Philosophy and the Mirror of
Nature, Richard Rorty writes:
Shall we take. .. "S knows non-inferentially
that P". .. as a remark about the status of S's
reports among his peers, or shall we take it as a
remark about the relation between nature and
its mirror? 11 The first alternative leads to a
pragmatic view of truth. .. (on) the second
alternative. .. truth is something more than
what Dewey called "warranted assertability":
more than what our peers will, ceteris paribus,
let us get away with saying. .. To choose
between these approaches is to choose between
truth as "what it is good for us to believe" and
truth as "contact with reality. ,, 12
Why should we suppose realism to depend on
the existence of fixed intuitive certainties? Perhaps
the argument goes like this. If we are to have any
reason for supposing that any of our statements are
realistically true, there must be some points at
which we have direct access to the way things are
in themselves. If some objective states of affairs are
directly presented to consciousness, so that here we
have the fact itself and not just our own "interpreta­
tion, " then at those points at least, we can tell
whether a statement is telling it like it is. But if
we never enjoy any such intuitive apprehensions of
objective reality, how could we ever tell whether
any statement is or is not in accord with the facts.
And if it is in principle impossible to determine
this, it is idle, meaningless, or empty, to claim such
an accord or to wonder whether it obtains.
This argument is in two stages. (l) Without
fixed intuitive certainties we have no way of telling
whether any statement is realistically true. (2)
Hence it is unintelligible, or otherwise out of
order, to employ this dimension of evaluation.
Both steps seem to me unwarranted.
The first stage is, at best, question begging. The
basic issue here is the status and evaluation of
epistemic principles. The argument obviously
assumes that a valid (reasonable, justified) set of
epistemic principles might be such that a statement \nWilliam P. Alston
could satisfy sufficient conditions for acceptability
without our having any reason to think it realistic­
ally true. But that is just what a realist would deny.
From a realist point of view, epistemic justification
is intimately connected with truth; not necessarily
so closely connected that justification entails truth,
but at least so closely connected that justification
entails a considerable probability of truth. An epis­
temic principle that laid down sufficient principles
of justification such that we could know that a
statement satisfied them while having no reason
to think it true, would ipso facto be unacceptable.
Another way of putting this last point: this first
stage of the argument is one form of the old con­
tention that "we can't get outside our thought and
experience to compare it with reality. " Therefore
we had better renounce any ambition to make our
thought conform to "reality" and concentrate
instead on tidying up its internal structure. But
from a realist point of view this picture of being
trapped inside our own thought, unable to get a
glimpse of what it is like outside, is radically mis­
leading - even if we do lack fixed intuitive certain­
ties. For whenever we have knowledge, that is ipso
facto a case of getting a glimpse of the reality "out­
side. " However we get this knowledge, it wouldn't
be knowledge unless the belief in question were
conformed to its referent(s). 13 It is unfortunate
picture-thinking to suppose that only some spe­
cially direct or intuitive knowledge constitutes
finding out what something is really like.
The second stage of the argument is plain
unvarnished verificationism. If there is no way of
telling whether a given statement is realistically
true, then we can attach no sense (or, if you prefer,
no cognitive or factual meaning) to the supposition
that it is true. It would be pleasant to suppose that
verificationism is now in such ill repute that to tar
the argument with this brush would be condemna­
tion enow. But, alas, such is not the case. The
verificationist criterion has conclusively and
repeatedly been found wanting; but perhaps
excessive attention to technical details has obscured
the basic point of these criticisms. If the underlying
causes of the disease are not clearly identified,
relapses are to be expected. The basic point is
simply this. Except for such statements as are
directly testable, no statement can be empirically
tested in isolation. We must conjoin it with other
statements if we are to derive any directly testable
consequences. And for any sentence, no matter
how meaningless, we can find some set of sentences
that together with the former will yield observation
sentences not derivable from that set alone. Thus
the capacity of a sentence to contribute to the
generation of directly testable consequences com­
pletely fails to discriminate between the meaning­
ful and the meaningless. We do, of course, make
distinctions between those sentences that do, and
those that do not, enter fruitful~y into empirically
testable systems, though it is either very difficult or
impossible to formulate precise criteria for this.
But this distinction also fails to coincide with the
distinction between meaningful and meaningless,
as is shown by the fact that one and the same
statement, e. g. , "Matter is composed of tiny indi­
visible particles, " will enter into such combinations
fruitfully at one period but not at another. 14
c
Rorty's argument can be generally characterized as
moving from epistemology to ontology, from con­
siderations concerning the epistemic status of
statements to conclusions concerning their capacity
to "reveal" reality. I now want to consider some
further arguments of this general sort, which differ
from the argument just discussed in being of a
relativistic character. Although Rorty's argument
depends on rejecting classical foundational ism, it
does not question (1) the existence of a single set of
epistemological principles that (2) yield a unique
result in each individual instance. The two lines of
thought I shall now consider each deny one of these
assumptions.
The first assumption is rejected by, e. g. , the
language-game approach that stems from the later
work of Wittgenstein and is found full-blown in
Peter Winch and D. Z. Phillips. Here the idea is
that there are radically different criteria of just­
ification and rationality for different spheres of
discourse - commonsense talk about the physical
environment, talk about personal agents, moral
discourse, religious discourse, scientific theorizing,
reports of dreams, experiential reports, etc.
Observation is crucial for physical-object talk, the
authority of sacred books and holy persons for
religious discourse, and the sincere asseveration of
the subject for reports of experience. It is a piece of
outrageous imperialism to suppose that any single
requirement for justification applies across the
board.
What bearing is this supposed to have on real­
ism? Well, first there is a straight verificationist
argument from the fact that different language­
games have different criteria of truth to the \nconclusion that they employ different concepts of
truth. This argument presupposes a stronger form
of verificationism. Rorty's argument only required
us to suppose that being empirically testable is a
necessary condition of meaningfulness for sen­
tences. But here we need the additional assumption
that the mode of verification constitutes the mean­
ing. We need this stronger thesis if we are to infer a
difference in the meaning of 'true' in different
language-games from differences in the way of
verifying truth-ascriptions in different language­
games. This stronger verificationist thesis can
hardly be in a more favorable position than the
weaker one, since it entails the latter.
The language-game approach also generates
arguments of a more distinctive sort, though I
cannot see that they fare any better.
(I) The irreducible plurality of language-games
militates against the realist position in another way.
The ontologies of different language-games do not
all fit into any single scheme. There is no place in
physical space for minds, sense-data, or God.
Agency cannot be located in the interstices of the
physiological causal network. Nor is there any
overarching neutral position from which particular
language-games can be criticized and their subject
matters integrated into a single framework. There­
fore it seems quite unjustified to suppose that the
success of a statement in some particular language­
game depends on whether it conforms to the con­
stitution of something called "reality. "
This argument also depends on verificationism.
It argues from our inability to see whether, or how,
different sorts of entities fit into one scheme, to the
unintelligibility of supposing that they do. But,
more basically, the argument suffers from a na'ively
simplistic conception of reality. Why suppose that
reality, if there be such, must fall into some single
pattern? Why shouldn't reality be as many-man­
sioned as you like? Why should there not be even
more kinds of entities in heaven and earth than are
dreamt of in our language-games? And if there is
some significant degree of unity to it all, why
should we expect to be able to discern it? Even if
we can't integrate agency and physical causation in
a single "space, " they may, for all that, be what
they are apart from our attempts to conceptualize
them. The argument suffers from a grievous lack of
ontological imagination.
(2) We find in the writings of Sprachspielists, as
well as in their historical relativist forebears, the
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
insistence that our concepts of truth and reality are
rooted in our forms oflife, our practices - linguistic
and non-linguistic. From this the inference is
drawn that truth cannot consist in conformity to
the way things are "outside" our thought and
practice. But this is just the old question-begging
argument that we "can't get outside our own
thought and experience to compare it with reality. "
Of course, when we use the term 'true' or any other
term, we are using our language, if we know what
we are talking about. Who else's language might we
be using? (I could have been speaking French or
Bantu instead, but that is presumably not to the
point. ) But this has absolutely no implications for
the content of what I am saying, or for the ways in
which it is properly evaluated. The fact that when I
say anything I am using the language I am using,
which is rooted in the social practices it is rooted in,
is a miserable truism that has no bearing on our
problem. It leaves completely open the question of
whether, in saying what I say, I am claiming to
refer to something that exists independent of our
discourse, and whether this is an intelligible or
reasonable claim to make. IS
D
Although Sprachspielism is relativistic in the sense
that it takes any particular cognitive success to be
relative to some particular language-game, it is not
so relativistic as to suppose that different language­
games yield mutually incompatible results. On the
contrary, it considers different language-games to
be too different to be in competition for the same
prize. We now turn to a more extreme relativism,
which denies the second of the assumptions listed
earlier - that our epistemological principles yield a
unique result in each application.
This line of thought has taken many forms from
the ancient Greek sophists to the present. Its most
prominent recent incarnation is in the work of
Feyerabend and Kuhn. Here is a highly oversim­
plified version. In the development of a science we
have a succession of "theoretical (or conceptual)
frameworks" or "paradigms. " Each of these para­
digms is self-enclosed in something like the way
Winch and Phillips think of a language-game as
being self-enclosed. The constituent terms get
their meanings by their place in the framework;
observations are conceptualized and reported in
these terms; and hypotheses are evaluated in
terms of how well they explain data so construed,
and in terms of how well they solve the problems \nWilliam P. Alston
generated by that paradigm. Hence we are unable
to choose between rival theoretical frameworks in
terms of one or another contestant.
The position is usually not held in so extreme a
form, but I wanted to present it as such so as to see
what bearing it would have on realism. The
obvious argument is this. All our conclusions are
relative to the assumptions and conceptual frame­
work of a given paradigm, which has indefinitely
many alternatives. Therefore we can never have
reason to think that any of our conclusions are in
conformity with reality itself. Hence the realist
notion of truth is inapplicable to our discourse.
Clearly this is but another rerun of the same old
verificationist argument. And again the same com­
ments are applicable.
These, I take it, are the epistemological argu­
ments against realism that are most prominent on
the current scene. I have not contested their epis­
temological premises, though I do not accept them
in every case, but instead have concentrated on
showing that even with these premises the argu­
ments are far from cogent.
E
Finally, there is the direct application of verifica­
tionism to the crucial implication of realism men­
tioned above, viz. , that however well confirmed,
justified, or rationally acceptable a statement may
be, it is logically possible that it be false. The
argument is very simple. We have, ex hypothesi,
ruled out any possible reason for supposing the
statement false. Therefore we cannot attach any
meaning to the denial that it is true. This is clearly
not just an argument against realism, but also an
argument for the equation of 'true' and 'justified'
(or 'could be justified'), or at least for the substitu­
tion of the latter for the former. In only slightly
different garb it is the main argument of Peirce,
James, and Dewey for their several pragmatic con­
ceptions of truth. It is given a fancy logical dress in
Hilary Putnam's recent Presidential Address to the
Eastern Division, but the verificationist underpin­
ning is the same in all its versions. And about this
enough has been said.
I conclude from this discussion that the recent
opponents of realism have failed to shake our
commonsense confidence in that doctrine. They
have not done significantly better than Hegel,
Bradley, James, and Dewey; in fact, their argu­
ments turn out to be warmed-over scraps from
the idealist, pragmatist and positivist traditions,
masked by a few ingenious sauces from La Nou­
velle Cuisine.
III
However, on this solemn occasion I am not content
with simply shooting down the arguments of
opponents. A more fitting aspiration would be to
show that there is no coherent alternative to rea­
lism. Unfortunately, I can see no way to do this
other than by examining all sufficiently promising
alternatives. This is, of course, a very large task,
and I shall only be able to make a start.
The most obvious move for the anti-realist is to
define truth in terms of whatever he takes to be the
appropriate standards for accepting a statement. A
common thread in the arguments we have been
considering is the verificationist objection to the
idea that there is something involved in a state­
ment's being true over and above the grounds we
can have for regarding it as true. Such arguments
naturally lead to an identification of a statement's
being true with there being adequate grounds for
taking it to be true (not, of course, with anyone's
seeing that there are adequate grounds). Thus the
truth of a statement, S, will be identified with S's
cohering with the rest of one's beliefs, with S's
leading, or having the capacity to lead, to fruitful
consequences, with S's satisfying the standards of
the particular language-game in which it is a move,
with S's being one of the survivors at the ideal limit
of scientific inquiry, or whatever. 16
Instead of proposing a non-realist analysis of
'true', the anti-realist may instead (more candidly,
in my view) propose that we abandon the concept
of truth and talk instead of justification, confirma­
tion, or verification. Thus Dewey once advocated
dropping 'true' in favor of'warrantedly assertable'.
It will be easier to focus the discussion if I stick
with the version in which some non-realist analysis
of 'true' is given.
As is implicit in the list just given, these non­
realist theories differ along various dimensions.
They may be atomistic or holistic; i. e. , they may
attach justification conditions to individual state­
ments or only to larger systems; in the latter case
what it is for a particular statement to be true is to
belong to a system that, as a whole, satisfies certain
constraints. Again, they may seek to give a single
account of justification for all statements, like the
traditional coherence theories, or they may hold,
like Sprachspielism, that different accounts are to \nbe given for different realms of discourse. The
question I want to explore is whether any verifica­
tionist account of truth can be intelligibly and
coherently spelled out (while not completely losing
touch with its subject matter), without involving or
presupposing the realist concept of truth.
A
The first place a realist will look for a chink in the
armor is the status of the higher-level epistemic
judgments like Sl - 'S would be included in the
ultimate scientific theory, .17 Isn't Peirce implicitly
thinking of this as true in the realist sense? In
asserting S, isn't he thinking that it is really the
case that if scientific inquiry were pushed to the
limit, S would still be there? If so, we have
extruded (real) truth from first-level statements,
only to have it reappear on a second level. 18 But
suppose that Peirce retorts that he is prepared to
treat these second-level statements in the same
way, i. e. , hold their truth to consist in their mem­
bership in the ultimate scientific theory. In that
case he will be faced with an infinite regress. For
this will set up a still higher-level statement Sz -
'Sl would be included in the ultimate scientific
theory'. And if that in turn is treated in the same
way. .. .
I am uncertain as to the force of this realist
criticism. It is unclear to me whether this regress
is any more vicious than a variety of other infinite
regresses with which we are saddled anyway, e. g. ,
the regress of truth levels, or the regress oflevels of
justification. Hence I will pass on to difficulties
that seem to me to be clearly fatal.
B
The real crusher for the anti-realist is the question
"How are we to interpret the statements to which
you apply your concept of truth? " What is crushing
about this question? Well, the point is that on a
natural, intuitive way of understanding statement
content (of specifying what is being asserted in a
given statement), that content carries with it the
applicability of the realist concept of truth. Let's
continue to restrict the discussion to those state­
ments that can plausibly be thought of as being
"about something(s). " For such a statement, the
natural way of specifying content, of making expli­
cit what statement it is, is to specify the referent(s),
and to make explicit what is being asserted of that
referent(s). But if that is what makes the statement
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
the statement it is, then there is no alternative to
supposing that the statement is true ijJ the refer­
ent(s) is as it is being said to be. If what I did in a
certain utterance was to refer to snow and say of it
that it is white, what alternative is there to holding
that my statement is true ijJsnow is white? 19 You
can't in one and the same breath construe the
statement as a commitment to X's being <1>, and
also deny that the statement is true ijJX is <1>. To
understand statement content in this familiar way
is to subject it to realistic truth-conditions. It is
incoherent to say "What I asserted was that snow
is white (or what I did in my assertion was to refer
to snow and say of it that it is white), but the truth
of my assertion does not ride on whether snow is
white. " This is to take away with one hand what
was offered with the other. The realistic concept of
truth is indissolubly bound up with this familiar
way of specifying statement content. 20 If I am
correct in this, the anti-realist will have to provide
some other way of specifying what is being asserted
- other than "The speaker referred to snow and
said of it that it is white. "
If we ask whether anti-realists have recognized
the necessity for an alternative reading, the picture
appears to be a mixed one. I believe that idealists in
the Hegelian tradition have generally been alive to
the issue. Consider Bradley's view of the nature of
judgment, as involving a separation of the 'that'
and the 'what', and a vain attempt to reunite them
in the forms of predication, together with the view
that the essential aim of thought is to produce a
comprehensive, coherent totality that would be
identical with reality. This is an attempt to give
an account of what we are up to in statement
making that is fundamentally different from the
familiar account and that is in harmony with a
coherence account of the nature of truth. Again,
we can see Dewey's emphasis on the "instrumen­
tal" function of ideas and judgments as the germ of
a different kind of alternative account. If what we
are up to in statement making is not attempting to
tell it like it is with particular referents or classes
thereof, but rather providing effective guidance to
our active commerce with the environment (allow­
ing, as I would not, that the latter can be separated
from the former), then it might be not incoherent
to hold that the fundamental dimension of evalua­
tion for statements is their effectiveness in this role.
In many cases, however, one is left with the
impression that the anti-realist takes individual
statements in the same old way, but simply pro­
poses to change the account of what it is for them to \nWilliam P. Alston
be true. If the above argument is correct, this is just
what she cannot do.
A thoroughgoing anti-anti-realist argument
would involve a careful scrutiny of all the note­
worthy attempts, actual and possible, to devise a
mode of statement-interpretation suitable for their
purposes. However, I fear that an examination of
such darkly labyrinthine authors as Bradley and
Dewey would be beyond the bounds of this lecture
even if we were at the beginning rather than, as I
hasten to assure you, in the latter half. Instead, I
shall consider some moves that are more in accord
with the dominant temper of Anglo-American
philosophy of the last half-century, moves that
might well tempt anti-realists, and in some cases
actually have.
(1) The anti-realist may try to turn the above
argument back on her opponent in the following
manner. "The argument depends on the claim that
statemental content is tied to truth-conditions.
Well and good; two can play at this game. If a
realist construal of statements yields realist truth­
conditions, then non-realist truth-conditions can
be associated with a corresponding mode of assign­
ing statement-content. If what it takes for a state­
ment, S, to be true is that it belong to the ultimate
scientific theory (call that 'T') then we will simply
assign to S the content - S belongs to T. "
However tempting this may sound in the
abstract, as soon as it is stated explicitly, it clearly
displays its absurdity. How could it be that assert­
ing that S is asserting that S has some property or
other? How could S be some higher-level statement
about S, i. e. , be a higher-level statement than
itself? How can a statement be a statement about
itself, rather than itself?
A contemporary anti-realist like Dummett, or
(the most recent) Putnam, would not be moved
by this. They would just take it as illustrating the
futility of working with statements or propositions as
our basic units, instead of sentences in a language.
Of course, we can't regard a statement as being a
statement about itself, instead of being itself. But
we do not find the same absurdity in the suggestion
that each of our statements makes a claim about a
certain sentence, even the very sentence used to
make that statement. Let's follow recent fashion
and take a theory to consist of a set of sentences.
Then we may formulate the following Peircean
view of statement interpretation. When I assertor­
ically utter "Lead melts at 327 degrees F, " what
I am claiming is: "The sentence 'Lead melts at 327
degrees F' will (would) be included in the final
scientific theory, T. "21
But though this escapes the absurdity of denying
that a statement is identical with itself, it suffers the
same unhappy fate that befalls other attempts to
substitute sentences for beliefs, propositions, or
statements. Here, as elsewhere, it turns out that
even the closest possible statement about language
will fail to have the same force as the original. In
this case (passing over the parochiality involved in
supposing that the ultimate scientific theory will
consist of English sentences) the difficulty is that
whether the sentence in question figures in T
depends, inter alia, on what that sentence will
mean by the time the final consummation is
achieved. If the sentence means something differ­
ent from what it means now, it may not be
included, even if T does include a statement to
the effect that lead melts at 327 degrees F. Thus,
on this interpretation, when we assert "Lead melts
at 327 degrees F, " we are, in part, making a claim
about the future history of the English language.
This radically distorts our intent. Sometimes we
are talking about language, but most of the time we
are not.
Of course, this view may be so construed that
our statement has to do not with a mere phono­
logical string (which might receive various seman­
tic interpretations) but with the semantically
interpreted sentence "Lead melts at 327 degrees
F. " But that is to throw us back on the absurdities
of treating a statement as being about itself. For a
semantic interpretation of an assertoric sentence is
precisely designed to determine a statement-con­
tent; it specifies what is asserted when the sentence
is used assertorically. Therefore this latest proposal
amounts to assigning two different contents to the
statement: the one determined by the presupposed
semantic interpretation, and the one built on that -
to the effect that the sentence used to express the
first content will be in T. Again we lapse into
incoherence.
(2) The moral of this story is that we can't identi­
fy a statement with a statement about itse(f;
whether about its epistemic status or about the
sentence used to make it. But the diagnosis sug­
gests a simple remedy. Why not take S to be, not
the statement that S satisfies certain epistemic con­
ditions, but rather the statement of those con­
ditions themselves? For each statement, S, we will
choose conditions the satisfaction of which will
guarantee that the statement has the desired \nepistemic status; but we will construe S not as the
statement that S has that status, but rather as the
affirmation of those conditions.
It would seem that this kind of first-level inter­
pretation is not available for holistic theories that
identify the truth ofS with the way it fits into some
system - the final scientific theory, the most coher­
ent and comprehensive theory of truth, or the
ongoing enterprise of coping with the environ­
ment. Here a blanket statement that makes refer­
ence to S (to the way S fits into some system) is all
we have to work with. But an empirical verifiability
theory of truth looks more promising. If we can
specify conditions under which S would be veri­
fied, why not identify what is stated by S with the
satisfaction of those conditions?
Interpretations like this were prominent in
twentieth-century phenomenalism and in early
logical positivism. ("The meaning of a statement
is its method of verification. ,, )22 And recently
Michael Dummett has suggested the possibility of
replacing (realist) truth-conditions with "verifica­
tion-conditions" in giving a semantic description
of a language. Let's use as our example an over­
simplified statement of C. I. Lewis's version of
phenomenalism. 23 A singular attribution of a prop­
erty to a physical object, like 'This container is
made of glass', is to be construed as the assertion
of an indefinitely large conjunction of subjunctive
conditionals like the following:
If I were to seem to dash this container to the
floor, I would seem to see the container shatter­
ing.
2 If I were to seem to thump this container with
my finger, I would hear a certain kind of ring­
ing sound.
Each of these "terminating judgments" is sup­
posed to have the virtue of being decisively verified
or falsified by "sensory presentations. " And the
verification of the whole set would be the verifica­
tion of the original statement, since they are one
and the same? 4
It has been frequently argued and, I think, to
good effect, that projects like Lewis's cannot be
carried out, that no purely phenomenalistic state­
ment is equivalent to any physical-object state­
ment. I don't want to get into all of that. I merely
want to ask whether, assuming that some such
project can be carried through, it enables us to
avoid the realistic concept of truth. And here I am
not asking whether the concept of verification can
be cut loose from dependence on the concept of
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
truth, as it would have to be if it is to be used in an
analysis of truth. Clearly the ordinary meaning of
'verify' is simply show (ascertain) to be true. But this
is not to the present point, since the second-level
concept of verification does not enter into the pro­
posed interpretation of first-level statements like
'This container is made of paper'.
The crucial point, rather, is this. Let's say that S
is taken to be the assertion that p, q, .. ., where
these are verifying conditions, whether stated in
Lewis's way or in some other. We have given a
propositional content to S that differs from the
familiar one. But in giving it this new content, are
we not thereby committed to realistic truth-condi­
tions for that content as firmly as we were with the
earlier one? Instead of simply attributing a prop­
erty to the object referred to by 'this container', we
are asserting a number of contingencies in sense
experience. But with respect to each of those con­
tingencies are we not asserting that it in fact obtains
- that if I were to seem to dash this container to the
floor, it would seem to break? But if so, then again I
am saying something that is true iff that con­
sequence would result from that activity. 2s Once
more, I cannot both be making that claim and
denying that whether the claim is true rides on
whether things would come out that way under
those conditions. In fact, this is the way in which
the matter has been viewed by most phenomenal­
ists and other verificationists. They were far from
wanting to jettison the realistic concept of truth.
They simply wanted to put restrictions on what
sorts of statements are susceptible of (realistic)
truth and falsity.
One might think that the failure to slough off
realistic truth-conditions comes from making the
verificationist interpretation match the original too
closely. By insisting on conditions of conclusive
verification, we have guaranteed that the transla­
tion says just the same as the original, and that is
why we wind up with realistic truth claims after all.
This suggests that we should follow the pilgrimage
oflogical positivism from conclusive verification to
"confirmation. " Perhaps we should interpret our
statements in terms of what would provide (more
or less strong) confirmation, rather than in terms of
what would conclusively verify. But this suggestion
is even more incoherent than its predecessor. We
cannot judge a certain condition to be merely pro­
viding some evidence for S, rather than conclus­
ively verifying it, except against the background of
a conception of what would render S true or, if you
like, of what would conclusively verify S. Why \nWilliam P. Alston
do we suppose that determining that X is malleable
is only some evidence for X's being gold, but does
not conclusively establish that it is gold? Because
we have enough of an idea of what it is for X to be
gold to see that it is possible for something to be
malleable and yet not be gold.
Contrariwise, if we simply take some "confirma­
tion condition" as giving the content of a state­
ment, then it follows that we can't be taking it to
be merely non-conclusively confirming. If what I
am asserting when I utter 'X is gold' is that X is
malleable, then it cannot be denied that the malle­
ability of X makes my assertion true. A set of
conditions cannot be merely confirming evidence,
and also constitute the content of what was said.
Nor will it be more efficacious to construe our
interpretation as made up of conditions of "accept­
ance. " Again, if we mean to contrast conditions of
acceptance with conditions of truth or verification,
we still have the latter in the background; we have
neither eliminated them, nor dissolved their tie
with statement content. If, on the other hand, we
are serious in taking our so-called conditions of
acceptance to specify statement-content, we are
thereby precluded from regarding them as condi­
tions of acceptance rather than of truth.
Thus these verificationist moves are to no avail.
When we identify statement-content in terms of
test, verification, or confirmation conditions, we do
not evade realistic truth-conditions; rather, we
introduce certain restrictions on what can be
asserted, thereby generating parallel restrictions
on what it takes to make statements true. When
all the smoke has cleared, it is still a matter of what
is talked about being as it is said to be.
The language-game, and other relativistic
approaches such as Quine's "ontological relativ­
ism, " may seem to provide a different way out.
Instead of trying to get away from interpreting
statements in terms of the familiar machinery of
reference, predication, and truth, we simply hang
onto all that, but regard it, in each instance, as
relative to a certain language-game (paradigm,
scheme of translation). In a normal utterance of
'Snow is white', we are, indeed, referring to snow
and predicating whiteness of it; and so what we say
is true iff snow is white. But this is all relative to the
"commonsense physical world language-game. "
We can only pick out a referent, identify a property
predicated, and adjudge truth by the standards
internal to that language-game. There is no way
in which we can raise the question, absolutely, as to
what is referred to in that statement, or as to the
conditions under which it is true. All such semantic
notions exist only in relativized forms. When we
try to drop the qualification, the concept dissolves.
But what does it mean to say that 'Snow is white'
is true in the commonsense physical world language­
game, rather than just true tout court?
(1) There is an innocuous interpretation
according to which it is in L that S is true, because
L is where S is. That is, S is constructed from the
conceptual resources of L; that statement-content
emerges from that conceptual practice. Clearly on
this interpretation'S is true in L' will be true for
some L, for any true statement, S, assuming that
every statement can be assigned to at least one
language-game. But this is innocuous because the
relativity does not affect the notion of truth. On
this reading'S is true in L' is just a conjunction of
'S is in L' and'S is true (tout court)'.
(2) It could mean - we're just pretending,
rather than claiming that S is really true, as in "It
is true that Bunter is Lord Peter's butler in Dor­
othy Sayer's mysteries. " But presumably this is not
what is intended, for this reading depends on a
contrast with "really true" (absolutely) - not to
mention the fact that a Sprachspielist would not
be prepared to assimilate all language-games to
fiction.
(3) What is left to us? Only the obvious,
straightforward suggestion that'S is true in L'
means - 'S passes the tests of L for being true'.
But the second occurrence of 'true' has to be taken
as employing the verboten absolute concept. For if
we try to make that occurrence express a relativistic
concept of truth in some L, that will require a
similar explanation, and an infinite regress looms.
These all too brief considerations indicate that
notions like 'true' and 'refers' stubbornly resist
relativization. Once admitted, they point inevitably
to what there is, whatever webs of thought we
weave.
(3) The non-realist interpretations that emerge
from currently fashionable modes of thought have
all backfired. The moral I draw from this caution­
ary tale is that most non-realists have seriously
underestimated the magnitude of their task. They
have failed to appreciate how violent a break is
required with our customary ways of viewing
thought and discourse. They have failed to grasp
the central point that if they are to abandon the
realistic concept of truth, they must give up \nthinking of our thought and discourse in terms of
reference, and the other semantic notions based on
that - saying this or that or what is referred to,
quantification over what is (or could be) referred
to, and so on. They have supposed that they can
continue to construe discourse in these terms,
while attaching a relativistic rider to these semantic
notions, or by substituting some specially tailored
propositional content for the more familiar ones.
But it just doesn't work. To repeat the main point
once more, so long as we think of our utterances as
being about something(s), there is no escape from
the realistic truth formula. So long as it is correct to
say that you are talking about this container, or
dogs, or the quality of mercy, then there is no
escape from the recognition that what you say is
true if/what you are talking about is as you say it to
be. If, on the other hand, it could be made out that
it is a mistake to think of statemental utterances as
being about anything, then clearly the realistic
truth concept does not apply. If there is nothing I
am talking about, my utterance can hardly be eval­
uated in terms of whether what it is about is as I say
it to be. If the non-realist is to make her position
stick, she will have to find some adequate non­
referential account of statemental discourse.
How might this be done? Well, there is the
Bradleian idea that the aim of thought is to develop
a comprehensive, coherent system of concepts,
where this aim is so conceived that if it were fully
realized, the system would be Reality as a whole.
Here the relation with reality is not secured by way
of reference to particular objects in each judgment
(belief, statement), but rather by way of the fact
that Reality is what would constitute the complete
fulfillment of the aim of thought. Whether this is a
radically non-referential conception depends on
whether we can understand the incomplete stages
of this quest without thinking of ourselves as refer­
ring either to the concepts themselves, or to their
Notes
Presidential Address delivered before the Seventy­
Seventh Annual Western Division Meeting of the Amer­
ican Philosophical Association in Denver, Colorado, 20
May, 1979.
I take this to be simply a slightly more explicit
formulation of the view classically expressed by
Aristotle in Metaphysics (1OIIb, 27) as ". .. to say of
what is that it is, and of what is not that it is not, is
true. "
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
extensions or instances. A still more radical altern­
ative would be an explicitly non-intentionalistic
account of speech as complexly conditioned beha­
vior, as in B. F. Skinner's book Verbal Behavior.
Whether this is really a radically non-referential
account will depend, inter alia, on whether the
account itself can be an account of speech without
itself being about something, viz. , speech.
Obviously I can't discuss these putatively non­
referential accounts at the tag-end of this paper. I
shall have to confine myself to the following
remark. Even if doubts of the sort just expressed
could be stilled, and one or more such accounts
could be formulated without embodying or pre­
supposing references at some point, the question
would still remain whether reference is being sold
at too dear a price. We would have to give up such
cherished ideas so that we can pick out objects of
various sorts and characterize them, correctly and
incorrectly, and that in the course of this enterprise
we sometimes communicate information about the
world that guides our behavior as well as satisfies
our intellectual curiosity. Unless the arguments
against realism are considerably stronger than I
found them to be earlier in this essay, the game,
clearly, is not worth the candle.
IV
Yes, Virginia, there is a real world. Not, or not
only, in the hearts and minds of men. Not, or not
only, in the language-games we play, in the
schemes of translation we devise, or in the episte­
mic standards we acknowledge. But in that ineluct­
able, circumambient web of fact to the texture of
which we must needs do homage, lest, though we
speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and
have not truth, our logos is become as sounding
symbols or as tinkling paradigms.
2 See Hilary Putnam, "Realism and reason, " Proceed­
ings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Asso­
ciation 50 (1977), p. 485.
3 To be sure, Hegel's philosophy as a whole contains
elements that are incompatible with realism in my
sense. Here I am only concerned with the Hegelian
or "absolute" version of the particular thesis that
reality is basically spiritual in character.
4 F. H. Bradley, Essays on Truth and Reality (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1914), p. I. \nWilliam P. Alston
5 F. H. Bradley, Essays on Truth and Reality (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1914) p. 223.
6 Brand Blanshard, The Nature of Thought (London:
George Allen & Unwin Ltd. , 1939), vol. 2, p. 264.
7 C. S. Peirce, "How to make our ideas clear, " in C.
Hartshorne and P. Weiss (eds), Collected Papers
(Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press,
1934), p. 268.
8 William James, Pragmatism (Cambridge, Mass. : Har­
vard University Press, 1975), p. 97.
9 John Dewey, Reconstruction in Philosophy (New York:
Henry Holt & Co. , 1920), p. 156.
to Putnam, "Realism and reason. "
II This last is Rorty's picturesque way of saying, "taking
it as involving an immediate awareness that p, or as
involving the fact that p's being directly presented to
consciousness.
12 Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1979), pp.
175-6.
13 Hence the well-advised tendency of some anti-realists
to renounce the concept of knowledge for justified
belief, or warranted assertability.
14 In this connection we may note that the verifiability
criterion forces us into a caricature of the process of
scientific inquiry. Often this involves generating some
hypothesis (, Electric current is a flow of tiny parti­
cles') and then looking around for some way to test it.
Free of verificationist blinders, it seems obvious that
this process is guided throughout by our understand­
ing of the hypothesis we do not yet see how to test.
(We haven't yet found a promising way of embedding
it in a larger system that will generate directly testable
consequences. ) But verificationism would have it that
what we were doing was looking for a meaning to
bestow on a certain sentence! And if that were what
we were doing, why should it matter which of in­
definitely many empirically respectable meanings we
chose?
15 We might also note that though this argument is
found principally in the writings of Sprachspielists,
it does not in any way depend on the multiplicity of
language-games. These truisms would be equally true
if our discourse were restricted to a single language­
game.
16 It may be suggested that I should have taken "redun­
dancy" or "disappearance" theories as equally
obvious alternatives for the anti-realist. These the­
ories deny that the statement 'It is true that S' has
any more "cognitive" or "assertoric" content (makes
any further truth claim! ) than S. The function of 'It's
true' is simply to endorse someone else's statement
that S, or to assert that S in a specially emphatic way,
or the like. But the relation of the redundancy theory
to realism is unclear. It does look anti-realist; if we
aren't asserting anything (over and above S) in saying
'It's true that S', then we aren't asserting, among
other things, that what S is about is as it is said to be
in asserting S. Nevertheless, the opposition might be
only skin deep. If the redundancy theory is merely a
view as to how the llJord'true' or phrases like 'It's true'
are used, then it is quite compatible with the view that
realism is right about the primary aim of thought, and
about the most fundamental dimension of evaluation
of statements; the disagreement would only be over
whether the word 'true' is properly used to express
this.
17 We might also raise questions about the status of
epistemic principles like "The ultimate scientific the­
ory must satisfy the following constraints. .. "
18 This realist rejoinder is reminiscent of a variety of tu
quoque's in which one who denies that there are X's is
charged with assuming X's himself. Thus the skeptic
who denies that anyone knows anything is charged
with himself claiming to know something - viz. , that
no one knows anything. Again, the mechanist or
behaviorist who writes books to prove that men are
not actuated by purposes, is charged with displaying
an example of what he is claiming not to exist. It is
generally true in these cases that the denial ofX's on a
first level is held to involve the admission of X's on a
higher level.
19 The use of the Tarskian paradigm is not inadvertent.
Unlike those who see the whole Tarskian treatment of
truth as a series of technical gimmicks, I feel that
Tarski's criterion of adequacy embodies a funda­
mental feature of our concept of truth. But I read it
somewhat differently from many other admirers. The
fact that'S is true ijJS' is a conceptual truth is often
taken to show that the former doesn't say anything
more than the latter, and that truth-talk is eliminable.
But in opposition to this reductive reading, I prefer to
concentrate on the other direction of equivalence and
give it an inflationary reading. That is, the notion of
what it takes for the statement to be true is already
embodied, implicitly, in the statement-content; in
explicitly saying that S is true, we are just bringing
to light what is already embedded in the first-level
statement.
20 This contention can be rerun for the question "What
is it to understand a given statement or to know what
statement is being made on a given occasion? " For
what one has to know to know that is precisely what
we have been calling statement-content. So again we
cannot say: "In order to know what statement P
asserted at t, what we have to know is that Preferred
to snow and said of it that it was white; and yet the
truth of what P said does not ride on whether snow is
white. "
21 Hilary Putnam considers an interpretation like this in
the second of his John Locke lectures, Meaning and
the Moral Sciences (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1978).
22 To be sure, the mid-twentieth-century advocates of
this mode of interpretation were not concerned to
reject a realist theory of truth, and rightly so, as we \nshall see. Nevertheless, their verificationist brand of
statement-interpretation might well appear attractive
to an anti-realist who is grappling with the problem
currently under consideration.
23 See C. I. Lewis, Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation
(La Salle, III. : Open Court, 1946), ch. 8.
24 Of course, there are many alternative ways of stating
verification-conditions for statements. They may be
stated in terms of what would have to be experienced
in order to verify it, or, as with Lewis, in terms of the
experiencing of it. On the former alternative the con-
Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World
ditions may be phenomenalistic or physicalistic. They
mayor may not be such as to provide a practicable
possibility of complete verification or falsification.
And so on.
25 It must be admitted that conditionals, especially sub­
junctive conditions, pose special difficulties for the
determination of realistic truth-conditions. But these
are problems that arise for any view that allows con­
ditionals (and how can they be avoided? ). It is just that
subjunctive conditionals loom much larger on the
view under discussion. \n47
Simon Blackburn
1 Introduction
Conclusions properly drawn must be true when the
premisses are; events must unfold in accordance
with natural law; people must obey the moral laws.
Why do we find it so tricky to give a satisfactory
philosophy of these necessities? In the first part of
this essay, I suggest that it is because we have a
rooted, and inadequate, conception of what is
needed to establish such an understanding. This
conception dominates the philosophy of modality,
just as it does other areas, but it makes a genuine
advance in understanding impossible. The diag­
nosis here is quite simple, but it is not so simple
to disentangle ourselves from its influence, and to
become practised with tools that are better suited to
the problem.
What would a philosophical theory of logical,
natural, or moral necessity be? By making judge­
ments, of necessity, we say things, and these things
are true or false. Perplexity arises because we think
there must therefore be something which makes
them so, but we cannot quite imagine or under­
stand what this is. Nor do we understand how we
know about whatever this is: we do not understand
our own must-detecting faculty. Elucidating the
truth-condition, and our access to it, is the goal of
philosophy, to which its techniques and controver­
sies are essentially directed. Not only is this so, but
Originally published in Crispin Wright and Graham
Macdonald (eds), Fact, Science and Value (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1987). Reprinted by permission of the
author.
surely it has to be so, for the philosophical itch is
that of finding the nature of the facts strange and
incomprehensible, of failing to imagine what could
make true the relevant judgements. The problem is
that of the fugitive fact, and the solution is to
capture the nature of the fact in an intelligible
way. This answer would tell us what such truths
consist in: the answer would be obtained by estab­
lishing the truth-conditions for such judgements. It
would give us an 'account' of the states of affairs in
which their truth consists, or of what it is that
makes them true. The account would have an
explanatory role as well: fully established, it
would explain why it is necessary that twice two
is four, or how it can be that natural laws exist, or
why we must be nice to one another. The most
direct technique would be analysis, showing, it
might be hoped, that the judgements are made
true by some state of affairs relatively familiar and
unproblematic (by whichever standards prompted
the perplexity). Another technique would be more
aggressive: to suggest that the concepts involved in
the judgements are defective and due for replace­
ment, so that the fugitive 'facts' were not really
such, not really worth chasing after all.
Within this conception of the philosopher's
quest, there is room for disagreement over detail
- for instance, whether the description of the state
of affairs finally fixed upon as making true the
original modal judgement has to be synonymous
with that judgement; whether one range of argu­
ments or another succeeds in showing some con­
cepts to be defective, or over what would count as
an admissible reduction class for the modal claims. \nIt is to the twists of this detail that we naturally
turn when faced with the embarrassment that the
head-on search for truth-conditions for modal
assertions has turned up nothing at all promising.
Where else is there to turn? For rejecting the
problem is too much like ignoring the itch.
The modal concepts need a theory. But I do not
think that they need or could possibly get a theory
described, however remotely, in the terms sug­
gested so far. In other words, I think that we have
completely misinterpreted the kind of solution the
philosophical problem needs. This may seem sur­
prising, for I posed the problem and the kind of
solution in terms deliberately bland - the kind
of terms that would go quite unremarked as a pre­
face to discussions. But I shall argue that they
mislead us, and that a better way to approach the
matter exists.
2 The Quasi-realist Alternative
Let us call the direct approach the truth-conditions
approach. Here is a dilemma that attends it, and
that I shall exhibit quite generally for moral, na­
tural, or logical necessity. If we ask what makes it so
that A must be the case, we may be given a local
proof, a proof of A from B. This is satisfactory if we
already understand why B must be so (if our topic
is logical necessity, there is also the status of the
proof to consider). But if our concern is with the
whole area, then we turn to scrutinize that under­
standing. Attention shifts to why B must be the
case, for our philosophical concern is with neces­
sity in general, not with A in particular. Suppose an
eventual answer cites some truth F, and so takes the
form: 'OA because P. ('Because' here is taken to
include constitutive variants: the truth that OA
consists in F, is made so by F, etc. )
Now, either F will claim just that something is
so, or it will claim that something must be so. If
the latter, there is no problem about theform of the
explanation, for one necessity can well explain
another. But, as we have seen, there will be the
same bad residual 'must': the advance will be
representable as 'if we see why this must be so,
we can now see why that must be as well'. And
there is no escape from the overall problem that
way. Suppose instead that F just cites that some­
thing is so. If whatever it is does not have to be so,
then there is strong pressure to feel that the original
necessity has not been explained or identified, so
much as undermined. For example, suppose a
Morals and Modals
theorist claims that twice two must be four because
of a linguistic convention, or that particles must
attract each other thus because of some ongoing
cosmic setup, or that we must be nice to one
another because that is what God wants. Suppose
it is denied that there is any residual necessity, that
we must make just those conventions, that laws
determine the consequences and continuation of
the cosmic setup, or that God's wants ought to be
heeded. Then in each case there is a principled
difficulty about seeing how the kind of fact cited
could institute or be responsible for the necessity.
This is because the explanation, if good, would
undermine the original modal status: if that's all
there is to it, then twice two does not have to be
four, particles don't have to attract each other, and
we don't have to be nice to each other, even if it
would be unwise not to. This is, of course, a
generalization of the famous Euthyphro dilemma.
Either the explanandum shares the modal status of
the original, and leaves us dissatisfied, or it does
not, and leaves us equally dissatisfied.
So why is the truth-conditional approach so
dominant - why is this dilemma not universally
recognized? Partly at least because it leaves room
for work. The circle can be virtuous and explana­
tory. In other words, there is no embargo on find­
ing theories of the form 'Op because P where F
stays within the modal sphere in question - 'OP
because in all possible worlds p'; 'OP because there
is a relation of necessitation between certain uni­
versals', or 'Op because ~ p is impermissible', for
example. Such theories can and do uncover
important aspects of our thought: making the
logic of modality intelligible, for instance. But
from the standpoint that prompts the original
problem - the dissatisfaction with the fugitive fact
- by staying within the family in question, the
analyses cannot do more than postpone things. Of
course, at one level this is perfectly well known, for
everyone agrees that it is one thing to have a pos­
sible-worlds approach to modality, for example,
and quite another to have a theory of the metaphy­
sics or epistemology of the things we say about
possible worlds.
The poor prospects of the truth-conditional
approach would be easier to tolerate if there were
another approach. Fortunately, there is. The truth­
conditional approach looks for another way of char­
acterizing the 'layer of reality' that makes true
modal utterances. The alternative starts (and,
I shall urge, ends) with our making of those utter­
ances: the thing we intend by insisting upon a \nSimon Blackburn
necessity or allowing a possibility. We could call it a
'conceptual role' or even a 'use' approach, but nei­
ther title is quite happy, for neither makes plain
the contrast with truth-conditional approaches
that is needed. The conceptual role of use of
a modal idiom might be just that of expressing
belief in the fugitive layer of fact! If the best
that can be said about our commitments is that
they are those of people who believe in particular
distributions of possibilities - logical, natural, or
moral - then we are silenced again. But this may
not be the best that there is to say: we can approach
the commitments differently.
This alternative is familiar under the heading of
projectivism (or sometimes, which is worse, 'non­
cognitivism') in ethics: this is why in setting the
scene I have included moral musts. It has been
pioneered in the philosophy of natural law by
Ramsey and Ayer, and my aim is to make it a
recognized option in the metaphysics of modality.
Notice that this is not the alternative of saying
that 'there are no laws of nature' (or no possible
worlds), any more than projective theory of ethics
involves the 'eccentric' view that there are no
obligations. Instead, this approach gives its own
account of what it is to say that there are, and, if
the commitments are valuable, why it is correct to do
so. The account has two stages. It starts with a
theory of the mental state expressed by commit­
ments in the area in question: the habits, disposi­
tions, attitudes they serve to express. It is these that
are voiced when we express such commitments in
the ordinary mode: when we say that there exists
this possibility, that necessity, this obligation. The
second stage (which I called quasi-realism) explains
on this basis the propositional behaviour of the
commitments - the reason why they become
objects of doubt or knowledge, probability, truth,
or falsity. The aim is to see these propositions as
constructions that stand at a needed point in our
cognitive lives - they are the objects to be dis­
cussed, rejected, or improved upon when the
habits, dispositions, or attitudes need discussion,
rejection, or improvement. Their truth cor­
responds to correctness in these mental states, by
whichever standards they have to meet. Such a
theory only collapses back into realism if we are
reduced to saying that correctness in modal or
moral judgement is simply representing the
modal or moral facts as they are. But according to
my direction of theorizing, we can do better than
that, and what we can do involves no irreducible
appeal to a moral or modal reality. It is here that the
opposition to realism lies, although I shall try to
make it plain that the interest of the approach
remains even if, as I also believe, there is no very
coherent realism for it to be 'anti'.
It is tempting to characterize this anti-realism as
an 'as-if' philosophy: we talk as if there exist moral
or modal facts, when in fact there are none. This
makes it sound as though, according to this
approach, some error of expression or thought
is involved in such talk - for we talk as if p, when
in fact p is false. This consequence of an as-if
characterization is especially tempting when we
remember other areas in philosophy where such
projections are supposed to be responsible for mis­
takes we make - pathetic fallacies, for instance.
Spinoza, for example, believed that what we take
to be contingency in the world is merely a reflection
of our ignorance, and this diagnoses a mistaken
belief that we have. l Most writers on projective
theories of morals and modals mention Hume, of
course, and then continue with some version of this:
Hume's view is that we then make a mistake: we
project something essentially 'inner' onto the
external world, and come to the mistaken belief
that the concept of necessity we have applies to
propositions in virtue of the objective prop­
erties of ideas and, as a consequence of this,
we mistakenly believe that modal judgements
can be true or false. 2
There is excuse for the interpretation, for Hume is
not as clear as one might wish. The first passage in
which he appeals to the metaphor of the mind
spreading itself on external objects is in the context
of diagnosing a mistake - the 'contrary bias' that
leads people to ridicule his philosophy of causation,
to suppose that, by making the 'efficacy of causes
lie in the determination of the mind', Hume is
reversing the order of nature. 3 But this does not
show Hume admitting that, by talking of causes (or
obligations or necessary relations of ideas) as we do,
we make any mistake. The theorist may misinter­
pret the nature of our judgements, their origins,
and the standards that justify them. But the first­
order user of the vocabulary makes no mistake:
there is decisive evidence that Hume thought he
made none. This is clearest in the moral case, of
course, for Hume's philosophy of natural belief is
infected by the background problem that our belief
in the external world in any case involves a mistake
- natural and inevitable propensities of the mind
that must lead us to falsehood. But there is no \nfurther mistake involved in 'causalizing' - in find­
ing causal order in the world we take ourselves to
inhabit - any more than there is in moralizing as a
reaction to characters and actions.
Hume's position is best explained by separating
two different applications of the notion of projec­
tion. In the one use (which I prefer) we 'project'
when we use the ordinary propositional expres­
sions of our commitments, saying that there is
this causal relation, that natural law, this other
obligation. In the other we project only when we
adopt, as philosophers, a particular 'realist'
explanation of the sphere in question. This is a
quite different thing, and it is what gave the con­
trary bias of which Hume is indeed complaining.
The space between the two uses is easily missed,
especially by philosophers coming with a realist
bias in the first place. For they will be only too
apt to suppose that the ordinary use has, as it were,
done their work for them, so that a realist ontology
is the only possible explanation of the first-order
usage. But this, in Hume's view and mine, is not so.
And this view must be given a hearing.
How can a projective theory accompany the view
that no mistake is made in talking as we do? We
would only make a mistake in saying that things
ought to be done, or have to be so, if these judge­
ments have a false content. But if their content arises
as the projectivist + quasi-realist story maintains,
they do not. No error occurs in moralizing or
modalizing, even if philosophers have mistaken
the kind of content these judgements have. Error
exists only if there is a real mismatch between the
truth about the nature of the claims and their con­
tent or what we make them do in our theories of
things. But no mismatch exists in the thought that
'1 + 1 = 2', that bees cause stings, and so on.
Quite apart from the implication that we make
some kind of mistake, an as-if description of the
theory makes it appear inadequate to the depth of
our commitments. It looks refutable by a kind of
phenomenological reminder of the strength of our
belief that there real~y are possibilities, necessities,
etc. Don't you believe that there real~y are natural
laws, iron proofs, genuine duties? It is not just that
we talk as if there are such things! But a quasi­
realist will properly say: it is not simply that we
think and behave as if there are necessities: there
are. And we are right to think that there are. The
commitment, and its correct expression, should not
be in question.
What, then, is the mistake in describing such a
philosophy as holding that 'we talk as if there are
Morals and Modals
necessities when really there are none'? It is the
failure to notice that the quasi-realist need allow
no sense to what follows the 'as if except one in
which it is true. And conversely, he need allow no
sense to the contrasting proposition in which it in
turn is true. He no more need allow such sense than
(say) one holding Locke's theory of colour need
accept the view that we talk as if there are colours,
when there are actually none. This is doubly incor­
rect, because nothing in the Lockean view forces us
to allow any sense to 'there are colours' except one
in which it is true; conversely, neither need it
permit a sense to 'there are actually none' in
which that is true. Theorists may construct such
senses: for instance, a sense in which 'there are
colours' implies that colours do some work of phy­
sical explanation, or could be apprehended by more
than one sense, and of course the Lockean will deny
anything implying such a thing. But if the words
retain an uncorrupted, English sense, then the
Lockean, and similarly the quasi-realist, holds not
just that we talk and think as if there are. .. , but
that there are. 4
Then the objection might be rephrased: accord­
ing to the quasi-realist, we think and talk as if there
were real moral and modal facts, but there are none.
However, this too, although it points in a better
direction, invites misunderstanding. It cannot
stand as an accurate diagnosis of a position, for
the word 'fact' also has an uncorrupted English
sense: it is a fact that there are colours, and there
are many facts about them. Certainly, there is a
sense in which the quasi-realist is opposed to giving
an ontological status to moral and modal facts, but
according to him you cannot read off this status just
from the nature of our commitments, their modes
of expression, or their genuine place in our think­
ing, even if that thinking goes on invoking talk of
facts. The appearance tempts philosophers to
ontological quests, puzzles, and errors, but the
mistake lies with the theorist who succumbs to
the temptation.
Of what then is the quasi-realist suspicious? We
can see now how the problem of characterizing
either realism or anti-realism becomes acute. Sup­
pose, for instance, we are satisfied with a quasi­
realist construction of modality: we see what we are
doing when we modalize, and why talking of poss­
ibilities or possible worlds is a legitimate form for
these commitments to take. So when a writer such
as Lewis maintains the irreducible nature of the
modal idiom and expresses his commitments in
that idiom, he is doing no more than a quasi-realist \nSimon Blackburn
allows. What more does he intend by deeming
himself a realist? How is there to be space, as it
were, for some extra content in any such claim?
One might see illegitimate content: if a theorist
held that alternative possibilities are real in the
sense that we can find them in space or hold them
responsible for causing various results, or ifhe took
comfort in the thought that he could model appre­
hension of possibilities upon sensory apprehension.
But theorists, including Lewis, call themselves
modal realists without accepting any such theses.
It begins to look as if there is no way of framing an
ontological or metaphysical opposition. Saying 'I
believe in possible worlds, and I am (or: I am not) a
realist about them' would amount to no more than
accepting irreducible modal idioms, and in either
form the last conjunct is quite idle.
Universal harmony is desirable, but it does not
come quite so cheaply. The difficulty of character­
izing the dispute shows that it is up to anyone who
takes pride in announcing himself in this style to
make sure that the last conjunct has a content. And
in my view, many philosophers who take pleasure
in calling themselves 'moral realists' have failed
badly in this obligation. They have either been
content to pour cold water on revisionary anti­
realism of John Mackie's kind, or content to insist
on the surface appearances, or content to generalize
what is mistakenly seen as a late Wittgensteinian
lesson, to the effect that every indicative sentence
shares the same role ~ that of describing an aspect
of the world ('our world'). The existence of the
kind of theory I am describing should undercut
this. But there is still room for disagreement,
specifically about what in the commitments needs
explaining, and about the kind of explaining modal
and moral facts can themselves do.
Realist theorizing is apt to pay too little attention
to the first and to make too much of the second. It
worries too little about the curious place that moral
and modal commitments have, about what notion
of truth can be appropriate to them, about why it
matters, and about how the commitments blend
with others that we have. It worries less about
these issues because if these commitments are
beliefs, then their aim is simple truth, and this is
proper depiction of the modal or moral realm. This
is an application of the second tendency: to make
much of the explanatory powers of the moral or
modal states of affairs. A realist may betray himself,
for instance, by relying upon metaphors of percep­
tion or vision to explain how we become acquainted
with moral or modal fact, or by entering false theses
about the creation or destruction of such facts and
their dependence on others, or by supposing that
the existence of such facts explains other genuine
states of affairs, in the way in which one state of
affairs can explain another. To suppose, for
instance, that the world exists as it does because it
ought to do so might be the privilege of the moral
realist. To suppose that the world exists because
God made it is the privilege of the theological
realist. If this kind of belief is intrinsic to first­
order theorizing (as in the theological case), then
the kind of diagnosis of the commitments offered
by a projectivist will indeed find error in the
everyday practice, as well as in various philo­
sophical interpretations of it; this is why a 'Witt­
gensteinian' protection of religious belief is a kind
of cheat. Ordinary religious belief, thought of in an
expressive way, involves the mismatch referred to
above. This is also why there is very doubtfully any
space for a genuine realist versus anti-realist debate
about explanatory physics. But first-order theories
are notably silent about the explanatory role of
possible worlds or moral duties; it is left to the
philosophers to inject good or bad views about
that. s
Once the explanations are agreed, not much is
left in the words. So the universal harmony is
better approached in a case like that of colour,
where we feel reasonably confident of the under­
lying facts and the way they relate to colour per­
ception. And then indeed it is no great matter
whether we say that there are colours (and I am a
realist about them) or that there are not (and I am
not). The space for dispute has shrunk away and
can only be resurrected if false implications are
read into the parenthetical remarks. It is no great
trick to announce oneself in either style; the work
comes in earning a right to do so. But to achieve
this harmony in the modal case involves the hard
work of showing how to explain modalizing in the
first place, and this remains to be done.
At the risk of appearing moralistic, I shall close
this section by illustrating how truth-conditional
theorizing dominates our philosophical imagina­
tions. One of the clearest expressive approaches to
commitment to natural law is that of Ramsey and
Ayer. Here is Ayer:
In short I propose to explain the distinction
between generalizations of law and generaliza­
tions of fact, and thereby to give some account
of what a law of nature is, by the indirect
method of analysing the distinction between \ntreating a generalization as a statement of law
and treating it as a statement of fact. (,
It is, however, a little unclear from this way of
setting it up quite how Ayer conceives the step
from a theory of what it is to treat something as a
law of nature to giving 'some account of what a law
of nature is' - the ontological overtone of this
suggests that the truth-conditional theory is not
quite exorcized. For if the expressive theory is
successful, there is no last chapter to write on
what a modal fact or state of affairs is. We would
know what we do and why we are correct to do it
when we commit ourselves to necessities of logic,
nature, or action, and that would be the end. Ayer's
nod towards truth-conditional hankerings is
wholesale prostration in other writers. A recent
example is David Armstrong. After observing
that inference from the observed to the unobserved
is central to our whole life as human beings, and
that if there were no laws, those inferences would
be unreliable, he continues: 'hence the notion of
law is, or should be, a central concept for epistemo­
logy. If so we will also want to enquire into its
ontology. We will want to know what a law of
nature is. ,7 The grip of the truth-conditional
approach appears when Armstrong considers the
alternative to this, which he identifies as the 'truly
eccentric view. .. which denies that there are any
Laws, .8
Even writers as cautious as Edward Craig and
Crispin Wright find it straightforward to agree on
the point that, in effect, closes off projectivism +
quasi-realism. The context here is that Craig had
demonstrated decisively the imaginative block that
faces us when we try to conceive, in proper detail,
of a counter-arithmetical reality. The projectivist is
then poised to see this imaginative block as some­
thing expressed when we insist upon the necessity
of arithmetic. But Wright commented, 'If as Craig
makes plausible, we are unable to conceive of how
any alternative determination might be viable, then
that is how things are with us; it is a further,
tendentious step to inflate our imaginative limita­
tions into a metaphysical discovery. '9 And Craig,
acknowledging that he and Wright agree that we
should not ask the imagination to do too much,
concedes immediately: 'It certainly is a further
step. ' 10 Is it so clear that there is this further step?
Only if claims of necessity are 'metaphysical dis­
coveries', and this the projectivist will query.
Again, the position is clear if we revert to the
moral case: a projectivist will see commitment to
Morals and Modals
an obligation as a distinctive mental state - call it a
sentiment - but he will not accept any charge that
we tendentiously inflate our sentiments into meta­
physical discoveries (discoveries about the in­
dependent structure of the world of obligations),
precisely because he denies that in our awareness of
duty and obligation we are in fact making any such
discoveries. (I return later to Craig's reasons, which
were good, for thinking there is a further step -
only it is not this one. )
There are aspects of the work of making quasi­
realism attractive that I shall not repeat in this
paper. These include its distinction from naive
subjectivism, its moves to accommodate the pro­
positional nature of ethical claims, its explanation
of the syntax and semantics that go with that, and
the basis for constructing a working notion of
truth. My concern here is to see how this shape of
theory fares with one of the other two 'musts': that
of logic.
3 Policies versus Needs
We allow possibilities, rule out impossibilities, and
insist upon necessities. This is not describing any­
thing. As in Wittgenstein, attributing necessity to a
proposition is not making a true or false claim
about it - or at least is not to be understood that
way. ll It is more like adopting a norm, or a policy
or a rule that a thesis be put 'in the archives', above
the hurly-burly of empirical determination. The
decision dictates how we shall treat recalcitrant
evidence. This accords with the parallel with mor­
als. The one kind of rule makes courses ofthought
intellectually obligatory; the other makes courses of
action so. But there is a major problem: to identify
any space for this rule-making. Modalizing, like
moralizing, does not feel optional: it feels as though
we regard 'I + 1 = 2' as necessary simply because
we must do so, not because we have chosen to do so.
Its status is more naturally seen as a product of our
inability to conceive otherwise, or to do anything
with a counter-arithmetical judgement. If the
necessity of propositions is in any sense conferred
by us, it is still unnatural to see it as reflecting
anything in which we had a choice. So notwith­
standing Wittgenstein, a projectivist will be wise to
look for the mental set that gains expression outside
the realms of the optional (and it is vital to notice
that he can do this - (the denial of metaphysical
realism does not usher in a 1950s embrace of free
choice and conventionalism). \nSimon Blackburn
If attributing modal value reflected free policies
and choices, it would be unclear why we should go
in for it. The right attitude would seem to be that
which Wright attributes to his imagined 'Cautious
Man'. 12 This is the character who agrees with us on
all empirical truth. He agrees with us too in accept­
ing proofs; in arithmetic or logic, or in any more
apparently metaphysical commitments, such as
those determining our basic ascriptions of tem­
poral, spatial, or causal categories, this character
agrees with us. But he refuses to make modal
assignments. As far as he is concerned, it is enough
that we accept, say, that I + 1 = 2. It is unwise to
go further and ascribe necessity to the proposition.
The challenge is reminiscent of Quine: would it
not be better simply to register our stronger attach­
ment to some propositions than others, and then to
leave market forces to determine which ones main­
tain our loyalty? Even if we abandon the self-image
of decision-makers, we confront essentially the
same problem. What would be lost if we simply
did not modalize? Is it not foolish to elevate mere
imaginative limitations into iron necesssities?
Quine thinks that even in the case of logic we
would be better off doing no such thing. Of course,
in the context of positivism, Quine's strength lay
not so much in opposition to modal discrimination
in itself, as in his insistence that coming to the
problem with notions of meaning or convention is
coming with dirty hands: there can be no modally
innocent appeal to conventions, or concepts or
meanings or rules or languages, giving us an ante­
rior understanding from which to explain or justify
those discriminations. In other words, even if we
can say things like 'analytic propositions are true in
virtue of meaning/ concepts/ constraints on the
application of concepts. .. ', this is no help. It is
no help because there is no identification of con­
cepts, meanings, etc. which does not itself involve
knowing the modal liaisons of propositions in
which the concepts occur - what must be, may
be, or cannot be true, if they are so. Hence, any
such appeal cannot explain or justify our modal
commitments: in a frequent metaphor, it keeps us
within the same circle.
It may have been naive of the positivists to think
that by retreating to questions of meaning we
obtained a clean-handed empiricist approach to
modality. But overthrowing that is not the same
as overthrowing the modal. Indeed, the 'dirty­
hands' argument is entirely two-edged: by showing
how deeply the modal is entrenched in any 'con­
ceptual scheme', it makes it less likely that modal-
izing is left an unprotected optional extra in our
thought. But so far as the present essay goes, the
point to insist upon is that there is clearly an ante­
cedent problem for any naturalistic sanitizing of
the modal. This is to explain the way in which we
make modal judgements - the ease with which we
non-collusively agree upon them. Obviously,
before we recommend that we abandon modal­
izing, we want to know what it involves and why
we do it. Our capacity to make non-collusive modal
discriminations requires explanation, whether or
not it is regrettable that we do so. But curiously
enough (since the task is one of naturalized
epistemology), Q! .Iine's philosophy of the modal is
incapable of meeting this eminently naturalistic
request, and when it is buttressed to do so, it
loses its appeal, doing better by becoming quasi­
realistic. Or so I shall argue.
4 Explaining Modalizing
Quine's consistent position has been that even
when we think of the most elementary trivialities
of truth-functional logic, the best we can say is that
they are obvious. It is sometimes said that he chan­
ged his mind about this, and that, discussing
translation from allegedly pre-logical or alterna­
tive-logical tongues, he conceded some very special
status to truth-functional logic, in the determina­
tion with which we would reinterpret others as
conforming to it. But in Quine's view this is no
shift. It is just a consequence of the fact that we
always translate so as to save the obvious. 13
Of course, not all truths naively called necessary
are at all obvious, but Q! .Iine can and does extend
the explanation to those which can be proved by
obvious means from obvious starting points. Here
we have the famous Quinean picture in which the
truths naively called necessary are those which are
obvious enough to lie far away from the theatres of
war in which empirical forces mould and break
theories. It substitutes the one-dimensional web
of belief, with only a vague and pragmatic bound­
ary between propositions that face the test of
experience routinely ('contingent') and those that
at worst would only face it in periods of exceptional
theoretical turbulence ('necessary'). And at first
sight it gives Quine his answer to the problem of
explaining our non-collusive application of the
notion. When we deem a proposition necessary,
we express our apprehension of its obvious
character. \nBut a little thought shows that this is quite
inadequate. For a great many truths are in Quine's
central reservation, but would simply be classed as
contingent. These are truths that are central, cer­
tain, obvious to everyone - that there exist trees and
rocks, that houses keep off the rain, and so on.
There is no prospect of these being rocked by
scientific change, nor of recalcitrant experience
casting doubt upon them. But we unhesitatingly
class them as contingent. How is Quine to explain
this difference in the modal reaction, if they are in
the scientific archive, beyond the struggles of falsi­
fication and modification?
Quine admits that logic is 'built into translation
more fully than other systematic departments of
science. It is in the incidence of the obviousness
that the difference lies. .. .'14 It looks as if this is to
be developed when he contrasts 'I + I = 2', which
is 'obvious outright', with 'it is raining', which is
'obvious in particular circumstances'. But the point
he apparently has in mind is just that 'every logical
truth is obvious, actually or potentially: each, that
is to say, is either obvious as it stands or can be
reached from obvious truths by a sequence of indi­
vidually obvious steps'. 15 This is the extension
referred to above. But it is not at all clear how it
relates to the incidence of the obviousness. And in
any event, in a well-developed theoretical science,
obviousness can similarly transmit from obvious
data through obvious principles of interpretation
and explanation, to bring hitherto unobvious con­
clusions into the fold. There is no diagnosis of our
different reactions to 'I + I = 2' and 'there exist
trees and rocks' here.
Quine's first thought about the contrast was the
best: it is indeed in the incidence of the obviousness
that the difference lies: 'it is raining' is obvious only
in particular circumstances; 'I + I = 2' is 'obvious
outright'. But 'obvious in particular circumstances'
versus 'obvious outright' is a dangerously suggest­
ive contrast: not far from 'assertible only in the
light of particular experience' versus 'assertible by
conceptual means alone', or a posteriori versus a
priori. If the best theory of the incidence of the
obviousness is that in the one case but not the other
it varies with particular contingencies, we are left
with our judgement that the truth of the one does
so vary, and the truth of the other does not. This
once more is what common sense would say: 'there
are trees' is obvious in the light of something that,
we know, could have been otherwise; not so
'I + I = 2'. Another way of putting it is that com­
mon sense allows that recalcitrant experience is
Morals and Modals
possible in the one case but not the other: we could
tell a story in which it came to appear to us as if
there were not trees, but not one in which I + I is
anything other than 2. But Quine cannot appeal to
entrenched modal intuitions to explain the division
within the obvious.
The problem, remember, is that Quine is to
explain our modal tendencies before dismissing or
sanitizing them - showing that nothing in the mak­
ing of them licenses epistemology to draw any
grander distinction than his. He is therefore quite
within his rights to call upon his list of theoretical
defects here. Perhaps it is because we are in the grip
of mythical theories of ideas, or molecular theories
of meaning, or use-mention confusion, that we
distinguish between equally certain or obvious
judgements, identically remote from the threat of
overthrow: there being trees and I + I being 2.
But is it clear from a naturalist perspective that
only a defect is involved - that there is no legitimate
point and purpose in the distinction, within the
overall class of certainties, between those that are
necessary and those that are contingent? Surely
not, and a better explanation of our propensities
is easy to produce. Let us consider the matter from
the opposite point of view. It is usually necessity
that is the bugbear, but if we suppose that it is the
distinction between the necessary and the contin­
gent that requires understanding, we also can ask
what we miss if we lack the capacity to deem
proposItIons contingent. This direction of
approach must be equally legitimate. In fact, I
suspect there is some evidence that contingency
needs more explanation to children than necessity:
the initial tendency is to take everything that is so
as having to be so. Suppose someone who is mod­
ally blind in this way: he sees no point or purpose in
accepting any notion of contingency. Running the
metaphysics and the epistemology in tandem, we
can suppose that epistemologically he can make
nothing of the idea that a particular judgement is
a posteriori. 16 So he can make nothing of the idea
that although there are trees there might not have
been, nor that there being trees is obvious only in
the light of particular experience, so that if the
experience were different (or had been different),
as it might be, the opposite judgement would have
seemed right.
What does he miss? The case is still under­
specified. This person may, perhaps like Leibniz or
Spinoza, have a background theory that all appar­
ent contingency is disguised necessity. In that case,
in the marketplace, or talking with the vulgar, he \nSimon Blackburn
could use a perfectly good surrogate for contin­
gency - perhaps one that he may regard as suited
for finite beings. Or perhaps he is like the Cautious
Man, and claims to find some kind of hubris in
expressing verdicts in modal language, although he
makes the same distinctions and the same use of
them (for instance, in distinguishing valid from
invalid proofs, or reflecting on alternative possibil­
ities) that we do. This is theoretical or philosoph­
ical scepticism, and, like its counterparts elsewhere,
is supposed to coexist with normal living. Such
theorists draw the same distinctions as the rest of
us, except that when they think such things as that
there might not have been trees, they will (as it
were) preface their assent with a universal
qualification: contingency becomes some species
of apparent contingency, or not the real thing.
This is scepticism, or perhaps idealism, about
modality, and not what I intend. I want instead
someone who does not even recognize the need for
a reinterpretation, for he cannot begin by recogniz­
ing even apparent contingency as such.
It seems plain that blindness to the a posteriori
status of propositions is catastrophic. To such a
person, failure to realize that it is raining here
now is like failure to realize that 1 + 1 = 2, an
incomprehensible defect. He is unable to make
anything of a mode of thinking in which it is not
realized that p, when p is true, in just the way that
we are unable to when p represents an elementary
necessity. But what does he make of (for instance)
sleep, of blindness, of his own need for telephone
directories or testimony, or of the difference that
different spatial and temporal position causes to his
own information gathering? How does he think of
his own failures of omniscience or conceive of his
own changes of knowledge as he goes about the
world? There seems no way of answering these
questions without stripping the subject of massive
quantities of ordinary, non-modal, empirical under­
standing - simple understanding about the varia­
tion of belief with circumstance. It would be
possible to fill out the way in which the deficiency
disqualifies him from interpreting others reliably:
he cannot rationalize them, seeing why various
beliefs seem right to them, because he has no way
of seeing how belief varies with point of view, with
use of the senses, with skill or luck. But ignorance
of these things in this context is just a species of
ignorance of the way one thing varies with another.
The person who cannot understand how the
cat's awareness of the bird varies with whether it
can see it seems little better than one who car, not
understand how the leafs motion varies with the
wind.
Conversely, if the subject has this understand­
ing, he is in a position at least to imitate modal
discriminations. Crucially, he can do better than
Quine suggests in making distinctions within the
class of the obvious. He can make something of a
way of thought in which it is not realized that there
are trees, just as he can make something of a way of
thought in which it is not appreciated that it is
raining here now. Long-term confinement to tree­
less zones is a kind of position he can understand,
and whose impact upon a belief system he could
appreciate. He can say something better about 'it is
raining here now' and 'I + I = 2' than that they
are equally obvious. He can say something of what
makes the former obvious, and describe people to
whom it would not be obvious; he can appreciate
how there could be, or make something of, a way of
describing the world in which it is denied. Suppose
he is set our task of discriminating, among obvious
truths, between those which are intuitively neces­
sary and those which are contingent; then he can at
least approximate to our division, by simply clas­
sing as contingent those which satisfy this condi­
tion: he can make something of ways of thought in
which, for various reasons, they are either not
accepted or are even denied. Here 'make something
of will include being able to explain how such a
way of thought might arise, knowing how it might
be rectified, understanding the practices of those
whose thought it is, and so on. This will give the
subject a sense of what would count as recalcitrant
experience, and what would have counted as such,
even for entrenched, obvious, but contingent, cer­
tainties. And, given that there is a residual class of
apparent beliefs where he cannot do this, he will
have a working substitute for the necessary and the
impossible.
The upshot is that blindness to the a posteriori
character of beliefs seems impossible in subjects
who have virtually any comprehension of the
world. Now naturalized epistemology is largely a
study of the variation of belief with circumstance.
It can be done by us only when we can make some­
thing of the variation of belief involved. In some
cases we can; in residual cases such as logic and
mathematics we characteristically cannot. This dif­
ference can be used naturalistically to explain our
tendency to make modal divisions, and it gives the
explanation that Quine left himself without.
Is it an explanation that can be taken over by
Quine? I believe so. Quine has no reason to oppose \nour discrimination of contingency; it is the remain­
der he dislikes. So his best path would be to accept
the explanation of our propensity to modalize, but
to warn us against making too much of the imagin­
ative differences it cites. This would be to join
forces with Wright's Cautious Man: our imaginat­
ive limitations are facts about us; they may gain
expression in our modalizing and explain our dis­
criminations, but they ought not to be taken as any
guide to what is necessarily the case.
5 Refining Imagination
The players, then, seem to align themselves into
two teams. Both admit the existence and centrality
of imaginative blocks - of the fact that there are
propositions of whose falsity we can make nothing.
The one side, encompassing Craig, Wright, this
new Quine, Forbes, and probably most others,
finds something distinctive about the Cautious
Man, who goes this far, but refuses to modalize.
~ine recommends his modesty; Forbes thinks it
would be a mistake to project imaginative limita­
tions. Craig does not go quite so far. He indeed
thinks there is a further step if we take our imagin­
ative limitations as guides to what must be the case,
namely the step of supposing that the world is
transparent to our intelligence. He points out that
in particular philosophical climates the belief that
the world is thus transparent, or the goal of making
it thus transparent, may be much more appealing
than in others. In particular in the twentieth­
century pragmatic climate that Quine inhabits, this
belief is less prominent: it becomes enough that
theory should enable us to 'anticipate and control
perceivable events', and genuine intelligibility is no
longer a first priority. 17 In modalizing we are being
incautious, and even if Craig finds much to admire
in the old ideology that prompted us to be so, the
sense remains that sobriety requires the more Qui­
nean attitude. This side then thinks that the Cauti­
ous Man is distinctive in not modalizing. Either he
does not possess a set of concepts that we, somewhat
unaccountably, do, or he exercises proper caution in
not making judgements with them.
The other side, where I feel rather isolated,
queries the central doctrine of these thinkers.
When we understand what the Cautious Man
lacks, we shall be pleased that we have it. The
central doctrine of the other team is, in Craig's
words, that 'we should not infer any absolute
impossibility from the limitations of our own ima-
Morals and Modals
ginations, .18 With modifications, I suggest that
there is a quite proper move or inference here;
that what looks like intellectual hubris is in fact
not so. The shared doctrine of the other team is
that there is a chasm which the Cautious Man is
admirable for not crossing. My claim is that it
is only in the shadows cast by illicit hankering
after a realistic, truth-conditional account of
modalizing that the crossing seems so dangerous.
Craig thinks that there might be two sources for
the idea that the crossing can be made. One is that
meanings are sufficiently transparent to our minds,
that we can know just by introspection that what
we mean by some sentence can never come out
false. As he rightly says, nobody can succumb to
that with a clear conscience these days. The other is
the assumption that our mental powers are per­
fectly in tune with reality, and as he again rightly
says, that can only be credible within a specific
philosophical climate. My source is different: I
am sceptical about the assumption that we know
what we mean by 'absolute necessity', or the real
distribution of possibilities, in a way that allows us
to contrast them wholesale with the blocks that our
only ways of thinking meet. I am sceptical because I
detect the influence of realism at just this point.
This scepticism will, I hope, appear less extra­
vagant if we remember the other, easier, fields on
which projectivism + quasi-realism fought. The
equivalent of the Craig-Wright-Quine team over
morals would say: 'we should not infer any ("abso­
lute") obligations from the direction of our own
sentiments' (for example). The equivalent of the
Cautious Man would be someone who, while con­
ducting his practical reasoning in every respect as
the rest of us do, eschews the 'inference' to the
proposition that we have, for instance, an obliga­
tion to our children. He can make the same
deprecatory remarks about our right to think our­
selves in tune with metaphysical moral reality. He
can even cite theological and philosophical climates
in which this pride would have seemed natural, but
which no longer obtain. My reaction is that he has
mistaken the nature of the judgement: by thinking
of it as 'made true' by some possibly alien state of
affairs, he has made his scepticism inevitable; by
seeing the proper function of the proposition, we
avoid it. On a realist account, his caution is correct,
as is his refusal to moralize. But as it is, he is
actually missing nothing (as I put it in 'Errors and
the phenomenology of value', 'shmoralizing' - con­
ducting practical reasoning properly without a real­
istic backdrop - is just moralizing). Again, the \nSimon Blackburn
colour case provides an easier but slightly more
distant analogy: we would be wrong to be cautious
over whether using our eyes tunes us to the real
divisions and distributions of colours, because our
only concept of the reality of those divisions comes
from proper use of our eyes.
However, the other team has another weapon,
again wielded powerfully by Craig. Following the
passage agreeing with Wright that it is a 'tendenti­
ous step' to inflate our imaginative limitations into
a metaphysical discovery, Craig writes:
It certainly is a further step. In the first place, it
is clear that there is a group of possibilities
which no argument from premisses about
what we can and can't imagine could ever rule
out. We might, for instance, come to be able to
imagine what we can't now imagine, there may
be other beings who can imagine what we can't
and never will be able to imagine, and so
on. .. . [I]f we close our minds to these possibil­
ities then we make assumptions about our pres­
ent imaginative capacities for which we have no
warrant. 19
To address this, we need to make distinctions
within the class of the 'unimaginable'. I wrote
above of propositions whose truth we cannot ima­
gine in the sense that we could make nothing of
ways of thought in which they are asserted. Now
this is to be taken fairly strictly, and so taken it does
not quite correspond to 'unimaginable' on an un­
tutored reading. Suppose, for instance, I announce
that I am able to show you a new primary colour,
quite distinct from any mixture or shade of pre­
vious colours. You may doubt me, and you would
certainly be unable to imagine what I was going to
show you, if my claim is true. You might even
express yourself by saying that it is impossible,
but you would be unwise to have much confidence
in this claim, for in some sense you can 'make
something of the possibility that I am going to do
what I said. It is not as if I had said I would show
you a circle with straight sides, or a true contra­
diction.
Let us distinguish a proposition's being 'unim­
aginable', in the sense that we cannot present to
ourselves a sense of what it is like to experience it as
true, from its being 'inconceivable', where this
involves the kind of block just indicated, in which
we can do nothing with the thought of its truth. It
is frequently pointed out that unimaginability is a
poor symptom of inconceivability, and this is cor-
recto The cases one would adduce include these:
the extra colour, the existence of infinite total­
ities, the bounded and shaped nature of space or
time, the existence of extra dimensions, perhaps
the operation of backward causation. Then there
is the unimaginability of entities like the self, or of
the will, and in some frames of mind, we cannot
imagine the possibility even of rule-following,
intentionality, and so on. The lack of fit works the
other way round as well - propositions might be
properly classed as impossible, although the im­
agination freely allows them: notoriously, the
alleged possibility that I might have been Napoleon,
or that Fermat's theorem might be true (or false),
one of which is imaginable, although impossible.
Our imaginative powers change and develop.
The child cannot imagine the beliefs of the adult;
those unacquainted with them cannot imagine the
taste of claret or the work of Rembrandt. These
conditions can be altered, which immediately gives
us a sense of potential ways in which our own
imaginations are partial. Our experience is limited,
and our imaginations not much better. Just as
people of limited experience have impoverished
imaginations compared with us, so we must accept
that there are many things of various kinds which
we cannot now imagine - tastes, smells, insights,
and presumably truths. This, of course, accords
well with Craig's caution: it is not just a modal
sceptic, but all of us, who will beware of inferring
impossibility from just any imaginative failure.
Using unimaginability as a good indication of
impossibility is also a mistake because it depends
upon too simple a notion of the relation between
experience and thought. It asks, as it were, that we
should be able to see any truth in a single picture.
So, for instance, if we want to think of a theoretical
notion, such as that of force acting at a distance, we
try to visualize the process, and, failing, are apt to
find the notion suspicious. We find it hard to
accept that full intelligibility can be earned by a
proper place in a theory, even if we cannot visualize
the happenings of the processes. Consider, for
another example, the shape of space. Children
find it incredible to think that space has a shape,
because they try to visualize it, or in other words
imagine themselves looking at it, which is what we
normally do to observe the shape of things, and the
thought experiment collapses, for the observer can­
not find a standpoint from which the whole of
space can be observed. But using that failure as a
reason for concluding that space must be infinite
would be a mistake, for it would ignore other ways \nin which a shape of space might be certified - ways
like those a man might use to find the shape of a
container in which he is confined. If these proce­
dures certify that only certain routes in space are
possible, then the right conclusion may be that
space is bounded and has a shape, and we can
explain why the enterprise of trying to visualize it
fails. Visualizing is a poor guide to states of affairs,
because not all states of affairs reveal themselves in
a picture. Similarly, things may be impossible
although naive imagination allows them, because
naive imagination does not tell us how to describe
the scenes it re-creates; this is why it is so danger­
ous to use imagination as a guide to the metaphy­
sics of the self.
Here we have explanations of failures of imagina­
tion. And we can conceive of superior positions
from which some of our imaginative limitations
could analogously be explained. When we can do
that, we will not take imaginative limitations as a
guide to impossibility. Now Craig in particular
notices all this. This is a difference, he writes,
between the case of the extra colour or difficult
intermediate cases like that of extra spatial dimen­
sions and full-blown cases like that of a deviant
arithmetic: 'An explanation of our inability to ima­
gine the arithmetically deviant along the lines that
served for colour and spatial. dimensions doesn't
get started; so nothing checks our tendency to
project our incapacity ar. d suppose that reality
just couldn '[ be like tho i. ,'. 0 But Craig does not
highlight the good use the projectivist can make
of this difference.
Consider again the parallel with moral projectiv­
ism. We do not find it trivial to cross from a
sentiment to a moral judgement. Only certain senti­
ments - those of a certain strength, or with certain
objects, or those accompanied by sentiments about
others who do not share them - form a jumping-off
point. We are also conscious that there are doubt­
less flaws and failures in our sentiments, which are
perhaps capable of explanation in the same way
that we explain the defects of those who are worse
than ourselves. But when the sentiments are strong
and nothing on the cards explains them by the
presence of defects, we go ahead and moralize. , We may be aware that our opinion is fallible, but
that is because we can do something with the
thought of an improved perspective, even when
we are fairly certain that one will not be found,
and here as elsewhere commitment can coexist with
knowledge that we may be wrong. The 'step' from
a fully integrated sentiment of sufficient strength
Morals and Modals
to the moral expression now becomes no step at all:
the moral is just the vocabulary in which to express
that state. A voiding it would not be an exercise in
modesty, but an impoverishing idiosyncrasy of
expression.
Why should it not be like this with logical neces­
sity? We have arrived at the residual class of pro­
positions of whose truth we can make nothing. We
cannot see our failure to make anything of them as
the result of a contingent limitation in our own
experience, nor of a misapprehension making us
think that their truth should be open to display in a
way in which it need not be. We express ourselves
by saying that they cannot be true - that their
negations are necessary. There is the bare possibil­
ity of being shown wrong - perhaps our search into
the causes of our imaginative block was inadequate,
or perhaps we were under a misapprehension of
what it might be for the proposition to be true. We
may be uncomfortably aware of even great philo­
sophers who mistakenly projected what turned out
to be rectifiable limitations of imagination - the a
priori has a bad history. But as Wright notices, we
should have no wish to make ourselves infallible
when deeming things a priori. We make the
commitment in the light of the best we can do.
There is no step, and no illusion.
6 NaturalisIn and Quasi-realisIn
On this account, part of what it is for us to make
nothing of the truths that we deem impossible is
that we cannot explain naturalis[ical~y our own fail­
ure to see what it would be for them to be true.
When we can see how, if a proposition were true,
we might nevertheless be in bad circumstances to
appreciate how it might be, we release it from
impossibility. It does not deserve ruling out any
more. But we cannot see how, if contradictions
were true or if I + I = 3, we might be in bad
circumstances to appreciate how it might be. We
could have not even a sketch of a natural story of
the block we face, because we can make nothing of
the starting point.
This provides a kind of catch-22 in our attempts
to theorize about the modal. If we can see our
tendency to rule out p as the outcome of a contin­
gent limitation, we are already making something
of the thought that p might be true, but that if it
were, nevertheless we would not appreciate it
because of something or other. And this under­
mines any original commitment to its impossibility. \nSimon Blackburn
When someone starts: 'if there were an extra col­
our, then. .. ', perhaps we can understand how it
might be contingent limitations that make the
hypothesis hard to contemplate - but if that is all
there is to it, we lose any right to regard it as
impossible. On the other hand, when someone
says 'if 1 + 1 = 3, then. .. ' and essays to show
how, if this were true, we would be in a bad
position to appreciate it, the thought experiment
breaks down, for we cannot properly work through
what is being supposed and how we might be in a
world of which it is true. But this means that there
is bound to be a residual 'surd': our incapacity to
make anything of the thought that some proposi­
tions are true has to be resistant to natural explana­
tion, if it remains a good candidate for modal
commitment.
The fear of an inexplicable core motivates
attempts, such as the positivists gave, to remove
any content from necessary truths. But we have
accepted that the dirty-hands argument shows
that we will not explain this incapacity by invoking
uncontaminated knowledge of meaning, concepts,
rules. We now find that if any natural explanation
of our imaginative block can be given, this attacks
our right to make the commitment. I think that
here we get an alternative, or perhaps supplement­
ary, explanation to that offered by Craig, of the
late twentieth-century opposition to the modal. It
can arise not only from a changed conception of
what theories need to do, but also from a conviction
that nothing escapes naturalistic explanation.
When we have thoroughly tested the sense of a
hypothesis and make nothing of it, this is, in
Wright's words, how things are with us. As Craig
says, if the quasi-experiment of working through
how it would be if p is done on ourselves, now, and
if our attempts to work with p being true fail, then
'for any logical guarantee we have, that may be as
far as it goes, .21 But it goes a little further, for in the
light of what we have said, it will also be so that we
cannot see the incapacity as just one we happen to
be subject to; we cannot deem it a mere fact about
ourselves, here, now. If we could see it in that light,
then that itself would destroy the modal commit­
ment. This is why there is something bogus in
Kant's theory that it is the forms of inner and
outer sense that determine our a priori commit­
ments. This looks illuminating because it looks
sufficiently parallel to the natural explanation we
might give of the imaginative limitations we can
accept as no indication of impossibility - the colour
limitation, for example. But it is not really parallel,
for if we can make nothing of the possibility of
other forms of sense, the 'fact' that ours is one
way or another is not intelligible as a genuine
explanatory truth. Seeing it like that would require
thinking the other side of the boundary: under­
standing how it might be, for instance, that
although it is compulsory for us to use classical
arithmetic, with a different cast of mind it might
have been compulsory to use another arithmetic.
And this we cannot do.
The residual surd marks a large asymmetry
between the moral and the modal. In the case of
moralizing, nothing stands in the way of a complete
naturalistic story of what it is, why we do it, and,
quasi-realistically, why we are right to do it. But
the genesis of the way of thought is similar. The
moralist insists upon obligations. He rules out
those who flout them, refusing approval, ignoring
contrary temptations, bending his actions to con­
form. The modalist insists upon necessities. He
rules out ways of thought that flout them, refuses
theories that involve them, bends his thoughts to
conform. The moralist could just issue rules and
penalties, but ifhe becomes self-conscious he needs
the moral proposition to stand as a focus for dis­
cussion and reflection, and he contemplates its
truth as a way of doing so. The self-conscious
modalist needs the same. But the moralist can be
quite completely aware of the genesis and justifica­
tion of his activity, whereas if what we have just
said is true, the modalist cannot be. In the case of
the modal, the phenomenon is anti-naturalistic at
its core.
Or is this unduly pessimistic? Some relief might
be got by teasing out more aspects of the core
inability to 'make anything of a way of thought
that accepts a putative impossibility. Obviously,
there are enterprises of thinking through what
modifications in logic are possible or what would
be missing in a way of thought that consistently
tried to make 1 + I = 3. The business, for
instance, of thinking through how a science might
be built around denial of double negation, or of the
distributive laws oflogic (from P and Q V R, infer
(P & Q) V (P & R)) proceeds under the stimulus
of constructivism, or of quantum mechanics,
respectively. So it ought to be possible to hold
both that these laws are necessarily true and that
we can 'make something of' ways of thought that
lead people to deny them. This is not a serious
obstacle to the direction of this essay. What we do
is take a proposed deviation and follow it until
either the way of thought seems possible - and we \nno longer modalize against it - or it breaks down.
But 'breaks down' will mean: offends against some­
thing that we suppose essential to any scheme of
thought (such as some distinction of truth and
falsity, some stability of content, some embargo
on contradiction). Eventually we voice an inability
to make anything of transgression against these
norms: this is the surd that remains. If the thought
processes of the deviants are eventually seen to
break down, then we can get a deeper understand­
ing of our own commitments: it is no longer so that
we face an entirely blank wall when we try to
explain our own attachment to these laws. This
reveals the genuine scope for explanatory work,
and it may do a little to moderate the anti­
naturalistic pessimism. We can certainly hope to
show why a way of thought that is committed (say)
to non-contradiction, or to supposing that not all
propositions are true, or to other elementary neces­
sities, is also committed (say) to 'I + I = 2', since
we can hope to prove (relying, inevitably, on moves
that we find inescapable) that if they are necessary,
then so is this. This would give a complete bill of
health to the modal if, as the positivists hoped, the
propositions finally bearing the burden were free of
genuine content, or owed their truth to some na­
turalistically explicable fact about us - a decision or
convention, for instance. But these escapes no
longer appear, and in default of a leap outside the
system of necessities, the final surd seems set to
remain.
Addendum
In this essay I do not press an argument against
Lewis's modal realism that I did express in Spread­
ing the Word; this argument nevertheless hovers in
the background. This argument is that, as well as
problems of saying how we get as far as possible
worlds, the realist has a problem of getting us back
from them: when we use a counterfactual, for
instance, in pursuit of a concern with the actual
world, why should we be interested if things are
thus and so in a neighbouring world, or in all
neighbouring worlds? It sounds like a change of
subject. This argument was assailed by Bob Hale in
his review. 22 Hale in effect plays the equation
between 'this wire might have been live' and
'there is a possible world in which this wire is
live' backwards, pointing out that since we have
excellent reason to be interested in the former, and
since according to the modal realist the latter
Morals and Modals
means the same, we have excellent reason to be
interested in the latter.
This mistakes the nature of the problem. My
concern, as usual, was explanation, and the point
is that a realist construction of the neighbouring­
possible-world proposition plays absolutely no role
in explaining why we should be interested in the
'might have been' proposition with which it is
identified. If anything, it seems to make such an
interest strange or even inexplicable. It is no good
replying that we are after all interested in the
'might' proposition, so we can expect the poss­
ible-world proposition to inherit that interest: the
point is that the interest is not explained, and
becomes harder to explain, if we give each of the
claims other-worldly truth-conditions. There is an
immaculate treatment of this by the late Ian McFe­
tridge in the collection of his papers, Logical Neces­
si~y. z3 McFetridge also correctly breaks the alleged
parallel with Kripke's notorious argument against
Lewis's counterpart theory.
Another puzzle with modal realism that I do not
develop is that the realism seems to take the moda­
lity out. 'Necessarily 2 + 2 = 4' and '2 + 2 = 4
everywhere' do not mean the same. But, says the
realist, what if 'everywhere' means 'in all possible
worlds'? The question is ambiguous. If the collec­
tion of all possible worlds were given extensionally
(WI, Wz, .. . ), then again the identity would be lost:
someone might think that 2 + 2 = 4 in all those
worlds, without thinking of 'all those worlds' as
exhausting the possible worlds. If the totality
were given under some heading other than modal­
ity, the modal content would be lost. It is only if the
collection is given under the heading of modality
that the two mean the same, but we are not any
further in understanding what it is to think of a set
of worlds under that heading. This is no objection
to using possible-worlds talk, but it shows that the
idea that when we do so we refer to real things just
like the actual world provides no explanation of the
nature of modal commitment.
It is natural to worry whether the use of the idea
of an imaginative block is a fig leaf, disguising what
must ultimately be thought of in more conventiona­
list terms, as for example adherence to a rule of
language. In a way, and for the purposes of this
essay, I do not mind very much whether this is so
(it would matter much more to Craig, whose cam­
paign has been directly concerned with refuting
conventionalism). In the last few lines of the essay
I do indeed express pessimism for the prospects of
any theory of why we face the blocks we do when \nSimon Blackburn
we set about thinking in terms of impossibilities.
But for my purpose it is more important that this
Notes
Spinoza, The Ethics, pt II, prop. 44. I owe the refer­
ence to Al McKay.
2 Graeme Forbes, The Metaphysics oj Modality (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1985), p. 218.
3 David Hume, A Treatise on Human Nature, bk I, pt
III, sect. 14, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Oxford
University Press), p. 167.
4 I do not have a fixed opinion on what Locke himself
thought about the existence of colour. See P. A.
Boghossian and J. D. Velleman, 'Colour as a second­
ary quality', Mind 97 (1989).
5 Obviously in this paragraph I ignore the possibility of
the generalized quasi-realist move introduced in
'Truth, realism, and the regulation of theory', in
Simon Blackburn, Essays in Quasi-realism (New York
and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993), ch. I:
the move that allows even the use of a concept in
explanatory roles, but still defends an anti-realist
construction of it. It is not that I changed my
mind between the two papers, or between then and
now, but that for the purposes of this paper it is the
different direction of a quasi-realist story that is
important. Even if explanatory contexts eventually
fall within the quasi-realist net, it is not right to start
with them.
6 A. J. Ayer, 'What is a law of nature? ', in The Concept oj
Person (London: Macmillan, 1963), pp. 230-1.
7 D. Armstrong, What is a Law oJNature? (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1983), p. 5.
8 Ibid. , p. 5.
9 Crispin Wright, Wittgenstein on the Foundations oj
Mathematics (London: Duckworth, 1980), p. 439.
10 E. J. Craig, 'Arithmetic and fact', in Ian Hacking (ed. ),
Exercises in Analysis (Cambridge: Cambridge Univer­
sity Press, 1985), p. 90.
II E. g. , Ludwig Wittgenstein, Remarks on the Founda­
tions oj Mathematics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1956), V. 6,
4-5, p. 163. Wittgenstein constantly appeals to hidden
difference of role underlying superficial descriptive
appearances. See also Blackburn, 'Errors and the
phenomenology of value', in Essays in Quasi-realism,
ch. 8, n. 13.
12 Wright, Wittgenstein on the Foundations of Mathe­
matics, ch. 23.
13 In 'Carnap and logical truth' (1954; repro in W. V.
Quine, The Ways oj Paradise and Other Essays (New
York: Random House, 1966), pp. 105-6) promoting
the dirty-hands argument, he wrote 'The considera­
tions which were adduced in 'I, to show the natural­
ness of the linguistic doctrine, are likewise seen to be
empty when scrutinized in the present spirit. One was
block is identified and properly located as the
source of our propensity to modalize.
the circumstances that alternative logics are insepar­
able practically from mere change in usage of logical
words. Another was that illogical cultures are indis­
tinguishable from ill-translated ones. But both of
these circumstances are adequately accounted for by
mere obviousness oflogical principles, without help of
a linguistic doctrine of logical truth. For, there can be
no stronger evidence of a change in usage than the
repudiation of what had been obvious, and no stron­
ger evidence of bad translation than that it translates
earnest affirmations into obvious falsehoods. ' And in
Philosophy oj Logic (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice­
Hall, 1970), in the same context, again insisting upon
the inevitability of our imputing classical logic to a
translatee, he offers almost identical terms: 'Being
thus built into translation is not an exclusive trait of
logic. If the natives are not prepared to assent to a
certain sentence in the rain, then equally we have
reason not to translate the sentence as 'It is raining'.
Naturally the native's unreadiness to assent to a cer­
tain sentence gives us reason not to construe the
sentence as saying something whose truth should be
obvious to the native at the time. Data of this sort are
all we have to go on. .. '
14 Quine, Philosophy of Logic, p. 82.
15 Ibid. , pp. 82-3.
16 It is beyond the scope of this paper to explore the
distinction between necessity and a prioricity, where
the one is thought as logical or metaphysical, and the
other as epistemological. I believe that an 'attitude'­
based theory of necessity is able to explain Kripkean
intuitions about the distinction, although the story is
not altogether straightforward. The difficult phenom­
enon to explain would be the alleged conferring of
necessity upon truths that were clearly arrived at a
posteriori. But it should be all right that, after we have
discovered something ('water is H20'), we should
'archive it' at least for some purposes: we do not of
course regard such things as truths of logic, nor can
we 'make nothing of' the thought processes of one
who would deny them.
l7 Craig, 'Arithmetic and fact', p. 92.
18 Ibid. , p. 110.
19 Ibid. , p. 90.
20 Ibid. , p. 106.
21 Ibid. , p. 91.
22 Robert Hale, 'The compleat projectivist', Philo­
sophical Quarterly 36 (1986), pp. 65·-84.
23 Ian McFetridge, Logical Necessity (London: Aristotel­
ian Society Monographs, 1990), pp. 144-6. \n48
Crispin Wright
I
It is, as is familiar, difficult to be precise about what
is involved in realism. The realist in us wants to
hold to a certain sort of very general view about our
place in the world, a view that, as I have put it
elsewhere, mixes modesty with presumption. I On
the one hand, it is supposed, modestly, that how
matters stand in the world, what opinions about it
are true, is settled independently of whatever ger­
mane beliefs are held by actual people2 On the
other, we presume to think that we are capable of
arriving at the right concepts with which to capture
at least a substantial part of the truth, and that our
cognitive capacities can and do very often put us in
position to know the truth, or at least to believe it
with ample justification. The unique attraction of
realism is the nice balance of feasibility and dignity
that it offers to our quest for knowledge. Greater
modesty would mean doubts about the capacity of
our cognitive procedures to determine what is true
- or even about our capacity to conceptualize the
truth - and, so, would be a slide in the direction of
skepticism. Greater presumption would mean call­
ing into question, one way or another, the auto­
nomy of truth, and, so, would be a slide in the
direction of idealism. To the extent that we are
serious about the pursuit of truth, we are unlikely
to be attracted by either of these tendencies. We
Originally published in Midwest Studies in Philosophy
12 (1988), pp. 25-49. Reprinted by permission of Uni­
versity of Minnesota Press.
want the mountain to be climbable, but we also
want it to be a real mountain, not some sort of
reification of aspects of ourselves.
It is a remarkable phenomenon that an issue of
this degree of abstractness, whose proper formula­
tion is unclear to the point where it is prima facie
hazy what shape a relevant debate about it might
assume, can so command intellectual curiosity.
The conviction that a real issue is being presented
is the conviction that metaphysics, in the most
traditional sense, is possible: that there are genuine
questions about the objectivity of human intellec­
tual endeavor, and about the constitution of reality,
which it falls to the traditional philosophical me­
thods of critical reflection and analysis to resolve, if
resolution is possible. This conviction may be base­
less, and may yet be shown to be so by the applica­
tion of just those methods. But we should work
very hard before drawing that conclusion. The
intellectual satisfaction associated with properly
formulating and responding to these questions
will be far greater than that of a repudiation of
them, however well motivated.
In any case, it is evident that progress can be
consequent only on some clarifications, perhaps in
unexpected directions. One deservedly influential
attempt at such a clarification has been Michael
Dummett's. 3 I shall begin by indicating certain
causes for dissatisfaction with Dummett's pro­
posal, and will then try to consider what more
generally apt analysis of realism may be appropriate
if the metaphysical issues are to emerge both as
reasonably definite in content and as (at least \nCrispin Wright
potentially) tractable. I am bound to confess to a
certain pessimism about the ultimate possibility of
this project. But my suggestions here must, in any
case, be sketchy. And the thought is always consol­
ing that, often in philosophy, it is more instructive
to travel than to get anywhere.
II
No one has to be a realist, or not tout court. It is
open to us to regard only some of our commitments
as apt to engage with reality in the appropriate way.
Realism about theoretical science, for example,
need not commit one to realism about pure mathe­
matics ~ and, indeed, one may wish to be only
eclectically realist within science, taking an antire­
alist view of quantum theory, for instance. Dum­
mett's original view was that the distinctive and
proper thesis of realism about a particular genre of
statements is that each of them is determinately
either true or false ~ that the principle of bivalence
holds good for them. The point of the proposal is
best appreciated if we concentrate on a class of
statements ~ say, those concerning the past beyond
living memory ~ for whose truth-values we cannot
guarantee to be able to get evidence one way or the
other. Holding that bivalence is valid for such
statements is holding that each is, nevertheless,
guaranteed to be true or false. It would appear to
follow that what confers truth or falsity on such a
statement must be something separate from and
independent of whatever makes for the availability
of evidence for the statement's truth-value ~ if
anything does. Hence, in particular, such a state­
ment's being true cannot be the same thing as its
meeting even our most refined criteria for its truth.
The truth is, thus, independent of human opinion,
which is the key realist notion. 4
This line of thought has its problems, 5 but here I
shall assume that it is in good order as far as it goes.
That, however, does not seem to be far enough.
One drawback of Dummett's proposal, remarked
by a number of commentators, is that a Dummet­
tian 'realist' about a given class of statements may
also be a reductionist about them. Someone who
held, for instance, that statements about the mental
may be exhaustively analyzed in behavioral terms
could also consistently hold that the analysis would
be bivalence-preserving; anyway, they would have
to hold, presumably, that the analysis would
respect the lack of any guarantee of available evid­
ence, one way or the other, for such statements.
But, such a view would hardly involve what we
think of as realism about the mental. Dummett, it
should be emphasized, has never been under any
illusions about this, 6 and would be content to add, I
think, that realism must be a view about what
makes for the truth of statements when they are
literally and nonreductively construed. But a more
serious worry concerns vagueness. If the members
of the germane class of statements are vague, then
we precisely do not want to hold that each of them
is guaranteed to be determinately either true or
false. At the same time, vague statements are cap­
able of truth and falsity, and a realist conception
ought to be possible, it seems, of what makes for
the state of affairs when they do possess determin­
ate truth-values. 7
One response would be to suggest that, when
bi valence is inappropriate for this sort of reason,
Dummett's proposal should reduce, in effect, to
the claim that truth may be evidence-transcendent:
The truth of a statement, vague or otherwise, need
have no connection with the availability of any
ground, even in principle, for believing it to be
true. I believe that the appropriateness of so con­
struing truth is the deep question that Dummett's
writings on the topic raise, and that such a con­
strual is, indeed, a cardinal feature of certain realist
positions, notably the Cartesian philosophy of
mind, the Platonist philosophy of mathematics,
and certain forms of scientific realism. But it leaves
the realist with no opinion to hold when it comes to
statements for which evidence, one way or the
other, can be guaranteed to be available ~ effect­
ively decidable mathematical statements, for
instance, or a statement concerning the observable
outcome of an experiment. More important still, it
represents as the distinctive realist thesis some­
thing that someone might well want to oppose,
though still wishing to endorse the spirit of realism.
Antirealism, in the sense associated with Dum­
mett's work, is exactly the view that the notion of
truth cannot intelligibly be evidentially uncon­
strained ~ or the view, at least, that once it is so
unconstrained, it is no longer in terms of truth­
conditions that the meanings of the statements in
question can be interpreted. But someone who
believes that has, so far, no motive to forswear all
use of the notion of truth (whatever exactly that
would involve), unless it is supposed that truth is
always and essentially epistemically unconstrained
~ a supposition that falls foul of evident fact that,
for a great many types of statements, we can make
no sense of the idea of their being true if we have to \nsuppose that evidence for their truth is not, at least
in principle, available. Indeed, in contrast to
the direction of much of Dummett's work on
this topic, it is not clear that a general antirealist
semantics must be other than truth-conditional,
provided the truth of a statement is always taken
to require the availability of evidence for its truth.
The point remains that it ought to be possible to
take a realist view of what makes for the truth or
falsity of statements whose truth-values are not
conceived as evidence-transcendent. Dummett's
antirealist, who wishes to urge that truth-value
should never be so conceived, seems to have no
motive to reject realism in this more basic sense.
But what is the more basic sense? It would pass
for a platitude, I think, that whether or not a state­
ment, envisaged as uttered on a particular occasion,
would express a truth is a function only of
the content it would have on that occasion and
the state of the world in relevant respects. The
more basic kind of realism involves, I suggest,
the assumption of a sort of mechanical view of this
Platitude. Truth-values are, so to speak, ground
out on the interface between language and reality.
What thought a particular sentence would express
in a particular context depends only on the seman­
tics of the language and germane features of the
context. Whether that thought is true depends only
on which thought it is and germane features of the
world. At neither point does human judgment or
response come into the picture. To be sure, the
semantics of the language depends on institution; it
is we who built the machine. But, once built, it runs
by itself. Thus, of any particular statement of suf­
ficiently definite sense, it is determinate whether it
expresses a truth in any particular context, ir­
respective of any judgment we may make about
the matter. A basic realist thought is that wherever
there is truth, it is, in this way, investigation­
independent.
Since this conception builds no epistemic con­
straints into the factors that determine truth, it will
no doubt come easily to someone who subscribes to
it to suppose that truth can transcend all evidence.
And since no provision seems to be made whereby
reality can fail to determine truth-values, so long as
the statements concerned are of sufficiently defin­
ite sense, bivalence, too, will be a natural adjunct.
But the conception is completely general, available
both for the class of statements whose truth we
conceive as requiring the availability of evidence
for their truth and for its complement. And it does
nothing to alter the essential character of this con-
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
ception of truth to superimpose whatever verifica­
tionist constraints we please.
The conception remains very much at the level
of metaphor. But at least it is clear that realism, as
characterized by it, has two quite distinct areas of
obligation. The belief that a class of statements are
apt to possess investigation-independent truth­
values depends on regarding meaning as strongly
objective: What constitutes correct use of an
expression in particular circumstances has to be
thought of as settled somehow independently of
anyone's actual dispositions of response to those
circumstances. What fits the meaning is one thing;
what, if anything, we are inclined to say is another;
and any correspondence between the two is merely
contingent. Naturally, one feels there has to be
something to this thought, that if the notion of
meaning, and with it the notions of truth and
error, are not to collapse, there must be space for
some kind of contrast between proper use of an
expression and that use to which people may actu­
ally incline. But it is quite another question
whether only a realist conception of the objectivity
of meaning can avoid such a collapse. Wittgen­
steinS assimilated the relationship between mean­
ing and practice to that between character and
behavior. The parallel is suggestive: It is quite
consistent with our attaching sense to the idea of
someone's action being out of character to regard
what it is true to say about character - as we do - as
a function of the way the subject is actually inclined
to behave. But I shall not consider further what
notion of the objectivity of meaning may be appro­
priate to the realist's purpose. 9 My point is merely
that someone who inclines to the 'more basic' real­
ism owes an account of the matter.
A philosopher who had no qualms about the
objectivity of meaning as such, however, might
still be dissatisfied with this kind of realism about
a particular class of statements. If there are to be
things that it would be correct to say, irrespective
of what anyone is actually inclined to say, then - in
accordance with the Platitude - a contribution is
called for from 'the state of the world in relevant
respects'. Historically, the various forms of antirea­
lism, in different areas of philosophy, have been
fueled mainly by doubts about the capacity of the
world to make the necessary contribution. One
class of such proposals is associated with more or
less austere, empiricism-inspired theories of con­
cept-formation. Hume, for instance, believed that
there is no way whereby we can form a properly
perspicuous notion of causation except at the cost \nCrispin Wright
of not including all the features that popular
thought attributes to it. Hence, understood as
popularly intended, statements involving the
notion of causation are of insufficiently definite
sense, in the Humean view, to take on determinate
truth-values. Since they, nevertheless, playa relat­
ively determinate role in our ordinary thought and
language, the proper account must be that their
role is not to 'correspond to the facts' - we can
attain no satisfactory conception of the relevant
'facts' - but is a nondescriptive one. The instru­
mentalism about scientific-theoretical statements
espoused by many positivists had an essentially
similar rationale: A preferred theory of meaning -
here, the conviction that all significant descriptive
language must ultimately be analyzable into a vocab­
ulary of sense experience - transpired not to have
the resources to accommodate such statements
within the sanctuary of fact-stating respectability.
This kind of proposal has its primary motivation
in the theory of meaning. The reality of causation,
or of certain sorts of theoretical entities, is called
into question only because it is doubted that we can
form any genuine concepts of what such things
could be. A second kind of proposal, to similar
effect, has a more basic ontological motivation.
Although it is true that non descriptive theories of
moral and aesthetic valuation, for instance, can be
and were stimulated by positivistic views about
meaning, they have, nevertheless, retained an
attraction for many who find no virtue in positiv­
ism. Such philosophers simply find it metaphys­
ically incredible, as it were, that the world might
actually contain objective values to which our
moral, aesthetic, and other value judgments may
be seen as some sort of cognitive response. It is
thought baffling what kind of thing an objective
value could be - in what the objective value of a
situation could reside - and what part of our nature
might justifiably be considered sensitive to such a
commodity. The alternative to so murky and pre­
tentious a view of, for example, moral language is,
again, to account for what appear to be its genuine
assertions in terms of their possession of some
other nondescriptive role. lO
There are, no doubt, other kinds of motives for
similar tendencies. The general conception to
which they give rise is that the range and variety
of our declarative discourse somehow outstrips the
categories of states of affairs that are genuinely
exemplified by reality. We apparently talk as if
there were moral, or scientific-theoretical, or pure
mathematical states of affairs, but in truth there are
not. One response to that convictIOn, of course,
would be to dismiss the 'language games' in ques­
tion as mythology. What is common to the forms of
antirealism in which we are interested here is that
they eschew that response: What might be taken to
be mythological descriptions are credited, instead,
with some sort of different but valid role. I shall
reserve the term irrealism as a marker for these
tendencies in general, preferring 'projectivism' for
a proper subclass of irrealist proposals with which
we shall be concerned later. What opposes irreal­
ism with respect to a particular class of statements
is the view that the world is furnished to play the
part in the determination of their truth-values,
which the Platitude calls for, that there really are
states of affairs of the appropriate species. II
III
Our concern, then, is with the philosophical topo­
logy of irrealism. What precisely are the commit­
ments of irrealism concerning a particular class of
statements? How best might it be supported? Is it
ultimately coherent? For a time, during the hege­
mony of so-called linguistic philosophy, the irreal­
ist tendency seemed to be channeled exclusively
into various forms of expressive theory. Expressive
theories were proposed not merely of judgments of
value, but of claims about truth and about causa­
tion, professions of knowledge, descriptions of
actions as voluntary, and much else. 12 The point
of the notion of 'expression' here is precisely its
contrast with and exclusion of assertion, properly
so regarded. When one expresses something in this
sense, the intention was, one makes no claim about
reality, 13 even though the syntax of the utterance is
superficially that of a genuine assertion, apt to
agree or to fail to agree with some putative state
of affairs.
The principal difficulties encountered by these
theories were twofold. First, many of the positive
suggestions concerning what was being expressed,
or more generally what, in enunciating an 'expres­
sion', people were doing, were actually quite con­
sistent with holding that the relevant kind of
sentence effected an assertion. For example, those
who held that to characterize an action as voluntary
was to express one's willingness to hold the subject
responsible for the consequences said something
that no realist about the distinction between
voluntary and involuntary action would have
wanted to deny. Not that this has to be an objection \nto the expressivist's positive claim. The point is,
rather, that if the positive account offered by an
expressive theory nowhere goes beyond what an
opponent would acknowledge as aspects of the
'pragmatics' of the relevant class of utterances,
then the theoretical obligation remains to explain
why it is that these pragmatic aspects actually
exhaust the use of the relevant sentences and are
not merely consequences of their possession of a
genuinely assertoric role. Historically, this obliga­
tion has not, by and large, been properly met.
Second, the syntactic similarities between the
sorts of 'expression' listed and what the theorists
would have been content to regard as genuine
assertions are actually far from superficial. Sen­
tences, for instance, which, according to emotiv­
ism, are apt merely for the expression of evaluative
attitudes, display all the syntactic possibilities
enjoyed by, for example, descriptions of the
weather. They allow, for instance, a full range of
tenses, appraisal as "true, " "false, " "exaggerated, "
"justified, " and so on; they may feature embedded
in the ascription of propositional attitudes; and
they admit of compounding under the full range
of logical operations. In connection with the last,
Peter Geach 14 argued, in an influential note, that
expressive theories have no resources with which to
explain the permissible occurrence of, for example,
moral sentences as the antecedents of conditionals.
If "Stealing is wrong" serves only to express moral
disapprobation, how do we construe its role in "If
stealing is wrong, encouraging people to steal is
wrong also"?
Expressivism can give no answer to this question
unless it is possible to construe the antecedent of
such a conditional as doing something other than
hypothesizing its truth. Dummett has suggested
that it is. IS Each kind of sentence for which express­
ive theories have been proposed is used to mark the
speaker's undertaking of a certain sort of commit­
ment. Accordingly, rather than view the condi­
tional just as a device for focusing attention of the
range of circumstances in which its antecedent is
true, we can see it, more generally, as a device for
articulating the consequences of acceptance of the
commitment that, if someone were to avow the
antecedent on its own, they would undertake. For
instance, the effect of the conditional at the con­
clusion of the preceding paragraph would be,
roughly:
If! were (to be brought to) to express a commit­
ment to the wrongness of stealing, I should also
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
(be willing to? ) express a commitment to the
wrongness of encouraging others to steal. 16
Geach's point, it could be claimed, would hardly be
philosophically fundamental, in any case. If moral
irrealism did, indeed, have absolutely no prospect
of a satisfactory construal of conditionals with
moral antecedents, that could hardly be decisive.
Rather, whatever case there was for moral irrealism
would become potentially revisionary of our ordin­
ary and moral linguistic practice - compare the
relation between classical mathematics and the
philosophical views of the intuitionists. But such
radical revisionism - in effect, the proscription of
all compound moral sentences - is best avoided,
and Dummett's proposal, though in some respects
imprecise, at least indicates a strategy for avoiding
it in the present case.
The strategy has been taken further by Simon
Blackburn17 in connection with what he styles the
general program of quasi-realism. This program
comes into play by way of supplement to the irrea­
list (for Blackburn, 'projectivist') view of some
given class of statements. Quasi-realism's goal is
to show how the irrealist account of the content of
these statements need not be revisionary. It pro­
ceeds by attempting to supply alternative analyses
of what appear, from an irrealist point of view, to
be problematic modes of construction - condi­
tionals, embeddings within propositional attitudes,
even the truth predicate itself, and so on - which
are to harmonize with what the irrealist wants to
say about the basic statements in the class in ques­
tion. In particular, therefore, the quasi-realist con­
structions have to proceed without any assignment
of truth-conditions to these basic statements.
Actually, there a number of significant differ­
ences between Dummett and Blackburn. Dum­
mett's proposal consisted essentially in calling
attention to the potential utility of a conditional
construction that - unlike the ordinary conditional
- hypothesizes not the truth of its antecedent, but
its utterance with a particular recognized illocu­
tionary force. What is contemplated is a range
of conditionals with antecedents like "if I were to
be brought to ask whether P. .. ," "if I were to be
brought to assert that P. .. ," "if! were to command
that P. .. ," and so on. The consequents of such
conditionals may, then, either describe a further
such utterance or may simply say something about
the circumstances that would prevail if the speech
act characterized in the antecedent were to be per­
formed. This suggests, though it is not conclusive, \nCrispin Wright
that Dummett was tacitly viewing expressive the­
ories as holding 'expression' to be an illocutionary
operation on a thought, just as are assertion, wish,
question, and command. Undoubtedly, this is one
possible view. It promises perhaps the tidiest
explanation of how 'expressions' fail candidacy
for truth-value - one directly modeled on the cor­
responding failure of, for instance, an indicative
sentence used to express a command. Of course,
if one attempts to view 'expression' in this way,
then there has to be an embedded thought, just as
there is in the case of the command (namely, the
thought whose truth it is commanded should be
brought about). So, an account will be owing of
what are the genuine, truth-value-bearing thoughts
that are so embedded in, for instance, moral eva­
luation - a possible source of difficulty if the case is
an example like "Stealing is wrong, " rather than
"You were wrong to steal that money. "
Whether or not this was Dummett's perception
of the matter, Blackburn's seems different. If an
apparent assertion is not a genuine assertion, that
is, a claim that something is true, it may be a
different mode of illocution of something apt to
be true; but it may also be construed as a different
kind of speech act altogether, no sort of operation
on a thought. Blackburn's reaction to the problem
of construing moral compounds, and especially
conditionals with moral antecedents, is in keeping
with this second conception. For Dummett, such
conditionals emerge as genuine assertions. Black­
burn, in contrast, has it that a conditional such as
If stealing is wrong, encouraging others to steal
is wrong
is itself an evaluation; to wit, a positive evaluation of
combining a negative evaluation of stealing with a
negative evaluation of encouraging others to steal.
How do these proposals cope with Geach's chal­
lenge to explain the validity of such an inference as
Stealing is wrong;
If stealing is wrong, encouraging others to steal
IS wrong;
So: encouraging others to steal is wrong?
On Dummett's account, the conditional premise
becomes something like:
If I ever (am brought to) negatively evaluate
stealing, then I also (will be willing to) negat­
ively evaluate encouraging others to steal.
If that conditional is true, then if I so perform as to
realize its antecedent - that is, I endorse the first
premise - then it follows that I thereby endorse, or
at least that I will be willing to endorse, the wrong­
ness of encouraging others to steal. So, it looks as
though, modulo its inexactness, Dummett's pro­
posal may well have the means to validate Geach's
example. One might wonder, though, about
whether the inference, even ifvalid as so construed,
is properly represented by Dummett's account.
The gist of the second premise ought to be not a
description of a performance that I will actually (be
ready to) carry out in certain circumstances, but
rather, something normative: It is that a negative
evaluation of stealing ought to be accompanied by a
negative evaluation of the practice of encouraging
others to steal.
In this respect, Blackburn's strategy of constru­
ing the conditional as itself an evaluation seems
superior. But what, now, does the validity of the
inference consist in - when it cannot be that the
truth of the premises guarantees that of the con­
clusion? 18 Anything worth calling the validity of an
inference has to reside in the inconsistency of
accepting its premises but denying its conclusion.
Blackburn does indeed speak of the 'clash of atti­
tudes' involved in endorsing the premises of the
modus ponens example, construed as he construes it,
but in failing to endorse the conclusion. But noth­
ing worth regarding as inconsistency seems to be
involved. Those who do that merely fail to have
every combination of attitudes of which they them­
selves approve. That is a moral failing, not a logical
one. 19
Generally, there is no difficulty in making out a
notion of inconsistency for speech acts other than
assertion, provided they represent genuine modes
of illocutionary force, that is, operations on a
thought. Commands, for instance, are inconsistent
just in case the thoughts are inconsistent whose
truth they command be brought about; questions
are inconsistent just in case the thoughts of whose
truth they inquire are inconsistent; and so on. Even
in these cases, the notion of inconsistency need not
carry the stigma associated with assertoric case.
Issuing inconsistent commands is irrational - at
least if one intends that they be obeyed. But asking
inconsistent questions is not. And, in any case, this
seems to be, as noted, the wrong model for Black­
burn's purposes. Evaluation, as he seems to con­
ceive it, is not a mode of illocutionary force. 2o
Neither account, then, seems to cope entirely
happil y with the modus ponens inference. Dummett's \naccount fails to reflect the normativity of the
conditional premise; Blackburn's fails to respect
the powerful prejudice that the failing of one who
accepted the premises but repudiated the conclu­
sion would not be merely moral. But there is, to my
mind, a deeper cause for dissatisfaction with both
approaches. What they have in common is that
they see the presence of a certain kind of vocabul­
ary - that of moral or aesthetic evaluation, for
instance, or that of logical necessity and modality
in general - as marking the performance of a cer­
tain kind of speech act, distinct from assertion (at
least when the latter is properly regarded as the
purported depiction of truth). It does not matter,
now, whether the speech act in question is strictly a
mode of illocutionary force or whether it is some­
thing else. In neither case are the materials at hand,
it seems, for an explanation of the role of iterated
applications of the vocabulary in question. 21 So
neither proposal promises any sort of satisfactory
account of the kind of applications that we seem,
intelligibly enough, to be able to make of notions
like logical necessity and logical possibility to state­
ments in which such modal notions are themselves
the principal operators. Such applications may not
be very important in ordinary inferential contexts;
but they are tremendously important in modal
logic, and they are, it should be stressed, apparently
intelligible. If, in contrast, affirming 'necessarily P'
is some kind of projection from my inability to
imagine the opposite, or marks the adoption of P
as some kind of linguistic rule, or expresses my
resolve to count nothing as falsification of P - or
whatever the preferred expressive account is - no
space seems to have been left for a construal of
'necessarily: necessarily P'.
Blackburn himself is strongly committed to the
progressive character of the projectivistl quasi­
realist research program with respect to modal
idiom, 22 but the point is not (merely) ad hominem.
It is that modality undoubtedly raises the same
kinds of problems, in this context, as does morality.
There is the same kind of difficulty in seeing our
judgements, modal or moral, as responses to object­
ive features of the world. In both cases, we feel the
want of a satisfactory account of the confidence
that, on occasion anyway, we repose in such judge­
ments; in both cases, philosophers have been
tempted to invoke special cognitive faculties, sen­
sitive to states of affairs of the problematic kind, as
our ordinary senses are sensitive to many of the
characteristics of our physical environment. In
neither case has any account of this kind achieved
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
anything but mystery. This is not to say that an
irrealist account of either can be satisfactory only if
it handles both equally well. But it is to suggest that
the general form of an irrealist account of morals
should at least be a starter in the case of modal
discourse also. There may, in the end, be good
reason for rejecting the irrealist account of either
or both. But we can hardly suppose that we are
entertaining the strongest possible version of such
an account until it is fashioned in such a way that it
can be adapted to any of the areas of discourse
about which an irrealist (or, more specifically, pro­
jectivist) tale may seem worth telling.
The proper response to the foregoing considera­
tions, it seems to me, is to recognize that the step in
the direction of expressive, or more generally non­
assertoric accounts of those areas of discourse that,
for various reasons, have inspired irrealist suspi­
cions, is afaux pas. The irrealist should seek not to
explain away the assertoric appearance, but to sever
the connection between assertion and the realism,
which he wishes to oppose. This direction has been
largely passed over, no doubt, because of the intim­
ate connection between assertion and truth: To
assert a statement is to present it as true. So if
moral or modal judgements rank as assertions, we
are bound to countenance, it seems, some notion of
moral or modal truth. Ifthis seems a fatal step from
a would-be irrealist point of view, it can only be
because it is being assumed that where there is
truth at all, realism is correct. But that is an error.
Realism, even when characterized as impressionist­
ically as above, evidently intends a conception of
truth that should be understood along the line
traditionally favoured by 'correspondence' theor­
ists. What else could be the point of the play with
the idea of an 'independent' reality, one that 'con­
fers' truth-values independently of our judge­
ments? By contrast, it has yet to be understood
why the notion of truth, which essentially engages
with that of assertion, may not be the thinnest
possible, merely 'disquotational' notion.
To assert a statement is to present it as true, but
there need be no supposition that the notion of
truth is uniform across all regions of assertoric
discourse. The proper focus for the dispute
between realist and irrealist tendencies in moral
philosophy, the philosophy of science, the philo­
sophy of mathematics, and elsewhere is on the notion
of truth appropriate to these various kinds of state­
ments. Actually, this is the conclusion to which
Blackburn's quasi-realist program must, if success­
ful, lead. The goal of the quasi-realist is to explain \nCrispin Wright
how all the features of some problematic region of
discourse that might inspire a realist construal of it
can be harmonized with objectivism. But if this
program succeeds, and provides inter alia - as
Blackburn himself anticipates - an account of
what appear to be ascriptions of truth and falsity
to statements in the region, then we shall wind up -
running the connection between truth and asser­
tion in the opposite direction - with a rehabilitation
of the notion that such statements rank as asser­
tions, with truth-conditions, after all. Blackburn's
quasi-realist thus confronts a rather obvious
dilemma. Either his program fails - in which case
he does not, after all, explain how the projectivism
that inspires it can satisfactorily account for the
linguistic practices in question - or it succeeds, in
which case it makes good all the things the project­
ivist started out wanting to deny: that the dis­
course in question is genuinely assertoric, aimed
at truth, and so on. The dilemma is fatal unless
what the projectivist originally wanted to maintain
is actually consistent with the admission that the
statements in question are, indeed, assertions, apt
to be true or false in the sense, but only in the sense,
that the quasi-realist explains. But if that is right,
then the route through the idea that such state­
ments are not genuinely assertoric but are 'express­
ive', or, one way or another, constitute some other
kind of speech act, emerges as a detour. Working
with that idea, and pursuit of the quasi-realist
program on its basis, may help us to focus on the
notion of truth that is appropriate to the statements
in question. But once that focus is achieved, we
have to drop the idea - and it hardly seems credible
that only by this somewhat circuitous route can the
requisite focus be gained. 23
IV
Naturally, it is questionable whether the notion of
truth can, indeed, be divided up in the manner that
the foregoing considerations anticipate, and also, if
it can, whether reasonably definite criteria can
emerge for determining which notion is applicable
within which areas of discourse. And correspond­
ence accounts, should they prove to be the stuff of
realism, have their familiar problems. 24 But, still, I
think there is a program here, and that the begin­
nings of some germane distinctions can be
sketched.
How 'thin' can something worth regarding as a
notion of truth be? We do not have a truth pre-
dicate if we merely have a device of 'disquotation',
since such a device could as well be applied to
utterances that are not assertions. And, it may
seem, it will hardly do to say that a predicate that
functions disquotationally just for assertions is a
truth predicate; that account, if it is not to be
circular, will require us to separate assertions
from speech acts of other kinds without appeal to
the notion of truth, an unpromising project. Actu­
ally, I believe the commitment to avoid circularity
of this kind would be an impossible burden in the
quest for an account of truth. But, in any case, one
essential aspect omitted by a bare disquotational
account of truth is normativj~y: Truth is what
assertions aim for. Now, if aiming at truth is to
supply a substantial constraint on assertoric prac­
tice, an assertion's being true cannot be guaranteed
simply by the assertor's taking it to be true. A
constraint is substantial only if we can make sense
of the idea of a misapprehension about whether or
not it is satisfied, or of its being satisfied independ­
ently of any particular subject's opinion about the
matter. The normativity of truth is respected by an
assertoric practice only if a role is provided within
that practice for the notions of ignorance, error,
and improved assessment.
This, I think, is the least that must be asked. Nor
is it very much. What is called for is only some sort
of notion of a proper pedigree for an assertion, and
correspondingly proper grounds for criticism of
assertions. We do, indeed, practice these distinc­
tions in all the areas of discourse about which
philosophers have been drawn to an irrealistic
point of view. Even the sort of affective judgements
- concerning what is funny, or revolting, and so on
- about which almost everybody's antecedent pre-
judice is irrealist are allowed to be capable of being
better and worse made. Judgements about what is
funny, for instance, may be in bad taste, or idiosyn­
cratic, or insincere, or just plain wrong. (There is
nothing funny about what happened at Cherno­
byl. )
There is a connection, here, with Geach's point.
We should have, in general, no use for conditional
or disjunctive compounds of such judgements
unless it was sometimes possible to appraise the
truth-values of the compounds independently of
any knowledge of those of their constituents.
Otherwise, knowledge of such a compound could
never be of any practical inferential use, and its
assertion would always violate Gricean 'co-operat­
ive' constraints. It is, thus, a condition of practic­
ally significant embedding of the kind Geach \nfocused on that ignorance be possible concerning
the status of the embedded statements. And ignor­
ance is possible only if there is, indeed, a contrast in
content between the claim that P is true and the
claim that any particular subject assents to P ~ the
contrast that, I have just suggested, is prerequisite
for paying proper heed to the normativity of truth.
It appears, then ~ if I am permitted a somewhat
swift conclusion ~ that truth, assertion, ignorance,
error, and significant embedding constitute a pack­
age deal. We get all of them off the ground
together, or none of them. And the real significance
of Geach's anticxpressivist point is that they are
'off the ground' in all the familiar cases where
expressivists wanted to look away from the notion
of assertion and to characterize practices in other
terms. The question, then, is: What can, never­
theless, be missing? What maya region of discourse
lack, even when it has all this, which may inspire
doubts about its factuality?
The answer, in one unhelpful word, is "object­
ivity. " I think that a number of separable ideas
jostle each other here, and I have space only to
advert to three of the more important. The first
has to do with what I shall call the rational command
of truth. The second concerns the distinction
between (human) responses that, respectively, are
and are not properly regarded as cognitive. The
third I shall touch on at the end of this paper.
By the 'rational command' of truth, I mean the
idea that truth commands the assent of any subject
who has an appropriate cognitive endowment and
uses it appropriately. Associated with this is the
notion that belief is not an operation of the will. We
do not choose our beliefs, but come to them invo­
luntarily ~ though not necessarily, of course, as a
result of involuntary processes ~ by putting our­
selves at the mercy, so to speak, of our reason, our
senses, any other cognitive receptors' we may have,
and the external world. Truth, then, according to
this feature of the concept, is what is at the origin of
the beliefs we form when we function as, cognit­
ively, we ought.
In describing this as part of our 'concept' of
truth, I mean only that it is a feature of the way
we ordinarily think about truth. One of the oldest
philosophical lessons is that there are other, poten­
tially destructive elements within the notion ~ ele­
ments that traditional skeptical arguments exploit ~
that threaten to reduce the correspondence, if any,
between what is true and the deliverances of our
better cognitive natures to inscrutable contingency.
Even prescinding from skepticism, realists in the
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
sense of Dummett will want to insist that we can
understand, for at least a significant number of
kinds of statements, how their truth might al­
together fail to connect with any disposition on
our part to believe them, no matter how meticulous
and extensive our investigation. And, in the other
direction, everyone must acknowledge that what
we are induced to believe by meticulous and
extensive investigation may still not be the truth
in any examples where no such finite investigation
can encompass all the material, as it were, in which
evidence of untruth might be found. Explicitly
unrestricted, contingent generalizations, and any
statement that ~ like many ascriptions of disposi­
tions ~ implicitly contains such a generality, are the
obvious instances.
One response, which would continue to allot a
dominant role to the aspect of rational command,
would be to move in the direction of a Peircean
conception of truth: We can mean by 'truth' only
that which is fated to be agreed on by all who
pursue rational enquiry sufficiently far, a "final
opinion. .. independent not indeed of thought in
general, but of all that is arbitrary and individual in
thought. ,, 25 Such a conception dismisses the total
or partial epistemological absolutism involved in
skepticism and in Dummettian realism. And it
relaxes the sense in which the truth of an unres­
tricted generalization must command the assent of
a rational investigator: A well-founded investiga­
tion may, indeed, mislead, but if such a general­
ization is true, all rational investigators will, sooner
or later, come justifiably to believe that it is.
This has been an influential construal of the
notion of truth. But, insofar as some sort of pre­
conception about the failure of certain statements
to exemplify rational command is at work in the
motivation for some kinds of irrealism, it is ques­
tionable whether the Peircean construct gets it
quite right. For one thing, it very much is a philo­
sophers' construct, building on but going a good
way past anything that might plausibly be regarded
as our intuitive understanding of truth. For
another, the thought that only Peircean truths are
true in the substantial sense we seek may seem to
hold out too many hostages to fortune. If, for
instance, Quine's famous thesis of the underdeter­
mination of scientific theory by empirical data is
true (fated to be agreed by all rational investiga­
tors? ), then it seems that the hypotheses of such
theories cannot pass the Peircean test. That would
be too swift a resolution of the debate about
scientific realism. Worse, any statement whose \nCrispin Wright
conditions of justifiable assent are a function of
what else a subject believes are at risk in the same
way. If whether you ought to believe a particular
statement depends on what you already believe,
Peircean convergence could be expected only
among rational investigators who set out with the
same baggage, as it were. And it has yet to be
explained why their rationality alone should tend
to ensure that that is so. Yet, almost all our con­
tingent beliefs appear to be in this situation.
A Peircean can reply. The possibility adverted to
is the possibility that there may be rationally
incommensurable alternative systems of belief. If
that is so, we can either retain the idea that one
such system might contain the truth at the expense
of the others, or we can drop the idea. To retain it is
to render the connection between truth and
rational inquiry utterly fortuitous. To drop it is to
abandon or to relativize the notion of an accurate
representation of the world. In neither case is room
left for the idea that the truth is what commands
the assent of an appropriately cognitively endowed,
rational investigator. So the Peircean development
of the notion of rational command should not be
faulted on the ground that it cannot accommodate
the possible consequences of the underdetermina­
tion thesis or of justificational holism. The fact is
that whatever notion of truth survives for state­
ments that fall prey to those consequences simply
cannot have the feature of rational command. My
own opinion is that not very much of what we are
pleased to regard as factual discourse will actually
fall prey to those consequences. In particular, a
holistic conception of confirmation poses a global
threat only if, at some level, the selection of back­
ground beliefs is unconstrained. There is no reason
to suppose that this must be so, but the matter
raises very large issues, which I shall not attempt
to broach here.
Even so, I think the intuition of rational com­
mand should be explained along other than Peir­
cean lines. For it is an intuition that coexists with
our inclination (however unfortunate) to allow that
truth may be evidence-transcendent. So, the intuit­
ive point is not that what is true ultimately com­
mands the assent of the rational. It is, I suggest, that
what it is correct to think about any statement that
is apt to be, in the appropriately substantial sense,
true or false is something about which rational
investigators have no option at any given stage of
investigation. It is, more specifically, determinate of
any given body of evidence whether it supports
such a statement, or supports its negation, or
neither. Even that is too simple. Vague statements,
for instance, may nevertheless be factual. But their
vagueness consists precisely in the existence of a
range of cases where rational subjects may permiss­
ibly and irreducibly disagree about their status in
point of justification. A similar point applies to
statements, vague or not, for which the evidence
is probabilistic. Different subjects may, without
putting their rationality in jeopardy, have different
probability thresholds, so to speak. One may
require a higher probability than another before
being prepared to work on the expectation that a
hypothesis is true. But, so far as I can see, only in
these two respects is qualification necessary. If a
pair of subjects disagree about the credibility of a
particular statement, and if the explanation of the
disagreement concerns neither of the qualifications
just noted, then either they are operating on the
basis of different pools of evidence - states of
information - or one (perhaps both) is misrating
the evidence they share. If the states of information
are different, and neither is misrating the state of
information, then one state must be superior to the
other: Either it must contain bona fide data that
the other lacks, or it must omit spurious data that
the other contains. Accordingly, we may lay
down the following as a criterion for the inclusion
of a statement, or range of statements within the
category of those apt to be true in the substantial
sense - the sense which incorporates the aspects of
rational command: Disagreements about the status
of such statements, where not attributable to
vagueness or permissibly differing probability
thresholds, can be explained only if fault is found
with one of the protagonist's assessment of his or
her data, or with the data being assessed. The data
must be in some way faulty or incomplete, or, if
not, they must have suffered a prejudiced response.
It follows that reason to think that other kinds of
explanation of disagreement are possible is reason
to think that the statements disagreed about are not
objective in the relevant sense, and so not apt to be
substantially true or false. This is one of the prim­
ary motives that have fueled expressive theories. It
is surely, for instance, the mainspring of the
thought that judgments about what is funny are
not genuinely factual: None of the envisaged ex­
planations may be appropriate in the case of a dis­
agreement about humor - it may be, as we say, that
the subjects have different 'senses of humor'. It is for
the same reason that importance is attached, in the
debates about moral and aesthetic realism, to
the (much exaggerated) cultural variability of \nmoral standards and the often idiosyncratic char­
acter of standards of aesthetic excellence.
It is another question, though, how one would
actually set about showing that a given region of
discourse failed to pass the test. A model dispute
must be constructed whose explanation falls within
none of the alternatives noted: It is not, that is to
say, to be owing to vagueness in the statement(s)
disputed about, nor to permissibly different prob­
ability thresholds, nor to faulty data - including
inferential or observational error - nor to one of
the subject's possession of a relatively inferior state
of information, nor to a prejudiced assessment of
agreed data. 26 But the question is, of course, what,
for these purposes, counts as 'a state of information'
or 'data'? What will tend to happen when this
construction is attempted for a particular prob­
lematic class of statements - about humor, or value,
or logical necessity, for instance - is that it will be
relatively easy to construct a dispute that fits the
bill, provided the 'data' are restricted to statements
of other kinds whose factuality is not at issue. It is
often possible, for instance, to give reasons for or
against the judgment that some situation is funny,
but, as just remarked, it seems perfectly conceiv­
able that a pair of subjects may have an irreducible
disagreement about such a judgment, although
neither is under any misapprehension about any
pertinent facts, or knows more than the other, or
is somehow prejudicially over-or under-rating the
facts that they agree about. But this way of describ­
ing the matter explicitly takes it that the 'facts'
exclude whether or not the situation in question is
funny. A similar possibility obtains in the case of
logical necessity. 27 And it does not seem unlikely
that moral evaluations, for instance, are in a like
situation, although I shall not pause here to consider
the construction of an appropriate dispute.
In any such case, it is open to the realist to accept
the proposed criterion but to insist that the ger­
mane data may not legitimately be taken to exclude
facts of the very species that the problematic of
statements serve to record. The comic realist, zs
for instance, may accommodate the model dispute
that the opponent constructs by insisting that mis­
appraisal of the data must, indeed, be at the root of
it; it is just that the data misappraised may irredu­
cibly concern the humor, or lack of it, in the situ­
ation.
The structure of this maneuver is not unreason­
able. Plainly, it cannot always be the case that, for
any particular class of statements whose factuality
is not disputed, they would pass the test even if we
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
restricted our attention to 'data' that excluded
them; not all genuinely factual disagreements have
to be owing to mistakes, or ignorance, or prejudice
about other matters. But the upshot is not that the
proposed test is useless, but merely that it has a part
to play only in the first stage of a dialectic, which
must now be pressed further. The test connects
failure to agree about judgments that are apt to be
substantially true or false with failure of ideal cog­
nitive performance. Accordingly, the realist who
responds in the way described now owes something
by way of explanation of what ideal cognitive per­
formance might be with respect to the sui generis
states of affairs to which, as such a realist now
contends, our judgments of humor, or value, or
modality, or whatever, are responsive. We require
to be told how it is possible for us to be in touch with
states of affairs of the relevant kind. What is it about
them, and about us, that makes them - at least
ideally - accessible to us? It is no answer, of course,
merely to introduce a word or phrase for some
putative kind of special cognitive faculty - the
sense of humor', 'conscience', 'the reason' - that
is to play the appropriate part. It is true that some of
our judgments must be, so to speak, primitively
factual, from the point of view of the test. But
that is not to say that we have carte blanche to regard
in this way any class of judgments that would
otherwise fail the test. Where there is cognition,
there must be at least the possibility of a satisfactory
theoretical account of how it is accomplished.
The first preconception about a substantial
notion of truth was its possession of the feature of
rational command. Now we have, in effect, arrived
at the second: Statements are apt to be substantially
true or false only if it is possible to provide a
satisfactory account of the kind of cognitive powers
that a mind would have to have in order to be in
touch with the states of affairs that they purport­
edly describe. 29 But what should 'a satisfactory
account' mean here? I take it that it would not be
necessary to trouble ourselves with the question if it
could be shown that the judgments that the realist
wishes to take as expressive of special abilities could
actually be satisfactorily simulated, without collu­
sion, by a subject who had only cognitive powers
that both the realist and his irrealist opponent are
agreed about. Thus, if, for instance, assertibility
conditions could be laid down for judgments of
logical necessity that someone could recognize to
obtain, whose cognitive faculties embraced only the
capacity for empirical judgments and so excluded
anything sensitive to logical necessity as such, it \nCrispin Wright
would be, on the face of it, simply a bad explanation
of our handling of such judgments to view it as
expressive of anything additional. Facultates non
fingendae sunt praeter necessitatem. 3o
The irrealist, however, may not easily be able to
make out such a case. This will be the situation
when the ability to make acceptable, or at any rate,
sincere and apparently well-understood, judg­
ments of the kind in question will depend on the
subject's capacity to be affected in some distinctive
way: to be amused, for instance, or revolted. If
possessing such affective capacities is a necessary
condition of full competence with the judgments in
question, the irrealist's question has to be, rather,
why see such affection as cognition? And the
thought is, of course, that no 'satisfactory account'
either of the affective response itself or of its causes
can be given that will legitimate the realist's view.
Contrast the sort of story that can be told about our
perceptual knowledge of our immediate environ­
ment. Our theories of the nature of matter and of
the workings of our sense organs and brains are
hardly complete. But we know enough to tell an
elaborate story about my perception of the tele­
phone on my desk - about the kind of object it is,
and the kind of creature I am, and about why,
accordingly, I am able to be aware of its being
there in the way in which I am. However, we
have not the slightest idea how to extend this pro­
totype to the cases of value or humor or logical
necessity. And, though that is so, it is perfectly
idle to claim that, in our judgments of these various
kinds, we express cognitive responses to objective
states of affairs.
The likely realist reply will be to suggest that the
kind of explanatory model invoked is question­
begging. In insisting that the epistemology of a
certain putative range of states of affairs ultimately
be accounted for in terms of existing fields of
natural science, the irrealist loads the dice in favor
of a naturalistic ontology. The states of affairs that
pass the test implicitly imposed can only be those to
which natural science assigns a causal role. Accord­
ingly, as before, it is open to the realist to claim that
the suggested criterion - that a class of judgments
is apt to be substantially true or false only if a
satisfactory account of the (ideal) epistemology
can be given - is in itself acceptable, but that it is
being applied here in a tendentiously restricted
way. The moral realist can urge, for instance, that
just as the 'data' that figured in the statement of the
first criterion should be allowed to include moral
data, so a 'satisfactory account', as the notion fig-
ures in the second criterion, should be allowed to
proceed by reference to a framework that includes
not only natural science, but also, inter alia, moral
judgment.
Does this help? Well, it might be supposed that
once moral judgments themselves are allowed to be
explanatorily primitive, the account of our cogni­
tion of the truth of some particular moral judgment
may straightforwardly proceed by inducing the
kinds of consideration that incline us to that par­
ticular judgment, namely, a moral argument based
on both moral and nonmoral premises. This,
though, will hardly do. Such a model explanation
of moral 'knowledge' would no doubt overestimate
the extent to which our convictions on particular
questions are principled, and would be inapplic­
able, besides, to at least some of the moral premises
that applications of it would be likely to involve.
But what is most basically wrong is that no real
analogy is constructed with the perceptual case. It
is not to our knowledge of neurophysiology and
physics, for instance, that the explanation of my
capacity to perceive the telephone would appeal,
but to relevant hypotheses within those disciplines
themselves. By contrast, the kind of 'explanation'
of our moral knowledge, just canvassed explicitly,
does appeal, not to certain moral premises, but to
our knowledge of them. So it cannot provide what
was being requested: an explanation of what it is
about us, and about the moral realm, that makes for
the possibility of cognitive relations at all.
In general, then, though it would be, I think, a
fair complaint by an evaluative realist, for instance,
that the original, explicitly naturalistic version
of the second test is unfair! y loaded, the prospects
for the position do not seem to become much
brighter if we grant, for the sake of argument,
that moral theory be permitted to figure in the
explanans. Indeed, prescinding from the confusion
just discussed, it is unclear what, for these pur­
poses, moral 'theory' might be taken to be, and how
it might be exploited by a more liberal style of
explanation. Matters look hardly more promising
for modal and comic realism, but I cannot attempt a
more detailed appraisal here.
v
Blackburn writes:
Suppose we say that we project an attitude or
habit or other commitment which is not \ndescriptive on to the world, when we speak and
think as though there were a property of things
which our sayings describe, which we can rea­
son about, be wrong about, and so on. Project­
ing is what Hume refers to when he talks of
"gilding and staining all natural objects with
the colours borrowed from internal sentiment",
or of the mind "spreading itself on the
world. ,, 3!
have spoken more often of 'irrealism' than of
'projectivism'. The latter, it seems, is best reserved
for those species of irrealism that concern commit­
ments - to borrow Blackburn's term - founded on
some specific mode of 'internal sentiment' or
affective phenomenology. The root projectivist
notion is the Humean one that we have a tendency
to seem to ourselves to find in the world qualities
that, properly, are predicated of our responses to it;
more specifically, that the range of our responses
that we tend to talk about as though they were
cognitive, apt to disclose real features of the
world, is actually much broader than the range of
those which really deserve to be so regarded. Pro­
jectivism is, thus, a possible and natural form for
the irrealist cause to assume in the three areas -
morality, modality, and humor - that this discus­
sion has mainly had in view. 32 Irrealism about
scientific theory, by contrast, is not, in any version
worthy of attention, projectivist. The most power­
ful arguments against scientific realism concern not
whether any appropriately local response we have
to scientific theory is cognitive - there is no such
local response - but whether theoretical statements
can survive the first of the two tests adumbrated:
Must disagreements about scientific theory, insofar
as they are not attributable to vagueness in the
concepts involved, or to rationally permissible vari­
ations in standards of evidence, invariably be
explicable in terms of prejudiced assessment of
agreed data, or faulty data, or ignorance? Not if
the underdetermination thesis is accepted. And
not, perhaps, if the received wisdom is correct
that the acceptability of any report of observation
is invariably theoretically conditioned. For, then,
the acceptability of any pool of data comes to
depend on one's background theory. And that
means that the data can exhibit the feature of
rational command only if the ingredients in the
background theories do. How is that to be provided
for, if any data by which such theories might, in
turn, be assessed will be theoretically conditioned
in the same sense? 33
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
In Blackburn's hands, as we have seen, projectiv­
ism starts out as an 'expressive' or nonassertoric
thesis. I have suggested that this element of the
view should be abandoned. The real question con­
cerns what notion of truth is applicable to the
'projections'. The projectivistlirrealist thesis
should be that only the thinnest possible notion is
appropriate; we have seen, by contrast, two ways in
which the notion of truth applicable to a class of
commitments might, on the contrary, be 'thick'. I
shall conclude by noting a potential instability in
the projectivist position, and a third potentially
germane distinction on the thinness/ thickness
scale.
The instability afflicts, paradoxically, just those
cases where the projectivist line is intuitively most
appealing. These are the classes of commitment
that, like judgments about what is funny, seem to
be most intimately associated with a well-defined
kind of response, which we are already inclined to
regard as affective rather than detective. The prob­
lem is that any such response can be construed as
potentially detective - can be 'cognitivized', as it
were - if the relevant projected 'quality' will sus­
tain construal as a disposition. Suppose, for
instance, that some such biconditional as this
holds:
X is funny iff X is disposed to amuse many /
most/normal people in many/most/normal
circumstances.
There is, obviously, scope for consideration about
which version of such a biconditional might be
most plausible, about whether some reference to
right-minded ness, or the like, might be wanted,
and so on. But if any such biconditional construal
provides the resources for a reasonably accurate
descriptive account of the relevant parts of our
linguistic practice, there can be no objection to
the idea that judgments of humor do have the
substantial truth-conditions that the biconditional
describes. And the relevant response - being
amused - will take on cognitive status only insofar
as finding oneself so affected will constitute a
defeasible ground for the assertion that the right­
hand side of the biconditional is realized.
A defensible form of projectivism, then, in mak­
ing good the claim that a certain class of judgments
is based on a response that is better not regarded as
cognitive, has to interpose sufficient distance, as it
were, between the judgments and the response to
prevent a dispositional construal. And this will be \nCrispin Wright
possible only to the extent that the original project­
ivist image - that we make such judgments merely
by way of reading back into the world features that
properly belong to our response to it - is strictly
misplaced. Projectivism has, therefore, a delicate
balancing act to perform. If it stays too close to the
image, it is liable to be undermined by a disposi­
tional construal; if it departs too far from it, it may
become unclear in what sense the response in ques­
tion provides the basis for the relevant class of
judgments, and why an argument for an irrealist
view of those judgments may properly proceed
from the noncognitive character of the response.
The difficulty is well illustrated, I think, by the
case of moral judgments. It is prima facie very
implausible to construe moral qualities as disposi­
tions to produce moral sentiments - not least
because the ascription of such a disposition does
not seem to have the reason-giving force that
properly belongs to a moral judgment. 34 But just
for that reason, the belief that moral passion is
not properly viewed as a state of cognition
seems to have no very direct connection with
moral irrealism.
Consider, finally, a case where such a disposi­
tional analysis seems appropriate anyway: the case
of secondary qualities. 35 To be red, for instance,
consists in being disposed to induce a certain kind
of visual experience in the normally sighted, under
normal circumstances. (I prescind from the con­
siderations to do with trans-galactic Doppler
effect, and so on. ) So, we have a biconditional
comparable to those mooted for 'funny' above:
X is red iff X would be seen as red by normally
functioning observers in normal circumstances.
Now, there is a question about how 'normality' is to
be understood for the purposes of the bicondi­
tional. Suppose we understand it statistically: Norm­
ally functioning observers function like most of
us actually do most of the time; normal circum­
stances are relevantly similar to those which actu­
ally prevail most of the time. So understood, the
statement on the right-hand side of the bicondi­
tional would still qualify as apt for substantial truth
by both the tests earlier considered. Disagreement
about such a statement might well be owing to
vagueness in its constituent concepts, or to per­
sonal probability thresholds - the disputants might,
for example, each have used statistical sampling
techniques. But it seems impossible to understand
how there could be a disagreement that could not
be explained along those lines and yet owe nothing
to prejudice, ignorance, or misinformation. As for
the second test, the sort of direction that an account
of the ideal epistemology of such a judgment
should take is, prima facie at least, clear. Never­
theless, to interpret the relevant notion of normal­
ity in this way is to impose a certain kind of reading
on the biconditional - at least if it is held to be true
a priori. In effect, we give priority to the right-hand
side. What makes something red is how we, most of
us, respond to it in the conditions that usually
obtain.
It is possible to elicit a third and stronger respect
in which the notion of truth may be substantial if
we contrast with this right-to-left reading of such a
biconditional an interpretation that assigns prior­
ity, instead, to the left-hand side. Such an inter­
pretation would see redness as a property of things
in themselves, connecting at best contingently with
any effect induced in us under statistically normal
circumstances. Accordingly, to give priority to the
left-hand side of the biconditional, while retaining
its a priori status, would be to impose a different
interpretation on the normality provisos. The
essential characteristic of a normally functioning
observer will now be: one suffering from no in­
ternal impediment to the proper functioning of the
capacity to detect red. And normal circumstances
will be those in which there is no external im­
pediment to the proper functioning of this same
capacity.
lowe to Mark Johnston the suggestion of the
possibility of these alternative readings of such
biconditionals; he characterized them as 'project­
ive' and 'detective' respectively. 36 I would rather
reserve 'projective' and 'projectivism' in the way I
have indicated. The distinction, if it can be prop­
erly elucidated, is nevertheless very important and
does correspond, it seems to me, to a further aspect
of our intuitive preconceptions about factuality and
substantial truth. An interesting suggestion, which
I suspect is not quite right, is that it also corres­
ponds to the distinction between secondary and
primary qualities. Primary qualities will sustain
biconditionals for which the proper reading is
detective; the biconditionals appropriate to second­
ary qualities, by contrast, will be properly read
from right to left. However that may be, there is a
distinction here - roughly, between our responses
making it true that so-and-so is the case and their
merely reflecting that truth - that the contrast
between two ways of reading an appropriate bicon­
ditional, interpreted as holding a priori, seems to \ncapture nicely. And this, as noted, is a distinction
that comes into play for judgments that pass the
tests earlier considered and are accordingly apt for
truth in more than the thinnest sense. Of any such
class of judgments, we can ask whether an appro­
priate biconditional does, indeed, hold a priori, and
ifso, to which side belongs the priority. If the way I
introduced the distinction is appropriate, this is a
question to be decided by reflection on the proper
interpretation of the normality provisos. But that is
Notes
In the introduction to my Realism, Meaning and
Truth (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986). This introduction
elaborates many of the themes of parts I and II of
this paper.
2 A qualification even of this formulation would be
necessary to make space for realism about self­
intimating mental states.
3 See especially essays 1, 10, 14, and 21 in his Truth and
Other Enigmas (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard Univer­
sity Press, 1978); ch. 20 of his The Interpretation of
Frege's Philosophy (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard Uni­
versity Press, 1981); and "What is a theory of meaning
(II), " in G. Evans and J. McDowell (eds), Truth and
Meaning (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1976), pp.
67-137.
4 Again, a qualification is called for, to make space for
realism about statements that concern human opinion.
5 As it stands, it involves a non sequitur, generated by
substituting into an opaque context: 'it is guaranteed
that P' and 'it is not guaranteed that Q' do not entail
the falsity of the biconditional: P. .. .. , Q. See my Real­
ism, Meaning and Truth, ch. II, sect. 1.
6 See, e. g. , Dummett, Truth and Other Enigmas, chs 10,
21.
7 Dummett notes the problems posed by vagueness for
his original account of realism in Interpretation of
Frege '. I Philosophy, ch. 20, p. 440. This chapter sub­
stantially qualifies the original account (though for
somewhat different reasons). For a useful discussion
of the new account, see the appendix to S. Rasmussen
and J. Ravnkinde, "Realism and logic, " Synthese 52
(1982), pp. 379-439.
8 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Remarks on the Foundations of
Mathematics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1956), I, 13.
9 For more on the objectivity of meaning, see my
"Rule-following, meaning and constructivism, " in
C. Travis (ed. ), Meaning and Interpretation (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1986), pp. 271-97, and "On making up
one's mind: Wittgenstein on intention, " in P. Wein­
gartner and G. Schurz (eds), Logic, Philosophy of
Science and Epistemology (Vienna, 1987), pp. 391-404.
To avoid misunderstanding, let me emphasize that I
see no commitment to the objectivity of meaning issu-
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
not the only possible way of proceeding, and it may
prove not to be best. I wish merely to suggest the
thought that one important class of intuitions about
objectivity - those reflected, in particular, in the
attempt to draw a distinction between primary and
secondary qualities - have no proper place in the
disputes between realism and irrealism. Rather,
when the dialectic is set up in the way I have
suggested it should be, they are internal to real­
ism. 37, 38
ing from acceptance of the platitude as such: It all
depends on what we see as determining the contents
that, with assistance from the world and in accordance
with the Platitude, determine truth-values. See "Rule­
following, meaning and constructivism, " pp. 273-4.
10 A fascinating recent example of the second sort of
proposal is provided, of course, by Saul Kripke's
interpretation of Wittgenstein on rule-following and
meaning in his Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Lan­
guage (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press,
1982).
II However, someone who so opposes irrealism (about a
particular class of statements) need not endorse the
objectivity of meaning unless, contrary to my own
belief, the Platitude requires it, so need not be a realist
in the 'more basic' sense described in sect. II.
12 Thus, Austin on knowledge: "saying 'I know' is tak­
ing a new plunge. But it is not saying 'I have per­
formed a specially striking feat of cognition, superior,
in the same scale as believing and being sure, even to
being merely quite sure': for there is nothing in that
scale superior to being quite sure. Just as promising is
not something superior, in the same scale as hoping
and intending, even to merely fully intending: for
there is nothing in that scale superior to fully intend­
ing. When I say 'I know', I give others my word: I give
others my authority for saying that'S is P'" a. L.
Austin, Philosophical Papers, 2nd edn (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1970), p. 99).
Compare Strawson on truth: "The sentence 'What
the policeman said is true' has no use except to confirm
the policeman's story; but. .. [it]. .. does not say any­
thing further about the policeman's story. .. . It is a
device for confirming the story without telling it
again. So, in general, in using such expressions, we
are confirming, underwriting, agreeing with, what
somebody has said; but. .. we are not making any
assertion additional to theirs; and are never using 'is
true' to talk about something which is what they said,
or the sentences they used in saying it" (P. F. Straw­
son, "Truth, " Analysis 9 (1949), p. 93).
But the classic example is Ayer on morals: "If! say
to someone, 'You acted wrongly in stealing that \nCrispin Wright
money', I am not stating anything more than if I had
simply said, 'You stole that money'. In adding that
this action is wrong, I am not making any further
statement about it. I am simply evincing my moral
disapproval of it. It is as if! had said, 'You stole that
money', in a peculiar tone of horror, or written it with
the addition of some special exclamation marks" (A. J.
Ayer, Language. Truth and Logic (London, 1962),
p. 107).
I3 More accurately: no additional claim beyond the
clause embedded within the expressive vocabulary if
- as, for instance, in each of the examples cited in n. 12
- there is one.
14 P. T. Geach, "Ascriptivism, " Philosophical Review 69
(1960), pp. 221-5.
15 Michael Dummett, in his Frege: Philosophy of Lan­
guage (New York: Harper & Row, 1973), ch. 10.
16 Ibid. , pp. 351-4.
17 Simon Blackburn, Spreading the Word (Oxford: Clar­
endon Press, 1984), ch. 6, and "Morals and Modals, "
this volume, ch. 47.
18 That still is the character of the inference when the
conditional is construed in Dummett's way. The
result is something on the model of:
I hereby ask whether Q;
IfI ask whether Q, I expect an answer;
So: I expect an answer.
19 Bob Hale, in his excellent critical study ("The com­
pleat projectivist, " Philosophical Quarterly 36 (1986),
pp. 65-84) of Spreading the Word, notes that Black­
burn's construal of the conditional is, in any case,
inapposite for examples like
If Jones stole that money, he should be punished,
whose role cannot possibly be to evaluate a combina­
tion of evaluations, since the antecedent is not
evaluative. His ingenious alternative proposal is,
first, to refashion the account of
If stealing is wrong, encouraging others to steal is
wrong
as a negative evaluation of combining a negative
evaluation of stealing with the lack of a negative
evaluation of encouraging others to steal; and, second,
to include not just evaluations, but beliefs (and pre­
sumably propositional attitudes in general) within the
scope of such second-order evaluations. The condi­
tional about Jones would then emerge as a negative
evaluation of the combinations of believing that Jones
stole the money but fail to approve of (positively
evaluate) his punishment.
No question but that this improves Blackburn's
account, and may well indicate the only viable direc­
tion for it to follow. But, notwithstanding some sug-
gestive remarks by Hale ("Compleat projectivist, " pp.
73-4), I do not think it deflects the criticism bruited
that Blackburn must misconstrue the failing of one
who accepts the premises of the modus ponens ex­
ample, but does not accept the conclusion. Certainly,
the character of the 'inconsistency' changes: It is now
a matter not of failing to have every combination of
evaluations of which one approves, but of actually
having a combination - a negative evaluation of steal­
ing and the lack of a negative evaluation of encour­
aging others to steal - of which one disapproves.
However, though such conduct - "doing what you
boo, " as Hale describes it - is naturally described as
'inconsistent', it remains that this is moral inconsist­
ency: conduct that is not true to moral principle.
Someone who rejects Geach's inference is being, in
addition, irrational-and this additional failing, separ­
ate from the moral one, is just as evident if he merely
rejects the conditional:
Provided that stealing is wrong, and that, if stealing
is wrong, encouraging others to steal is wrong, then
encouraging others to steal is wrong
without endorsing any particular evaluation of the
conjuncts in its antecedent.
A related worry (acknowledged by Hale in
correspondence) is whether a projectivist who
follows Hale's direction can, once having construed
'mixed' conditionals as evaluations, avoid so con­
struing all conditionals. Of course, expressive theories
of the conditional have their supporters, too. But
there is something unhappy about being pushed
toward such an account quite generally, merely
by the conviction that morals are of limited
objectivity.
20 Actually, and independently of the illocutionary sta­
tus of evaluation, there is, of course, a notion of
inconsistency for evaluations quite similar to that
mooted for commands: A set of evaluations, positive
and negative, is inconsistent just in case no possible
world realizes all the positives but avoids realizing all
the negatives. But this is of no obvious help in the
present case. Whether the conditional is construed as
originally by Blackburn, or as proposed by Hale (see
n. 19), one who endorses both 'Stealing is wrong'
and 'If stealing is wrong, encouraging others to steal
is wrong', but denies 'Encouraging others to steal is
wrong', commits himself to no such inconsistent set of
evaluations. There is, I have urged, a logical incon­
sistency in such a performance, different from both
the forms of moral inconsistency that, respectively,
are disclosed by the Blackburn/Hale proposals. But
neither the logical inconsistency nor those types of
moral inconsistency are instances of this interevalua­
tional species of inconsistency. The former has essenti­
ally nothing to do with the values the subject actually
accepts (compare n. 19). And the latter concern not \nthe relations among his values, hut those hetween his
values and his conduct.
21 The point is made by Hale, "Compleat projectivist, "
pp. 78~9.
22 See, e. g. , his "Morals and modals, " this volume, ch.
47.
23 For pursuit of these misgivings, see my review of
Spreading the Word in Mind 94 (1985), pp. 310-19.
24 Of which the foremost is probably Frege's regress
argument, given in his paper "Thoughts, " trans.
P. T. Geach, in G. Frege, Logical Investigations
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1977), pp. 3-4.
See Peter Carruthers's discussion, "Frege's regress, "
Proceedings o{the Aristotelian Sociezy 82 (1981~2), pp.
17·-32. For a very illuminating analysis of the issues
between correspondence and disquotational or 'defla­
tionary' accounts of truth, see the contributions by
Hartry Field ("The deflationary concept of truth")
and Graeme Forbes ("Truth, correspondence and
redundancy") in G. MacDonald and C. Wright
(eds), Fact, Science and Morality pp. 55~ 117 and 27~
54, respectively.
25 From Charles S. Peirce: Selected Writings (Values in a
World of Chance), ed. Philip P. Wiener (New York,
1966), p. 82.
26 And 'dispute' here means, of course: genuine dispute.
There must be no material misunderstanding.
27 For details of how such a dispute might run, see the
dialogue with the Cautious Man in ch. 3 of my Witt­
genstein on the Foundations of Mathematics (Cam­
bridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1980).
Compare my "Inventing logical necessity, " in J. But­
terfield (ed. ), Language, Mind and Logic (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1986), pp. 187~209.
28 Not all realists are comic, of course.
29 I try to deploy this feature of substantial truth in the
context of a strategy against traditional epistemolog­
ical skepticism in "Facts and certainty, " Proceedings of
the British Academy 71 (1985), pp. 429~72.
30 Compare my Wittgenstein on the Foundations of Mathe­
matics, ch. 23, pp. 456~60.
31 Blackburn, Spreading the Word, pp. 170-1.
32 There are important internal differences. The relation
between moral sentiment and moral judgment is
much more complicated than that between amuse­
ment and judgment about what is funny. For one
thing, though we may wish to allow that certain
moral sentiments are natural in the sense that they
are untrained, the capacity for moral sentiment argu­
ably presupposes possession of moral concepts. An
infant's distress at his older brother's punishment is
not yet a moral response. By contrast, possession of
the concept of humor is not a prerequisite for the
capacity to be amused. For another, judging that a
certain hypothetical state of affairs would be funny
involves an element of prediction missing from the
correspo'lding moral judgment, and is defeasible by
Realism, Antirealism, Irrealism, Quasi-realism
subsequent apathetic responses in a way that moral
judgment need not be. Third, both moral and modal
judgments are disciplined by principle: Moral senti­
ment, and the phenomena of conviction and unintel­
ligibility involved, for example, in the ratification of
mathematical proofs, are quite often quashed by
appeal to what it is independently considered correct,
morally or mathematically, to think. Humor affords a
parallel to this only insofar as we moralize about it, by
introducing, for example, the notion of a joke in bad
taste.
33 For pursuit of this line of thought, see my "Scientific
realism, observation and the verification principle, " in
MacDonald and Wright (eds), Fact, Science and
Morality, pp. 247~74.
34 But perhaps only prima facie. See the remarks on the
'Moral Sense Theory' in Michael Smith's "Should
we believe in emotivism? ," in MacDonald and Wright
(eds), Fact, Science and Moralizy, pp. 289~31O.
35 The distinction I wish to use the case to illustrate
is actually appreciable independently of the belief
that a dispositional analysis is here appropriate, so
it does not matter if the reader does not share that
belief.
36 In graduate classes on ethics in Princeton, spring
1986. However, the explanation of the contrast in
terms of the alternative interpretations of the normal­
ity provisos demanded if the biconditional is to hold a
priori is mine and may not coincide with his own
preferred account. I should emphasize that I do not,
at present, regard the contrast as unproblematic.
37 Johnston wanted to commend the question whether
appropriate such biconditionals for moral judgements
should be read right to left as the pivotal issue for
moral realism. Certainly, we need a more detailed
examination of the relations among the three criteria
of the capacity for substantial truth than I have here
been able to attempt. But my present belief, to stress,
is that the first two criteria are prior, and that the third
comes into play only for judgments that satisfy them.
However, that does not entail that Johnston was in
error to lay emphasis on the third criterion. For the
capacity to sustain the truth of some such biconditional
may be regarded as the litmus test of whether a type of
statement is apt for substantial truth at all ~ so, unapt
for irrealism ~ with the first two criteria providing
tests in turn ~ perhaps not the only tests ~ of this
capacity. The correctness of such a view is one among
a number of very interesting questions here in
prospect.
38 I would like to acknowledge the stimulus of conversa­
tions on these matters with Mark Johnston, David
Lewis, and Michael Smith, and to thank Simon Black­
burn, Bob Hale, Mark Johnston, and Peter Railton for
extensive and very helpful comments on a previous
draft, most of which the deadline has prevented me
from responding to as I would have wished. \nAbbott, F. E. , 199, 208n
Achinstein, Peter, 257, 259, 267 n,
268n
Adams, Marilyn McCord, l73, l76,
182n, 183n
Adams, Robert M. , 118, 127 n, 133,
134, 163, l70 n, 172-83
Albritton, R. , 85, 88 n
Alexander, H. G. , 175, 182 n
Alexander, Samuel, 492-3, 542-3,
553-4, 554 n, 555 n, 556 n
Alston, William P. , 3, 559, 620-33
Anderson, John, 416, 425 n
Anscombe, G. E. M. , 412, 424, 426n,
427 n, 437-8, 442 n, 463-7, 481 n,
590
Aquinas, St Thomas, 117, 126n,
139-40, 174, 182 n, 278, 282 n, 299,
300 n, 378, 389-90, 391 n, 392 n
Archimedes, 598
Aristotle, 21, 24, 136, 139-40, 145,
147n, 151, 153n, 173, 199, 278,
282 n, 299, 300 n, 377-8, 387-90,
391 n, 392 n, 444, 599-600, 604,
606 n, 615, 620, 631 n
Armstrong, David M. , 133, 134, 160,
l70 n, 184-93, 193 n, 197,
198-208, 208n, 209-17, 220-2,
228 n, 229 n, 230 n, 231 n, 460,
469, 478, 481 n, 521, 529 n, 639,
648n
Arnauld, Antoine, 117-18, 126n,
174, 182n, 294, 300n
Augustine, St, 278, 282 n
Austin, John L. , 291, 299 n, 593, 597,
652, 663 n
Ayala, F. ]. , 542, 554 n
Ayer, A. ]. , 65, 172, 348, 354 n, 570,
589, 590 n, 636, 638-9, 648 n, 652,
663 n, 664n
Bar-Elli, Gilead, 208, 208 n
Barker, S. F. , 259, 267 n, 268 n
Barwise, John, 605
Bayle, Pierre, 274, 281 n, 331, 336,
336 n, 337 n
Bealer, George, 197, 211, 229 n
Beauchamp, Tom L. , 412, 548, 555 n
Beckermann, Ansgar, 486, 517-18,
523, 528 n, 529 n, 542, 554 n
Belnap, Nuel, Ill, 115 n
Benacerraf, Paul, 52, 60 n, 142, 148 n,
503, 503 n
Bennett, Jonathan, 218, 231 n, 366,
375 n
Berent, Paul, 239, 242 n
Bergmann, Gustav, 203
Bergson, Henri, 453, 457 n
Berkeley, George, 20, 390, 392 n,
593-4, 621, 631 n
Bernard, Rev. J. P. , 274, 281 n, 336,
337n
Bernays, Paul, 18, 22 n, 237, 242 n
Berofsky, Bernard, 433, 435 n
Berry, G. D. W. , 59, 500
Beth, E. W. , 531, 536-7
Birch, Thomas, 274, 281 n, 336,
337n
Black, Max, 65, 66-71, 100, 114n,
175-7, 180, 182 n, 183 n, 211,
229n, 471, 481 n
Blackburn, Simon, 545-6, 553, 555 n,
556 n, 559, 560, 634-48, 648 n,
653-6, 660-1, 664n, 665 n
Blanshard, Brand, 622, 632 n
Block, Irving, 227, 232 n
Block, Ned, 212, 230 n, 516, 518, 522,
525-6, 528 n, 529 n
Bochenski, I. M. , 151, 153 n
Bodemann, E. , 542, 554 n
Boghossian, Paul A. , 637, 648 n
Bolzano, Bernard, 135, 147 n
Bonevac, Daniel A. , 486
Boole, George, 24, 216, 230n, 293,
296, 300 n, 436, 442 n, 584
Boolos, George, 516, 528n, 534,
538n
Boyd, Richard, 267, 268 n, 516, 528 n,
605
Boyle, Robert, 261, 268n
Bradley, F. H. , 27, 66, 622, 626-8,
631 n, 632 n
Braithwaite, R. B. , 477, 481 n
Brand, M. , 254, 267 n
Brentano, Franz, 151, 153 n, 595
Bressan, Aldo, 108, 115 n
Broad, C. D. , 181, 183 n, 299, 300n,
485, 487-98, 542, 554 n
Brodbeck, M. , 423, 426 n, 600, 606 n
Brody, Baruch, 118, 127 n
Bromberger, S. , 250
Brouwer, L. E. ]. , 10
Burks, Arthur, 429, 434 n
Butchvarov, Panayot, 3
Butler, Bishop Joseph, 85, 271,
275-77, 281 n, 347-8, 354n,
369-70, 376 n, 387, 392 n, 398,
406n
Butler, R. ]. , 72, 86 n, 417, 421, 425 n,
426 n, 434, 435 n
Butterfield, J. , 659, 665 n \nCantor, Georg, 10, 291, 299 n
Capitan, W. H. , 516-17, 528 n
Care, Norman S. , 336, 337 n, 346,
351, 354n, 366, 375n, 387, 392n
Carnap, Rudolf, 3, 9, 13-22, 22 n, 37,
54-5, 108-11, 113, 114n, 115 n,
146, 148 n, 167, 170 n, 188, 235-6,
238-9, 242 n, 471, 481 n, 499,
501-2, 503 n, 520, 529 n, 534,
538 n, 597-9, 602-4, 606, 606 n,
612-14, 619n, 640, 648n
Carneades, 274, 281 n
Carr, David, 592, 606n
Carruthers, Peter, 656, 665 n
Cartwright, Helen Morris, 307, 311 n
Cartwright, Nancy, 412, 451
Cartwright, Richard, 65, 271,
291-300, 301, 303, 31In
Causey, Robert L. , 486
Chierchia, G. , 197
Chisholm, Roderick M. , 3, 37, 43 n,
133, 149-53, 152n, 217, 271,
273-83, 281 n, 282 n, 301, 311 n,
313, 321-2, 324, 325 n, 329, 331-7,
336n, 337n, 346, 351, 354n, 366,
375 n, 387, 392 n
Chomsky, Noam, 600-1
Church, Alonzo, 6, 9, 12 n, 172, 182 n
Churchland, Patricia, 486, 519, 528 n
Churchland, Paul, 527, 530 n
Clarke, Samuel, 175, 182 n, 295, 300 n
Cockburn, David, 329
Cohen, Robert S. , 152, 153n, 430,
434 n, 549-50, 555 n
Conee, Earl, 525, 529 n
Couturat, Louis, 24, 35 n
Cover, Jan, 321, 325 n
Craig, Edward]. , 639, 643-7, 648 n
Danto, A. c. , 385, 391 n, 392 n
Darwin, Charles, 136, 237, 242 n
Davidson, Donald, 72, 86 n, 100,
114n, 138, 147n, 174, 182n,
233-4, 242 n, 262, 266, 268 n, 400,
406n, 411, 428-35, 435n, 463,
481 n, 508, SIS, 528 n, 531, 537 n,
542, 544-5, 549, 554 n, 555 n, 570,
598, 607, 612, 618n, 619n
Dedekind, R. , 17, 500, 502, 600, 607,
618n
Democritus, 241
Dennett, David c. , 596, 606 n
DePaul, Michael R. , 542-3, 546-7,
554n, 555 n
Descartes, Rene, 75, 86, 88 n, 89 n,
117, 126n, 238, 292, 299n, 331,
357, 385, 388-9, 392 n, 401-2,
407 n, 502, 505, 531, 533, 538 n,
544, 588-90, 592-3, 595, 599, 604,
650
Deutscher, Max, 338, 341, 345-6,
351 n, 352 n, 353 n
Devitt, Michael, 215, 228n, 230n,
560, 605
Dewey, John, 45-6, 52-3, 60n,
622-3, 626-8, 632 n
Dickmann, M. A. , 534, 538 n
Diderot, Denis, 595, 599
Dobzhansky, T. , 542, 554n
Dockx, S. , 237, 242 n
Donnellan, Keith, 43, 44n, 79, 87,
174, 182n
Downing, P. 8. , 218, 231 n
Dray, W. , 423, 426n
Dreben, Burton, 233, 242 n
Dreler, James, 545-6, 553, 555 n,
556n
Dretske, Fred, 221, 231 n, 437-8,
442 n, 460, 481 n
Driesch, Hans, 493, 497
Ducasse, Curt]. , 412, 433, 435 n, 465,
481 n
Duhem, Pierre, 290, 290 n
Dummett, Michael, 559, 560,
561-90, 628-9, 632 n, 633 n,
649-51, 653-5, 657, 663n, 664n
Duns Scotus, Johannes, 172-3, 182n
Dupre, John, 486
Earman, John, 447, 456 n, 535, 538 n
Eccles, ]. c. , 366, 375 n
Eddington, Arthur S. , 591
Edwards, Jonathan, 301, 311 n,
321-2, 325 n
Edwards, Paul, 369-70, 376n
Ehring, Douglas, 412
Einstein, Albert, 136, 147 n, 447, 532,
538n
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 446, 456 n
Empedocles, 241
Endicott, Ronald, 525, 529 n
Erwin, Edward, 480, 481 n, 482 n
Euclid, 177, 183 n, 246, 597-8, 634
Evans, Gareth, 3, 649-50, 663 n
Fales, Evan, 412
Feigl, Herbert, 7, 12 n, 18, 22 n, 246,
288-9, 290 n, 423, 426 n, 429,
434n, 486, 508, 513n, SIS, 542,
554 n, 593, 600, 606 n
Feldman, Fred, 65, 276, 282 n
Fermat, Pierre de, 137-8, 644
Feyerabend, Paul, 625
Field, Hartry, 462, 481 n, 518, 528 n,
656, 665 n
Findlay, ]. , 38, 43 n
Fine, Kit, 3, 134
Flew, Antony, 471, 481 n
Flohr, Hans, 486, 517-18, 528 n, 542,
554n
Fodor, Jerry, 485, 504-14, 515-16,
518-24, 528n, 529n, 531, 537n
Follesdal, Dagfinn, 430, 434 n
Forbes, Graeme, 134, 272, 636, 643,
648 n, 656, 665 n
Foster, L. , 531, 537 n
Foucault, Michel, 596
Fraenkel, A. , 10, 57, 136
Name Index
Frank, Philip, II, 12n
Frege, Gottlob, 5, 7, 9, II, 12n,
17-21, 22n, 38-9, 43, 51, 57, 60n,
65, 74, 86 n, 90-3, 96-8, 98 n, 100,
108-9, 114n, 115n, 135, 147n,
172, 182 n, 185, 265, 278, 282 n,
288-90, 290 n, 430, 434 n,
499-500, 502, 527, 529 n, 535,
538 n, 562-3, 565, 567, 585-6, 622,
649-50, 656, 663 n, 665 n
French, P. A. , 459, 481 n
Galileo, Galilei, 238, 592-3
Gardiner, P. , 418, 426n
Geach, Peter T. , 65, 90-8, 98 n, 99 n,
100, 104, 114n, 118, 127n, 254,
267 n, 275-6, 282 n, 313, 325 n,
576-8, 653-4, 656-7, 664 n, 665 n
Gettier, E. , 393
Gibbard, Allan, 65, 100-15, 123,
128 n, 167, 170 n, 218, 231 n, 301,
307, 311 n
Glymour, Clark, 447, 456n, 605
Giidel, Kurt, II, 12 n, 50-3, 56, 58-9,
60 n, 80, 211, 229 n, 500-1, 503 n,
537
Goldman, Alvin, 400, 406 n, 407 n,
439, 442n
Goodman, Nelson, 10, 12 n, 205,
208n, 211, 216, 229n, 230n,
233-6, 238, 242 n, 243, 245, 252,
254, 259-60, 268 n, 288, 290 n,
295-6, 300 n, 301-2, 308, 311 n,
421, 426n, 502-3, 503 n, 512,
514n, 532-3, 538n, 591, 598
Gorovitz, Samuel, 433, 435 n
Grandy, Richard E. , 60, 226, 232 n
Grice, H. P. , 339, 352 n, 381, 391 n,
656-7
Griffin, Nicholas, 124, 129n
Grimes, Thomas R. , 546-8, 555 n
Grimm, Robert H. , 336, 337 n, 346,
351, 354n, 366, 375n, 387, 392n
Gruit, L. , 174, 182 n
Grunbaum, Adolf, 422-3, 426 n, 447,
456 n, 471, 481 n
Gupta, Anil, 111, 115 n
Hacking, Ian, 176-7, 183 n, 545-6,
555n
Haldane, Elizabeth S. , 292, 299 n,
388, 392n
Haldane, ]. S. , 497, 560, 560 n
Hale, Robert, 647, 648 n, 654-5,
664n, 665n
Halmos, Paul R. , 293, 300 n
Hamilton, Sir William, 273, 281 n,
335, 337n
Hardin, C. L. , 592, 606 n
Hare, R. M. , 541, 543-5, 549, 553,
554n, 555 n
Harman, Gilbert, 72, 86 n, 114 n, 138,
141-2, 147n, 148n, 174, 182n,
262, 268n \nName Index
Harper, William L. , 218, 231 n
Harre, Rom, 257, 259, 268 n, 412, 541
Hartshorne, c. , 622, 632 n
Hegel, G. W. F. , 31, 35 n, 621, 623,
626-7, 631 n
Heller, Mark, 271, 312-26, 325 n,
326n
Hellman, Geoffrey, 485, 515-16,
528n, 531-9, 538n, 551, 556n
Hempel, C. G. , 233, 238, 242 n, 423,
426 n, 432, 435 n, 520, 523, 529 n,
600, 606 n
Henkin, Leon, 51, 60n
Heraclitus, 273, 284
Heyting, A. , 564, 579
Hilbert, David, 10, 57, 251
Hintikka, Jaakko, 74, 86 n, 149, 152,
152n, 153n, 167, 170n
Hintikka, Merrill 8. , 545, 555 n
Hirsch, Eli, 272, 377, 391 n
Hispanus, Petrus, 151, 153 n
Hobbes, Thomas, 273, 281 n, 291,
299 n, 595, 599
Hoffman, Joshua, 272
Hook, Sydney, 508, 514n, 517,
528n
Hooker, C. A. , 218, 231 n
Horgan, Terence, 220, 231 n, 551,
553, 556 n
Horwich, Paul, 560
Hudson, Jim, 313, 325 n
Hume, David, 20, 138, 187, 221, 239,
253-4, 266-7, 267 n, 276-9, 282 n,
285, 288, 340, 352 n, 375, 376 n,
381, 391 n, 375, 376n, 411, 424,
426 n, 427 n, 428-9, 433-4, 435 n,
436-7, 439, 442 n, 444-5, 450--1,
455-6, 456n, 458, 464-7, 480,
481 n, 604, 622, 636-7, 648n,
651-2, 661, 663 n
Humphreys, Paul, 412, 486
Husserl, Edmund, 592-3, 595-7, 601,
606 n, 622
Ishiguro, Hide, 542, 554 n
Jack, Mrs]. M. R. , 368, 376n
Jackson, Frank c. , 212, 218, 223,
230n, 231 n
James, William, 403, 407 n, 592-3,
595, 597-8, 622, 626, 632 n
Jeffrey, R. , 534, 538 n
Johnston, Mark, 160--1, 170n, 205,
272, 329, 393-407, 662-3, 665n
Jones, Austin Duncan, 374, 376 n
Jubien, Michael, 134, 197
Kafka, Franz, 398, 406 n
Kant, Immanuel, 72, 172, 176, 182 n,
331-3, 336n, 337n, 340, 352n,
398, 401, 406 n, 407 n, 591, 593,
595, 598, 601, 604-5, 646
Kaplan, David, 155, 167, 169 n,
170n, 172, 182n, 456
Katz, Jerrold]. , 3
Keifer, H. E. , 335, 337 n
Kemeny, John, 247, 252 n
Kemp-Smith, N. , 332-3, 336n,
337n
Kepler, ]. , 136, 147 n, 444, 456 n
Kim, Jaegwon, 134, 217, 230 n,
253-4, 267 n, 412, 473, 481 n, 485,
486, 515-30, 528n, 529n, 540-56,
554 n, 555 n, 556 n
Klagge, James, 543, 553, 555 n
Kleene, S. c. , 501, 503 n, 553, 556 n
Klein, Felix, 241
Kneale, William, 139, 143-5, 147 n,
148n
Knox, John, 387, 392 n
Komblith, Hilary, 516, 520, 523,
525-6, 528 n, 529 n
Komer, S. , 465, 481 n
Kovesi, Julius, 541, 554n
Kripke, Saul, 59, 61 n, 65, 72-89,
86n, 100-1, 103-7, 113-14,
114n, 115n, 116-17, 119, 125,
125 n, 126 n, 127 n, 138, 147 n, 156,
169n, 174, 180, 182n, 183n, 186,
189-90, 217, 227, 230n, 231 n,
232 n, 262, 265-6, 268 n, 537,
538n, 539n, 611, 619n, 647, 648n,
652, 663 n
Kuhn, Thomas, 625
Kuratowski, K. , 292, 299 n
Lambert, Karel, 116, 125 n, 167,
170n
Laplace, Pierre Simon, 444, 535,
538n
Lashley, Karl, 508
Leach, ]. T. , 218, 231 n
Lehrer, Keith, 291
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 24, 35 n,
36, 43 n, 65, 74, 98, 107-8, 110,
117, 124, 126n, 129n, 141-3,
147n, 148n, 172, 174-7, 179-81,
182 n, 183 n, 273, 281 n, 294-5,
300 n, 336, 337 n, 346-7, 354 n,
533, 538n, 542, 554n, 598, 621,
631 n, 641
Leonard, Harry S. , 295-6, 300n,
301-2, 308, 311 n
Lepore, Ernest, 400, 406 n, 516, 518,
521, 528 n, 529 n
Lesniewski, Stanislaw, 58, 60 n,
295-6, 300 n, 597-8
Lewes, G. H. , 542, 554 n
Lewis, C. I. , 570, 629, 633 n, 637-8,
647, 648 n.
Lewis, David K. , 3, 78-9, 84, 87 n,
88n, 104, 110, 112, 114n-15n,
123, 128 n, 133, 134, 146, 148 n,
154-71, 169n, 170n, 171 n, 186-7;
193 n, 197, 203-4, 208 n, 209-32,
230n, 301, 311 n, 312, 318, 324n,
325 n, 329, 394, 405 n, 406 n, 411,
412 n, 436-43, 442 n, 471, 477,
481 n, 516, 521, 528n, 529n, 537,
538 n, 539 n, 542-3, 548, 551,
554 n, 555 n, 556 n, 585, 599, 606 n,
611, 619n
Linsky, L. , 42, 44n
Locke, John, 255-6, 267 n, 275-6,
281 n, 282n, 299, 300n, 332-3,
335, 336 n, 337 n, 338, 347, 351 n,
352 n, 354 n, 366, 369-70, 375 n,
376 n, 379-81, 386, 391 n, 394,
406 n, 589, 592, 628, 632 n, 637,
648n
Lockeman, John, 274, 281 n, 336,
337n
Loemaker, Leroy E. , 295, 300n
Loewer, Barry, 516, 518, 521, 528n,
529n
Lombard, Lawrence, 546-7, 555 n
Loux, MichaelJ. , 134, 155, 169n,
188, 193 n, 197, 272
Lovejoy, Arthur 0. , 543, 555 n
Lowe, E. ]. , 65, 329
Lowinger, Armand, 290, 290 n
Lucas, ]. R. , 417, 422, 425n, 426n
Lucas, P. G. , 174, 182 n
Lucretius, 336, 337 n
Lukasiewicz, Jan, 570
Luschei, Eugene c. , 58, 60n, 61 n,
295-6, 300n
Lycan, William G. , 134, 188, 193n
Lyon, Ardon, 437, 442 n
Macdonald, Cynthia, 525, 529 n
Macdonald, Graham, 634, 656,
/161-2, 665 n
Mackie, ]. L. , 403, 407 n, 411, 412,
413-27, 426n, 428-9, 434n, 445,
456 n, 473, 481 n, 548, 555 n,
599-600, 602, 606 n, 638
Maddel, Geoffrey, 398, 406 n
Madden, E. H. , 257, 259, 268n, 412
Malcolm, Norman, 140, 147n, 193,
193n, .338, 341, 351 n, 352n,
353 n
Marcus, Ruth Barcan, 58, 60 n, 61 n,
74-=6, 81, 87 n, 116, 125 n, 134, 141,
147 n, 503, 503 n
Marc-Wogau, Konrad, 414-16,
418-20, 424 n, 425 n, 426 n
Marr, David, 593
Marsh, Robert c. , 3 n, 100, 114 n
Martin, C. B. , 203, 338, 341, 345-6,
351 n, 352 n, 353 n
Mason, H. T. , 117, 126n, 174,
182n
Mates, Benson, 174, 182n
Maxwell, G. , 423, 426n, 429, 434n,
486, 508, 513 n, 593, 606 n
McClennen, E. F. , 218, 231 n
McCormick, Peter, 560
McDowell, John, 649-50, 663 n
McFetridge, Ian, 647, 648 n
McGinn, Colin, 622
McGuiness, B. F. , 184, 193 n \nMcLaughlin, Brian, 400, 406 n, 486
~1cT"ggart, J. M. E. , 181, 183 n, 293,
299, 300 n, 398, 406 n
Meehl, Paul, 542, 554 n
Meinong, Alexius, 36·-9, 43 n, 96,
99 n, 586
Mellor, D. Hugh, 197, 257, 259,
267n, 268n, 471, 481 n
Mendola, Joseph, 525, 529 n
Merrill, D. D. , 516-17, 528n
Merrill, Gary H. , 224-5, 231 n
Mill, John Stuart, 19, 222, 231 n, 416,
423, 425n, 426n, 428-9, 431-4,
434n, 435 n
Minkowski, H. , 246, 447, 452, 456n,
457 n
Mondadori, Fahrizio, 156, 169 n
Montague, Richard, 218, 231 n, 535,
538n
Montgomery, G. R. , 118, 126 n, 294,
300n
Moore, G. E. , 3, 135, 140, 147 n,
213-16, 224, 403, 407 n, 543-4,
549, 552-3, 554 n, 555 n, 556 n,
622
Morgan, C. Lloyd, 486, 493, 542-4,
553-4, 554 n, 555 n, 556 n
Morton, Adam, 211, 229 n
Muir, Willa and Edwin, 398, 406 n
Mulligan, K. , 197
Munitz, Milton K. , 72, 321-2, 325 n,
335, 337 n
Myhill, J. R. , 500, 503 n
Nagel, Ernest, 20, 22 n, 139, 147 n,
415, 421, 425n, 426n, 486, 519,
524, 528 n, 529 n, 542, 549-50,
554n, 555 n
Nagel, Thomas, 60n, 61 n, 116, 125 n,
374, 376 n, 398, 403, 406 n, 407 n
Nahm, Milton c. , 273, 281 n
Nerlich, G. c. , 339, 352 n
Neurath, Otto, 290
Newton, Issac, 136, 147 n, 446-7,
462, 481 n, 599-600, 606 n
Nidditch, Peter H. , 255, 267 n, 338,
351 n, 352 n, 380, 391 n
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 601
Noonan, Harold, 329
Nozick, Robert, 397-8, 406 n
Occam, 182n
O'Connor, D. ]. , 65
Odeherg, David S. , 272
Oliver, Alex, 197
Oppenheim, Paul, 247, 252 n, 423,
426 n, 486, 508, 513 n, 600, 606 n
Owens, David, 520, 529 n
Palma, A. B. , 370, 376 n
Pap, Arthur, 212, 230n, 429, 434n
Parfit, Derek, 329, 335, 337 n,
365-76, 383-5, 391 n, 394-5, 404,
405n, 406n
Par getter, Rohert, 223, 231 n
Parsons, Terence, 3, 36-44, 43 n,
44n, 1I5n
Partee, B. H. , 197
Paull, Cranston, 486
Pearce, G. , 218, 231 n
Pears, David, 184, 193 n, 471,
481 n
Penelhum, Terence, 368-9, 375 n,
376n
Pepper, Stephen c. , 542, 554 n
Perehoom, Derk, 516, 520, 523,
525-6, 528 n, 529 n
Perry, John, 65, 9{)-9, 172, 179, 182n,
183n, 312, 319, 324n, 325n, 329,
347-8, 354 n, 605
Petrie, Bradford, 551, 556 n
Phillips, D. Z. , 624-5
Pierce, Charles S. , 21, 172, 334,
337 n, 593, 622, 626-8, 632 n,
657-8, 665 n
Place, U. T. , 116, 125n
Plantinga, Alvin, \33, 135-48, 147n,
154, 169n, 172, 182n
Plato, 4, 11, 12, 13, 18-19, 21, 22n,
45, 187, 198-200, 206-8, 208n,
214-15, 273, 281 n, 289, 388, 561,
572, 579, 584, 604, 650
Poincare, Henri, 10
Popkin, R. H. , 331, 336 n
Popper, Karl, 422-3, 426 n
Post, John F. , 486, 516-17, 528n,
550, 553, 556 n
Prior, A. N. , \34, 150, 152 n, 346,
354 n, 366, 375 n
Prior, Elizabeth W. , 223, 231 n
Putnam, Hilary, 197, 223-5, 231 n,
243-52, 252 n, 485, 485 n, 486, 508,
513 n, 514 n, 515-18, 527, 528 n,
529n, 530n, 531, 537n, 559, 560,
591-606, 606n, 607-12, 614,
617-18, 618 n, 619 n, 620, 622, 626,
628, 631 n, 632 n
Pythagorus, 57-58, 60, 168, 171 n,
50{)-502
Quilter, John, 206, 208 n
Quine, Willard Van Orman, 3, 4-12,
12n, 17-18, 22n, 36-8, 41, 44n,
45-61, 60n, 61 n, 74-5, 78-81,
86 n, 87 n, 91, 96, 98 n, 99 n,
102-3, 107, 110, 113, 1I4n,
115 n, 116, 125 n, 136, 141,
145-6, 147n, 148n, 168, 171 n,
181, 183n, 197, 203, 208n, 209,
211, 215, 228n, 229n, 230n,
231 n, 232 n, 233-42, 242 n, 243,
248-9, 271, 274, 276, 281 n,
282 n, 284-90, 299, 300 n,
312-13, 324n, 325n, 430, 434n,
485, 499-503, 503 n, 521, 523,
527, 529 n, 530 n, 590, 598, 600,
602, 606n, 6\3, 619n, 622-3, 630,
640-3, 648 n, 657
Name Index
Quinn, Philip, 188, 193 n, 209,
228n
Quinton, Anthony, 211, 229n, 272,
335, 337 n, 342-3, 353 n, 369,
376 n, 381, 391 n, 394, 405 n,
406n
Ramsey, F. P. , 222, 231 n, 477, 481 n,
522, 529 n, 636, 638-9
Rasmussen, S. , 650, 663 n
Ravnkinde, J. , 650, 663 n
Reichenhach, Hans, 252, 450, 452,
457n
Reid, Thomas, 273, 277, 281 n, 282 n,
335, 337n, 370, 376n, 38{)-1, 387,
391 n, 392 n, 398, 406 n, 622
Rescher, Nicholas, 233, 243, 423,
426 n, 431, 435 n, 437, 442 n
Robb, A. A. , 447, 456n
Rorty, Amelie 0. , 163, 170 n, 301,
311 n, 329, 394, 405 n, 406 n
Rorty, Richard, 596, 606 n, 607,
623-5, 632 n
Rosen, Deborah, 446, 456 n
Rosenherg, Alexander, 412, 486, 548,
555n
Rosenberg, Jay, 400, 406 n
Rosenkrantz, Gary, 272
Ross, G. R. T. , 292, 299 n, 388,
392n
Rothman, Milton A. , 448, 457 n
Routley, Richard, 3
Russell, Bertrand, 3, 6-7, 9, 11, 16,
18-20, 22 n, 23-35, 36-40, 42-3,
51-2, 73-6, 86 n, 87 n, 100, 114 n,
\37, 172, 175, 182n, 198, 208n,
211, 229 n, 248, 290, 332, 346,
354n, 417, 425n, 445-7, 449,
453-4, 456 n, 457 n, 494, 585-6,
589, 622
Rutherford, Sir Emest, 498
Ryle, Gilbert, 19, 22n, 37, 199
Salmon, Nathan, 65
Salmon, Wesley c. , 411, 444-57,
457 n, 465, 481 n
Sanford, David H. , 548, 555 n
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 150, 152 n
Savellos, Elias, 486
Sayre, Kenneth M. , 450-1, 456,
457n
Sayre-McCord, Geoffrey, 527, 529n,
530n
Scales, Ron, 42, 44 n
Schiffer, Stephen, 224, 232 n, 552-3,
556n
Schilpp, P. A. , 211, 229 n, 471, 481 n
Schlick, Moritz, 18, 22 n
Schmidt, Franz, 174, 182n
Schurz, G. , 651, 663 n
Scott, Dana, 116, 121, 125 n, 127 n
Scriven, Michael, 415-20, 422-4,
425 n, 426 n, 429, 434 n, 486, 508,
5\3n, 542, 554n, 593, 606n \nName Index
Seager, William, 520, 529n, 546, 550,
555 n, 556 n
Seargent, David A. ]. , 206, 208 n
Searle, John, 83
Selby-Bigge, L. A. , 254, 267 n, 277-8,
280, 282 n, 381, 391 n, 636, 648 n
Sellars, Wilfrid, 7, 12 n, 21, 22 n,
288-9, 290 n, 423, 426 n, 542,
554 n, 591, 593, 595, 606 n, 623
Shoemaker, Sydney, 122, 124, 127 n,
129 n, 197, 253-68, 329, 330, 336,
337 n, 338-54, 352 n, 354 n, 356,
364n, 366, 368-70, 373, 375n,
376 n, 377, 394, 400--3, 405 n,
406n, 407n
Shoenfield, ]. , 534, 538 n
Shope, Robert K. , 393, 405 n
Shorter, J. M. , 368, 375 n, 376 n, 434,
435 n
Sider, Theodore, 486
Sidgwick, Henry, 542-4, 554 n, 555 n
Simons, Peter, 272
Skinner, B. F. , 631
Skolem, Thoralf, 51, 57-8, 60, 60 n,
500--2
Skyrms, Brian, 184--8, 193 n, 203,
208n
Slote, M. , 85, 87n, 88n, 216, 230n
Smart, Brian, 389, 392 n
Smart, J. J. c. , 116, 123, 125 n, 128 n,
238, 242n, 422, 426n, 515, 525,
529n
Smith, Michael, 662, 665 n
Smullyan, A. , 74, 86 n
Snyder, Aaron, 437-8, 442n
Sober, Elliott, 197
Socrates, 199, 241
Sosa, Ernest, 330, 412, 463-7, 473,
481 n, 553, 556 n, 559, 560 n,
607-19, 619n
Sperry, R. W. , 366, 375 n
Spinoza, Baruch de, 331, 336n, 636,
641, 648n
Squires, Roger, 341, 348, 352 n, 354 n
Stachel, John, 447, 456 n
Stalnaker, Robert, 112, 115 n, 123,
128n, 134, 218, 231 n, 437, 442n,
486
Stenius, Eric, 211, 229 n
Stich, Stephen, 527, 530 n, 596, 606 n
Stout, G. F. , 206, 208 n
Stove, D. c. , 414, 424n
Strawson, P. F. , 272, 330, 335, 337 n,
340, 342, 352 n, 400, 403, 406 n,
407 n, 585-6, 652, 663 n
Stroud, Barry, 381, 391 n
Sturgeon, Nicholas, 261, 268 n
Suppes, Patrick, 139, 147n, 412, 445,
456n
Sutton, E. , 150, 152 n
Swain, Marshall, 400, 406 n, 407 n
Swanson, ]. , 531, 537 n
Swinburne, Richard, 329, 330,
377-92, 392 n, 394, 400-1, 405 n,
406 n, 407 n, 471, 481 n
Swoyer, Chris, 197
Tarski, Alfred, 60, 139, 147 n, 293,
296, 300 n, 500, 503 n, 535, 538 n,
563, 627, 632 n
Taylor, Richard, 335, 337 n
Teichmann, ]. , 424, 426 n, 427 n
Teller, Paul, 550, 556 n
Tennant, Neil, 560
Thomason, Richmond, 112-13,
115 n, 167, 170 n
Thompson, Frank, 485, 515-16,
528n, 531-9, 538n, 551, 556n
Thomson, Judith Jarvis, 271, 301-11,
312-13, 319, 325n
Timmons, Mark, 553, 556 n
Tomberlin, James, 154, 169 n
Tooley, Michael, 200--1, 208 n, 221,
231 n, 411, 412, 458-82, 481 n
Travis, c. , 651, 663 n
Turing, A. M. , 596
Tye, Michael, 313, 325 n
Uehling, T. E. , 459, 481 n
Ullian, ]. , 245
Ullmann-Margalit, E. , 208, 208 n
Van Cleve, James, 272, 550, 556 n,
560, 608, 618 n
Van Fraassen, C. Bas, 134, 452, 457 n,
614, 619n
Van Gulick, Robert, 517-18, 528n
Van Heijenoort, Jean, 57, 60n
Van Inwagen, Peter, 154-5, 160,
169n, 170n, 218, 231 n, 253, 272,
313, 324, 325n, 326n, 401-2,
407n
Van Straaten, Zak, 403, 407 n
Velleman, J. D. , 637, 648n
Vendler, Zeno, 434, 435n
Vermazen, Bruce, 545, 555 n
Vesey, Godfrey, 335, 337 n
von Neumann, ]. , 51, 154, 499-500,
502
von Wright, Georg, 412
Wallace, John, 432, 435 n
Walton, D. , 254, 267 n
Walton, Kendall, 3
Wang, Hao, 501, 503 n
Wartofsky, Max W. , 152, 153 n, 430,
434n
Watanabe, S. , 237, 242 n
Weingartner, P. , 651, 663 n
Weiss, P. , 622, 632 n
Wettstein, H. K. , 459, 481 n
Weyl, H. , 10
White, Mort(ln G. , 437, 442 n, 598,
606n
Whitehead, A. N. , 9, 175, 182 n, 248,
290, 489
Wiener, Phillip P. , 657-8, 665 n
Wiggins, David, 65, 72-3, 86, 89 n,
90, 98 n, 99 n, 118, 124, 127 n,
129 n, 276, 282 n, 297, 300 n, 303,
310, 311 n, 341, 347, 352n,
354n, 366-73, 375n, 376n, 379,
382, 391 n, 394, 401-2, 406 n,
407n
Williams, Bernard A. 0. , 329,
334--5, 337 n, 346, 348, 354 n,
355--64, 364n, 368-9, 375 n,
376n, 381-4, 391 n, 394, 396--8,
403-5, 405 n, 406 n, 407 n, 609-10,
619n
Williams, C. J. F. , 3
Wilson, Mark, 197, 527, 530n
Wilson, Neil L. , 52, 60 n, 150, 152 n
Wimsatt, William, 549-50, 555 n
Winch, Peter, 624--5
Winnie, John, 447, 456 n
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 18, 22 n, 37,
45, 47, 49, 60 n, 133, 184--6, 188-9,
192-3, 193n, 202-3, 208n, 227,
258, 464, 566, 568, 582, 590, 595-7,
624, 638-9, 648 n, 651-2, 659-60,
663 n, 665 n
Woods, Michael, 367, 375 n
Woozley, A. D. , 370, 376 n
Wright, Crispin, 559, 560, 634,
639-40, 643, 645-6, 648 n, 649-65,
663 n, 665 n
Xenophon, 273, 281n
Yabla, Stephen, 65, 116--29, 412
Yal~in, Omit D. , 486
Yolton, John W. , 366, 375 n
Zeno ofElea, 452-4, 457n
Zermelo, E. , 51, 57, 136, 499 \na priori, 79, 648; knowledge, 137-8,
147; truth, 79-81, 82, 87
absolutism, 617, 618
abstract entities, 13, 18-21, 289
abundance, 210, 211, 229
accidental properties, 126, 140, 159,
161, 163, 170
actions: intentional, 385, 391-2;
mediated, 392
aesthetic realism, 658-9
alien properties, 186-9, 191
ambiguity, 46, 49, 87
analogy, 186, 187, 188
analytic notion, 152, 246, 596
anomalous monism, 544
anti-realism, 559, 568, 622-6, 636,
650; options, 569-90; outright,
582; reductive, 581-2
anti-reductionism, 536
Anzahl, 51
argument from meaning, 199
as-if philosophy, 636, 637
at-at theory, 450-6
attributes, 7-8, II, 119
bare particulars, 205-6, 210
behaviour, 580; characteristic
differences, 491-2; chemical,
494-6; structure and component
differences, 492-4; vital, 496-7;
vital! chemical difference, 491
being, 4-5, 6
beliefs, 14, 381, 621, 642
biconditionals, 662-3, 665
bivalence, 561-2, 564, 566, 567, 568,
571, 573, 575, 579, 582-3, 585-6
bodies, 291; dualist theory, 385-90
bound variables, 9, 10, II
brain-process doctrine, 128
branching, 104-5, 162-3, 218, 371-4
branching-off, 259
bridge laws, 505, 506, 510, 511, 519,
549-50
calculus of individuals, 295-6, 301,
307-8, 532-3; cross-temporal,
308-11; see also mereology
Cartesian doubt, 588-90
categorical properties, 121-3, 127-8
causal chains, 442, 456; M-type,
345-6, 348-51
causal fields, 416-17, 425
causal line, 446, 449
causal principle, 424
causality, causation, 211, 218, 222-3,
253, 257-67, 411, 559, 605-6,
608-9, 651-2; and counterfactual
dependency, 411, 437, 438-42;
direction of, 422-3; downward,
523; Ducassean, 465;
epistemological question, 480;
Humean, 436, 444-5, 464, 465-6;
importance of, 411; INUS
condition, 411, 413-16, 417, 419,
420, 421; mental, 424; of necessity
and sufficiency, 415-18, 420-2;
non-discrete, 469-70; process/
event distinction, 411;
reductionist, 466; regularity
approach, 411, 423; and time,
422-3; see also singularist account
of causation
cause, 239, 419, 595; defined, 428-9,
433, 436; description of, 431-3;
predisposing, 420; preempted,
441-2
Cautious Man, 642, 643
cinematographic view of becoming,
453
circularity, 199-200, 261, 656
classes, 7, II, 35, 210, 211, 225, 425
classifiers, 48-9
closure, 119, 123
cluster theory, 100-1
coincidence, 124, 318-19, 321, 325
colour, 589
combinatorial theory, 184, 186-93,
211
commonsense conceptions, 591-3,
595
community, imperfect, 235
concatenation theory, 51
concept-property distinction, 527
conceptual relativity, 603, 612-17, 618
conceptualism, 9, 10
concrete general terms, 49-50
concrete objects, 103, 105-6, 107-8,
Ill, 114, 124
conditionals, 628, 629-30, 633, 654;
counterfactual, 599; non-material,
421; permissive, 575;
straightforward, 575; subjunctive,
239, 240, 573-6, 578; see also
counterfactuals
confusion hypothesis, 125
connections, 435, 455-6; basic
problem, 444-5; contiguity and
priority in time, 445; non-truth­
functional, 429-30, 434
consciousness, unity of, 321, 322-3,
324 \nSubject Index
constancy, 157
constructivism, 579, 580-1
contingency, 189, 263, 264, 641-2
contingent identity, 72, 73, 76, 79,
81-5, 114, 120-3, 125; as
categorical indiscernibi1ity, 121-3;
and concrete things, 124; and
dispositional properties, 112-13;
and essentialism, 110-11; and
functionalism, 124-5; modeling,
123; and necessity, 100; objections
to, 107-10; and persistence criteria,
101-2; and reference, 100; and
violation of Liebniz' Law, 107-8
contracted worlds, 187, 188-9
coordinate systems, 53
copy theory, 45
core cluster theory, 263, 264-5
correlation: theses, 516-18; type-to-
type, 508-9, 553
Correlation Thesis, 516-17
counterfactuals, 78, 83-4, 88, 106,
112-13, 201, 218, 223, 437, 443,
451-2, 601, 605; see also
conditionals
counterparts, 87-8, 114, 133, 155,
156-7, 159, 166-8, 169, 647
covariance, 542-3, 555; and
dependence, 546-9; global, 551-2;
property, 548; and reducibility,
549-52; weak/strong, 545-6, 548,
550, 553; see also supervenience
covering-law theory, 250, 294-5,
296-7, 423-4, 426
cross-world identity, 104, 106
data, 20
dependence, 544; causal, 439-41, 548;
counterfactual, 411, 438-9, 440-1;
and covariance, 546-9; see also
supervenience
description(s), 6-7, 9, 29-30, 41-2,
73-5, 83, 86-7, 100-1; ambiguous,
30; definite, 30-5, 41-2
determinism, 218, 437-8, 534-7, 538
difference, 66-7
directionality, 548
dirty-hands argument, 640, 646, 648
disjunction, 201, 518-21, 522, 526-7,
529, 550-1
dispositions, 112-13, 231, 238-9, 241,
592, 593-4, 599-600, 661-2, 665;
equal, 594; strict, 594
divergence, 162, 163, 217-18
dualism, 531, 592; and personal
identity, 385-90
effects, 435, 441
egoism, 375
eliminativism, 616, 617, 618
elliptical laws, 423-4
emergence, emergent, 485, 493,
494-7, 538, 541-2, 543-4
empiricism, 13
endurance, 160-1
entities, 106; abstract, 18-21;
acceptance of a kind of, 17-18;
existence/ reality of, 14-17
entrenchment, 233
epiphenomena, 441, 553
epistemology, 623-4, 625, 632, 639,
660
equivalence, 248, 251
ersatzism, 155, 156-7
essence, 80-1, 86, 87, liS, 117-18,
119, 126, 127, 140, 141, 151-2; and
being necessarily true, 143-5; and
identity, 110-11, 124; and the
mathematical cyclist, 145-7;
modeling, 118-20; and the number
of apostles, 142-3; paradox of,
116-17; and set-theoretical
reduction, 141-2
ethics, 543
evaluation, 654, 664-5
events, 253; causal dependence
among, 439, 442
existence, 3-4, 25-9, 33-5, 119, 127,
616; internal! external questions,
14-17
existence-facts, 27
experience, 85
explanation, 593, 600, 605, 638, 647,
660; causal, 423, 425, 434, 444
explanation/ prediction distinction,
426
expression, 51, 652-5, 658
extensionalism, 248-9
facts, 26-7, 185, 604, 634, 636, 637,
659; molecular, 27
family resemblances, 202
'Fido' -principle, 19
first-order / second-order properties,
see primary and secondary qualities
first-personal! third-personal
questions, 363
fission, 275
formalism, 9, 10
four-dimensional objects, 271, 312,
322, 325; boundaries of, 314;
difference from three-dimensional
objects, 317-18; refinement of,
314-16; spatiotemporal parts,
316-17
functional states, 248, 249
functionalism, 124-5, 553, 595
functions, 7
fundamental magnitudes, 244-6,
249-52
fusion principle, 275, 295-9, 301-2,
305, 371
games, 202
gappy law, 418, 422, 424, 426
general causal statements, 419-20,
423; of necessity and sufficiency,
420-2
geometry, 200
Gettierology, 393
haecceitism, 133, 157, 187-8, 541
higher-order phenomena, 531
homophonic rule, 52
human beings, 401-5
human organisms, 401-5
hypothetical properties, 121, 122, 127
idealism, 225, 621-2, 623, 623-4
identity, S, 65, 73, 74-6, 79, 85, 88,
128, 189, 190, 246, 259, 261, 263;
absolute, 94; and coincidence, 124;
distinction between necessity and,
135-8; and essence, 124; good
questions and bad, 154-7; and
object/occurrence of a kind, 95;
and overlap, 157-64; and possible
words, 149-53; relative, 90-8, 99;
restricted, 93-4, 99; and
substitutability, 92, 96; and word
typesltokens, 93-7; see a/so
personal identity
identity of indiscernibles, 66-71, 175,
286-7, 533; almost indiscernible
twins arguments, 177-9; dispersal
arguments against, 176-7
identity over time, 164; and
alteration, 274; and change, 284-5;
feigning, 277-81; loose and
popular sense, 275-7, 282-3; and
parthood, 301-11; relative, 276;
and scattered objects, 291-9; Ship
of Theseus, 273 -5; and
spatiotemporal spread, 285-90;
transitive, 273, 274
imagination, 643-5
incomplete symbols, 30, 35
indeterminacy, 162, 622-3
indiscernibles: identity of, 66-71,
175-9, 286-7, 533; qualitative, 183
individuals, S, 108-9, 110-11,
112-13, 184, 185; alien, 186-7
individuation 47, 243, 523-4
induction, 237-8
influence, 450-6
inheritance principle, 523
inscrutability of reference, 48, 49-50,
52-4, 622-3
instantiation, 161, 198-201, 205-6,
207, 264
intensionalism, 249
intentionality, 225, 594-5, 604; as
intractable, 595--6
internal relations, 140
internal! external questions, 14--17,
18, 19-20, 54-5
interpretation, eligible, 224-5
intra-physical laws, 490
intrinsic properties, 543, 593-5, 604,
611
intrinsic/ extrinsic distinction, 216,
230 \nintuitionism, 9, 10, 601
intuitive certainties, 623
IN U S condition of causality, 411,
413-16, 417, 419, 420, 421
irrealism, 652--3, 655, 660, 661, 663
irreducibility thesis, 571, 586
judgements, 634, 636, 643, 655, 656,
660
kinds, 126, 407, 506, 519-20, 526-7;
natural, 211, 233--41; principle of
causal individuation, 523--4;
psychological! physical
relationship, 517
knowledge, 80, 393, 587, 605, 660
language, 22, 29, 45, 209, 290, 559;
analytical hypotheses, 47-8;
content of, 223-5; extensional!
intensional, 48, 49; framework,
14-17, 18
language-games, 624-5, 626, 630,
631, 632, 652
laws, 221-3, 228, 245, 251, 432-3, 434,
436, 506, 639; and causal relations,
472, 480; derived, 222;
fundamental, 222; not necessarily
anti-symmetric, 479; postulates of,
473--6; underlying intuition, 472-3
laws of nature, 267, 636
learning, 236-7
Leibniz' law, 65, 107-8, 110, 124,
142
linguistic turn, 623
logic, 27-9, 246, 568, 585, 641, 646
logical equivalence, 246
logical fictions, 35
logical positivism, see verificationism
logicism, 9, 10
looseness, see strictlloose distinction
Liiwenheim-Skolem theorem, 57, 58,
60, 500-1, 502
M-type causal chains, 345-6, 348-51,
353, 354
manifest image, 591-2
mark transmission (MT), 451-6
material objects, 291, 294, 295;
non-null set, 293--4, 295
materialism, 86, 593, 595; central­
state, 571; minimal, 218-21;
non-reductive, 544; panpsychistic,
219-20; physical, 536, 538; see also
physicalism
mathematics, 9-10, II, 13, 51-2, 200,
246-7, 290, 650; intuitionistic, 579,
584
meaning, 7, 8, 13, 45, 46, 48, 251, 562,
564-5, 566, 568, 651; giving, 8;
having, 8
meaning-theory, 571, 578, 579, 581,
586-7
meaninglessness, 54; of
contradictions, 6
mechanism, 485; ideal view, 487-8,
490-1; limitations to pure view,
488-90; theories, 493--4, 497-8; see
also reductionism
memory, 334, 337, 587-8, 589-90;
actual, 381; apparent, 381, 384,
386, 391; causal element in, 348-9,
354, 355, 368, 381, 393; and
changing bodies experiment,
357-8, 363--4; defined, 339; and
duplication, 215-17, 230, 231,
381-2, 384-5; error through
misidentification, 338-9, 352, 353;
event, 339--40; factual, 351; and
fear of pain experiment, 358-63;
and imagination, 355-6; and
personal identity, 338-54, 381-2,
384; previous awareness condition,
338, 340, 348; and quasi­
remembering, 340-7, 350; recall,
remind, learning again, 356; and
risk, 364, 384; temporal dimension,
344-5; theories of, 329
mental phenomena, 4, 526, 527, 544,
549, 554
mental states, 605, 636; backward­
looking/forward looking, 350-1; as
compositionally plastic, 595-6; as
computationally plastic, 596
mere-Cambridge properties, 254-5,
259, 260, 261
mereology, 190, 296, 485, 532-3, 547,
548, 597, 603, 612; see also calculus
of individuals
metalinguistic statements, 81-2
metaphysics, 122, 127
micro-reductionism, see reductionism
mind-body problem, 85-6, 516, 532,
542, 553, 595-6, 599
modal realism, 168, 169
modality, S, 88-9, 107-9, 115, 126,
128, 133, 168, 585; de re, 73, 74,
108, 111, 114; de rei de dicto
distinction, 133, 139--41;
distinctions, 135-8; objections to
de rei de dicto distinction, 141-7
modals, 634-5, 637-8, 639--40, 646,
647, 655; conceptual role, 635-6;
explained, 640-3
moral judgments, 541, 660, 662, 665
moral knowledge, 660
moral realism, 553, 658-9
morals, 636, 637, 639, 645, 660
motion, paradoxes of, 452--4
multiple location, 207-8
multiple realization (MR), 485;
anti-reductionist, 515-16;
Correlation Thesis, 516-17;
disjunctive properties, 518-21,
522, 526-7; Fodor's argument,
519-20; jade, jadeite, nephrite
example, 520-1; jade and pain
example, 521-3; local reductions,
524-7; metaphysical implications,
Subject Index
525-8; Physical Realization Thesis,
521-3, 526; and projectability test,
520; Restricted Correlation Thesis,
517-18, 521
museum myth, 45, 46
names, 7-8, 9, 31-2, 40-1, 42-3,
100-1, 183, 199, 585-6
narrow content, 541
naturalism, 45, 207, 645-7
necessity, 73, 75, 79, 100, 151-2, 186,
221, 559, 641, 643, 646, 648, 655;
causal, 113, 415-18, 420-2, 429;
distinction between identity and,
135-8; Kripkean, 189, 190; and a
priori knowledge, 137-8; and
self-evidence, 137; and thisness,
181-2; and unrevisability,
136-7
neutralism, 576-8, 579, 584, 603
nomic dependence, 440-1
nominalism, 9, 10, 21, 199, 211, 214,
216, 228; class, 204; predicate, 204;
resemblance, 204, 229
nomological statements, 250, 252
non-being, 4, 6
non-fundamental disciplines, 247
non-realist theories, 626-31
nonexistent objects, 36-7; quasi-
Meinongian view, 37--40; and
singular terms, 40-3
nonreducibility, 544
normality, 662-3, 665
nuclear properties, 37--40
numbers, 7, 10, 16, 51, 57, 59, 142;
Giidel, 51-2, 500; imaginary, 500;
impure, 499, SOl; infinite, 500;
natural, 20, 499-502, 562; and
ontological reduction, 499-503;
proxy function, 501-2; rational, 16;
real, 17, 500; system of, IS
objectivism, 579, 581, 593, 594-6,
600-1, 610-12, 656, 657
objects: impossible, 39; nameless, 59;
persistence of through time,
273-81; properties of, 37--40;
scattered, 291-9; succession of,
278-81, 282, 331-2
Occam's razor, 4, 286, 536
One over Many, 209, 212, 213-15
ontological relativity, 54-60, 622, 630
ontology, 4, 7, 11-12, 54-5, 531--4;
acceptance of, 10-11; as
consequential, 10; controversy in,
10; as internally indifferent, 58;
platonic, 13; proxy function, 56,
60; reduction of, 55-7, 499-503;
regress in, 60
open question argument, 549
ostension, 47, 236-7, 285, 288-9;
deferred I direct, 50, 52
overlapping worlds, ISS, 157-64,
170 \nSubject Index
paradigms, 625-6, 632
paraphrases, 212
part-whole theory, see mereology
parthood: and identity across time,
301-11; spatiotemporal, 316-17; as
three-place relation, 307-11
particulars, 198-9, 200, 259, 286, 288;
thin and thick, 206, 207; see also
universals; universals as attributes
perceptions, bundles of, 381
perdurance, 160--1, 168, 615
personal identity: as all-or-nothing,
365, 375, 383; and backward­
looking/ forward-looking mental
states, 350-1; bare-locus view, 395,
398-40 I; closest-continuer
schema, 397-8; conundrum
concerning, 396--8, 403-5; criteria
of, 335-6, 337; as divided, 372-3,
383-5; dominant view, 395-7;
dualist theory, 385-90; and
egoism, 375; empiricist theories,
377-85; as everlasting, 373-4; and
the future, 355-64; and memory,
338-54, 381-2, 384; memory-and­
character theory, 379-81; mental
theory, 381-5, 393, 402-3, 406;
method of cases, 395-7;
persistence of self through time,
331-3; physical theory, 377-9, 393,
401-2, 404, 406; and psychological
connectedness, 371-3, 374, 394--5;
and psychological continuity,
368-9, 370, 372, 374, 394--5, 398,
404; and reidentification, 395;
relativist view, 406; and self­
interest, 374--5; simple view of,
384--5, 388, 389; social continuer
effect, 404--5; spatio-temporal
continuity, 390--1; and successive
selves, 374, 383; and survival,
365-74; truth conditions and
criteria, 333-6; as united, 373; wide
psychological reductionist view,
394--5, 405; see also identity
phenomenalism, 11, 12, 14, 567, 568,
573, 574, 575-6, 581
Physical Exhaustion Principle, 533,
536, 537
physical magnitude, 243-4
physicalism, 531; determination,
534--5; ontology and reduction,
531-3; reduction and
determination, 535-7; status of
ontological principles, 533-4;
token, 505-6, 508; see also
materialism
physics, 11, 203, 219, 220, 532;
psychology reduced to, 504--5, 506;
spatio-temporal coordinate system
for, 17
Platonism, 561, 571, 579
positivism, 640
possibilia, 209, 213, 217, 221, 225, 229
possibility, 5-6, 33, 141, 646, 655;
combinatorial, 184, 186--93; nomic,
191
possible worlds, 78, 100-1, 104, 106,
119, 133, 172, 217, 259, 265-6, 585,
599, 635, 638, 647; and branching,
104--5; comparative similarity of,
438; and identity, 149-53
power, 255-6, 260, 261, 599, 610;
conditional, 256--7, 262, 265
pragmatic realism, 597, 598, 601, 602,
604; model-theoretic argument,
607-8, 618; nonabsolute existence
and conceptual relativity
argument, 612-17, 618;
perspectival causation, reference
and truth argument, 608-9, 618;
scientific convergence/absolutism
argument, 609-12, 618
pragmatism, 598, 622
predicates, 108-9, 202-3, 214--15,
255, 535, 543, 550
primary and secondary qualities, 127,
221, 231, 248, 256, 517, 522, 526,
589, 592, 637, 638, 662
primitive identities, 179-81
priority, 422, 423, 548
process, 446-50; as discontinuous,
466; transmission of, 450, 451-6
production, 446
projection, 233-4, 245, 594--5, 596,
610, 636-9, 661-3, 664
propagation, 446
proper names, 40-1, 42-3, 74--6,
81-3, 102, 114; and persistence
criteria, 104--6; and reference
theory, 105, 108; as rigid
designator, 103-4
property 13, 16, 118-19, 128-9, 184,
185, 191-2, 207, 228, 234, 247, 253;
defined, 119; and difference with
universals, 209-13; as dispensable,
249-52; genuine and pseudo, 129;
knowable a priori, 147; and logical
equivalence, 246--7; natural, 224--5,
227-8; physical, 243-4, 246-7;
predicate, 243; real, 254; second­
order, 127
propositional attitudes, 596, 598
propositional calculus, 287
propositional function, 24--6, 29, 30,
33
propositions, 15-16, 22, 32-3, 94,
135, 138, 139, 147, 213, 225-6,
261-2, 331, 442, 640, 642, 644, 647;
general, 23-9; logical, 28-9
pseudo-process, 411, 447-50
pseudo-questions, 15, 20
pseudo-statements, 18, 19, 21
psychology, 247-9, 251, 595;
reduction of, 504--5, 506, 508, 522,
570; status of, 524--5, 527-8
qualitative similarity, 163-4
quality, 238, 255
quantified modal logic, 170
quantities, 203, 245
quasi-realism, 553, 559, 635-9,
645-7, 653-6
quasi-remembering, 340--1, 340-7,
350, 353-4, 369-70, 371, 373, 376;
M-type causal chain, 345-6,
348-51, 353, 354;
misidentification, 341, 342-3;
previous awareness condition, 341,
342, 345, 347
realism, 9, 203, 214--15, 559, 649-52;
and acceptance, 561; aesthetic,
658-9; arguments against, 622-6;
arguments instead of, 626--31; and
bivalence, 561; comic, 658, 660,
664; commonsense, 591-3, 595,
596-7, 602; defined, 620; internal
(pragmatic), 597, 598, 601, 602,
604, 607-18; metaphysical, 595,
597, 602, 607; moral, 553, 658-9;
naive, 571, 581, 586, 587-8,
589-90; platonic, 22, 621; rejection
of, 566-7, 568, 570; scientific,
591-2, 593, 594, 621, 661; semi­
naive, 588; sophisticated, 571, 581;
without dichotomies, 602-6
reality, 14, 122
recognition, 587
reductionism, 217, 244, 247, 248, 531,
539, 551, 555-6, 567; causal, 466;
and covariance, 549-52; local,
524--5; metaphysical implications,
525-8; and multiple realization,
521, 524--8; ontological, 55-7,
499-503, 531-4; to lower-level
properties, 485, 504-13; see also
mechanism
reductivelreductionist theses
distinction, 569-90
redundancy theory of truth, 632
reference, 100, 105, 224, 535, 537,
562, 563, 567-8, 575-6, 582, 605,
607-8, 608-9; inscrutability of, 48,
49-50, 52-4, 622-3
region of space, 291; boundary points,
291-3, 298; covered, 294--5, 296-7;
fusion, 295-9; open domain,
292-3, 294, 296; open sphere, 291,
292
regularities, 246
reinterpretation, 603
relation of refinement, 122
relations, 7, 35, 184, 185, 191, 192,
201, 204, 207, 210, 230, 433-4, 435,
445, 467, 480, 542, 600, 607-8; and
causal laws, 472; and causal loops,
479-80; defined, 477; dense, 469,
470; formal properties, 469-71;
fundamental, 468~~ 9; genuine,
477-8; Humean, 464; immediate
knowledge of, 458-9; not \nnecessarily asymmetric, 478-9; as
primary, 460; process-based
approach, 446-50; singular, 411;
and transitivity, 469-70
relative atoms, 190
relativity, 447, 559, 596, 597
resemblance, 550-1
rigid/nonrigid designators, 76-9, 81,
84-5, 86, 87, 88, 103-4, 106, 538-9
sameness, 90-2, 213--14;
circumstantial, 121; total, 121
satisfaction, 563
scattered objects, 291-9
scepticism, 642, 643, 657
science, 10-11, 21, 76, 238, 423, 559,
595, 601, 641; reduction of,
504-13; special, 504-13, 515-16,
529; unity of, 504, 507, 508,
509-10, 513
secondary properties, see primary and
secondary qualities
self, transference of, 332--3
self-evidence, 137
self-identity, 54, 72-3
self-interest, 374-5
semantic theory, 562-4, 578, 583,
586; intuitionistic, 564; objectivist,
564-5; two-valued, 562, 564-5,
583, 584--5
semantics 10, 13, 21, 22, 45-6, 60,
155, 212-13, 559; abstract entities
in, 18-21; ostensive predicament,
47
sense-data, 14, 20, 75, 567, 569, 573,
576, 581, 591, 592, 593-4
sentences, 37, 46, 562-3; complex,
582; negation of, 583-4; Tarskian
approach, 563; as true, 564-5; true
or false, 582-4
set theory, 11, 51, 57, 142, 234, 235,
500, 532
Ship of Theseus problem, 273-5
similarity, 234-6, 238, 239-41
simplicity, 11
singular causal statements, 266,
413-16, 423, 429, 431-2; causal
field, 416-17; and causal laws,
432-3, 434; elliptical!
indeterminate, 417-18, 423-4;
minimal sufficient condition, 416,
418, 424-5; necessary condition
post factum, 415, 418; of necessity
and sufficiency, 421; not necessary
or sufficient, 415-16; see also
statements
singular descriptions, 6, 8-9
singular terms, 37, 40-3, 562, 563;
abstract, 50
singularist account of causation:
analysis of concept of, 476-80;
arguments against, 463-7; causal
relations/causal laws link, 472;
completing the theory, 471-2;
development of theory, 467-8, 473;
exact replicas of causal situations,
462; formal properties, 469-71;
fundamental causal relations,
468-9; Humean objections, 464,
465-6; and indeterminate laws,
459-61; and intuition, 459;
inverted universes, 462-3; and
knowledge, 458-9; positivist view,
467-80; postulates of causal law,
473-6; supervenient view, 459,
467; uncaused events and
probabilistic laws, 461-2;
underlying intuition concerning
causal laws, 472-3; see also
causality, causation
souls, 389, 390, 392
space, 643-5; see also time
space-time, 353; dispersal arguments,
176-7
space-time points, 598, 602
space-time region, 313, 314-16
space-time world, 186-7, 207-8
sparse properties, 205-6, 210, 229
spatial dispersal, 176-7
spatio-temporal boundaries, 317-18
spatio-temporal reference, 5
special component theory, 493
speech acts, 654-5
statements, 6, 7, 14, 22, 249-50, 434,
559, 562, 604, 605, 610-11, 650-1;
atomic, 580; future-tense, 576-7;
general, 419-22, 423; of identity,
93-4, 99; interpretation of, 627-31,
632; irreducible, 581; material­
object, 570, 573, 574, 575-6, 581,
589; mathematical, 571, 579,
580-1; meanings of, 566, 567-8,
570; ontological, 8; past-tense, 587;
problematic of, 658-9;
psychological, 580; true or false,
620-1, 626, 651, 655-6, 659;
undecidable, 11; see also singular
causal statements
states of affairs, 185, 203-5, 599, 605,
645, 660; atomic, 185-6, 189-91;
conjunctive, 185, 186, 189, 193;
first-order/second-order, 221, 231;
molecular, 185; world of, 205-6
strict/loose distinction, 275-7,
282-3, 325, 334, 354
structural properties, 189, 190,
192-3, 205
Structure-Restricted Correlation
Thesis, 517-18
subjectivism, 600, 610
substances, 377-8, 387-8, 391
Substantial Vitalism, 492-3, 497
substitutional quantification, 58-9
substitutivity of identicals, 107; see
also Leibniz' law
suchness, 173-4, 177, 179, 181;
Leibnizian position, 175
sufficiency, 415-18, 420-2, 429
Subject Index
supervenience, 217, 220, 230, 485,
615; and causation, 459, 460, 461,
480; and covariance, 542-3, 544,
545-6, 550-1; defined, 555; and
doctrine of relations, 542; global,
551-2, 554; grounds of, 552-4;
moral, 552-3; in philosophy,
540-2; see also covariance;
dependence
synonymy, 243
synthetic a priori judgments, 72
tautological properties, 152
temporal parts, 271, 281, 288, 325-6;
causal connections, 323-4; crazy
metaphysic of, 306-7, 319-20;
defined, 303-6; four-dimensional,
312-24; modal properties, 324;
support for, 320-1; three­
dimensional, 307-11; and unity of
consciousness, 321, 322-3, 324
tendencies, 599
theories, 54-5, 506, 551
things-in-themselves, 604, 605, 607,
609, 611-12, 614, 617
thisness, 172-3, 179-80, 182;
Leibnizian position, 174-6; and
necessity, 181-2
thought, 595, 631; content of, 225-8
three-dimensional objects, 307-11,
317-18, 325, 570; boundaries of,
313-14
time: identity through, 273-81; see
also space
total cluster theory, 263, 264
trans-physical laws, 490
trans-world identity, 154, 155, 157-8,
164-9, 182; primitive, 179-81
translation, 603
translational indeterminacy, 622-3
transmission, 450, 451
trial-and-error procedure, 245
triangularity, 257
trilaterality, 257
tropes, 204
truth, 13, 135, 138, 223, 264-5, 535,
537, 538, 559, 570, 579, 588, 600,
609, 625, 626, 630-1, 632-3, 649,
655; contingent, 641;
correspondence theory of, 621;
defined, 622; normativity of,
656-7; rational command of,
657-8, 659; redundancy theory of,
566; thinlthick notion, 656, 661
truth-conditions, 333-6, 559, 565-8,
570, 576, 580, 582, 584-5, 586, 600,
624-5, 628, 629-30, 633-6, 638-9,
643, 647, 651, 653-6
truth-function, 562, 564, 640
truth-maker principle, 203-4
truth-values, 73, 76, 79, 162, 562,
566, 568, 577-8, 584, 650-1,
654-7
type-identity theory, 553 \nSubject Index
universals, 7-8, 9, 9-10, 16, 54, 170,
184-5, 228, 420--1; alien, 186-7,
191; bundle theory, 205; complex,
205; concrete, 286, 287-8;
conjunctive, 201-2; and difference
with property, 209-13; disjunctive,
201; monadic, 210; negative, 201;
polyadic, 210; redundant, 210-11;
as sparse, 205-6, 210;
transcendent, 198; as ways, 206--7;
see also particulars
universals as attributes: conjunctive,
201-2; disjunctive, 201; multiple
location, 207-8; negative, 201; and
predicates, 202-3; states of affairs,
203-6; thin and thick particular,
206; uninstantiated, 198-201;
ways, 206--7
unrevisability, 136--7
utterances, 8-9
vagueness, 165, 170
variables, 108-9, 113, 115; duality of,
110; of quantification, 9
verificationism, 624-6, 629, 632,
633
Weber-Fechner Law, 251
word typcsltokens, 93-7
world, 578
world of things, 14-15 \n