A REALIST
CONCEPTION
OF TRUTH
ALSO BY WILLIAM P. ALSTON
Divine Nature and Human Language: Essays in Philosophical Theology
Epistemic Justification: Essays in the Theory of Knowledge
Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience
The Reliability of Sense Perception
A REALIST
CONCEPTION
OF TRUTH
William P. Alston
Cornell University Press
ITHACA AND LONDON
Copyright © 1996 by Cornell University
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review,
this book, or parts thereof, must not be reproduced in any
form without permission in writing from the publisher. For
information, address Cornell University Press, Sage House,
East State Street, Ithaca, New York 14850.
First published 1996 by Cornell University Press.
Printed in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Alston, William P.
A realist conception of truth / William P. Alston.
P. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-8014-3187-5 (cloth: alk. paper)
1. Truth. 2. Realism. 3. Knowledge, Theory of.
BD171. A42 1995
121-dc20
I. Title.
95-31251
The paper in this book meets the minimum requirements
of the American National Standard for Information Sciences
Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39. 48-1984.
For Hugh Fleetwood,
true friend

CONTENTS
Preface
Introduction
Alethic Realism
xi
i Preliminary Formulation 5
ii Bearers of Truth Value: Sentences 9
iii Bearers of Truth Value: Statements and Beliefs 13
iv Bearers of Truth Value: Propositions 15
v The Nature of Propositions 17
vi General Formulations of a Realist Conception of Truth 22
vii Propositional Truth and the T-Schema 26
viii Relation to Tarski 30
ix Minimalism about Truth 32
x Minimalist Realism and the Correspondence Theory 37
xi Minimalist Realism and "Deflationary" Accounts of Truth 41
xii Objections to the Minimal-Realist Account of Truth 52
Alethic Realism and Metaphysical Realism
i Metaphysical Antirealism: Flat Denials 65
ii Metaphysical Antirealism: Reductions 69
iii Realism and Idealism 73
CONTENTS
iv The Boundary between Flat Denials and Reductions 75
v Logical Relations of Alethic Realism and Metaphysical
Realisms 77
An Epistemological Objection to Alethic Realism
i The Alleged Impossibility of Comparing Judgments and
Facts 85
v Indeterminacy of Reference 149
vi Putnam's "Brain in a Vat" Argument 159
ii Can We Cognize Anything Other Than Judgments? 87
iii Counterattack by Blanshard 97
Putnam on "Conceptual Relativity"
i Putnam's Conceptual Relativity 162
ii Hard-Nosed Absolutist Rejoinders 168
iii More Moderate Absolutist Rejoinders 173
Dummett's Verificationist Alternative to Alethic Realism
i Forms of Verificationism 103
ii Dummett's Verificationist Semantics 105
iii Critique of Verificationism 110
iv Verificationist Semantics and the Concept of Truth 115
v Compatibility of Verificationist Semantics and Realist Truth 123
vi No Meaningful Sentences Are Only Defeasibly Verifiable 126
vii Dummett on Realism 128
Putnam's Model-Theoretic Argument
i The Argument 132
ii Initial Difficulties with the Argument 136
iii Another Reading of the Argument 139
iv What Is an "Interpretation"? 142
iv Conceptual Relativity and the Nature of Truth 179
CONTENTS ix
Epistemic Conceptions of Truth
i The Realist Conception of Truth and Its Alternatives 188
i Varieties of Epistemic Conceptions of Truth 188
in Ideal Epistemic Conditions (1) 192
iv Ideal Epistemic Conditions (2) 196
v Are There Counterexamples to the Ideal Justifiability
Conception? 199
vi The Concept of an Ideal Epistemic Situation Presupposes the
Concept of Truth 204
vii An Intensional Argument against the Claim 208
viii Replies to the Intensional Argument 211
ix An Epistemic Reinterpretation of Content 214
x Back to Dummett 219
xi Realist and Antirealist Prospects for Determining Truth
Value 224
xii A Nonconceptual Epistemic Theory of Truth 228
Doing without Truth
i The Scope of This Chapter 231
ii Reasons for De-Emphasizing Truth 233
iii Why Truth Is Important 235
iv Truth and Epistemology: Knowledge and Justification 240
v Justification without Truth 248
vi Troubles with Deontological Conceptions of Justification 252
vii Problems with Any Truth-Free Justification 253
viii Stich on the Unimportance of Truth 258
Epilogue 262
Bibliography
Index
PREFACE
Though I have been interested in issues concerning truth and realism
from the beginning of my involvement in philosophy, I did not under
take to write anything substantial on the topic until my American Philo
sophical Association presidential address of 1979, entitled, against the
advice of my wife, "Yes, Virginia, There Is a Real World". That piece was
followed, after a long interval, by a paper entitled "Realism and the
Tasks of Epistemology", presented at a conference on the implications
of realism and antirealism for epistemology, held at Santa Clara Univer
sity in 1992. (The proceedings of that conference are forthcoming in a
book, Realism/Antirealism and Epistemology, edited by Christopher Kulp,
to be published by Rowman & Littlefield. ) These two papers were at
tempts, with different degrees of preliminariness, to formulate and de
fend a realist account of truth, an enterprise that has assumed much
larger and, I hope, better-developed form in the present book.
Since the book is fairly narrowly concentrated on formulating and
defending a realist conception of truth and does not stray from this path
to meditate on wider implications, let me say here that I believe the
question of how to think about truth is crucially important for intellec
tual issues generally. It is hard to overemphasize the amount of mischief,
in this century especially, that has resulted from confusions, false assimi
lations, and sloppy thinking concerning truth. In particular, the con
flation of truth value and epistemic status of one sort or another
(justification, certainty, knowledge, rationality, general consensus. .. )
has muddied the waters in religious thought, the social sciences, and
literary studies, as well as in philosophy itself. (See my "Realism and the
Christian Faith", International Journal for Philosophy of Religion [1995],
for an exploration of one aspect of this. ) The supposition that to call
something true is simply to pay it some kind of compliment and the
popular view that truth value is relative to a set of presuppositions, a
conceptual scheme, a theory, or a "language game" have also wreaked
a lot of damage in the learned world. I can't pretend in this book to have
cleared up nearly all the confusions with which thought about truth is
rife, but I hope to have made some contribution to that enterprise.
In thinking through these issues I have learned much from many peo
ple, not least from those with whom I disagree most. Many of them are
discussed, at greater or lesser length, in this book. Among those whose
ideas are, at most, touched on, and from whom I have learned much
are G. E. Moore, Bertrand Russell, J. L. Austin, Peter Strawson, Crispin
Wright, and Hartry Field. My thanks are due the participants in the al
ready mentioned 1992 conference at Santa Clara University for many
insights. Special thanks go to the members of a seminar I gave on real
ism at Syracuse University in the fall of 1992. That seminar was a kind
of pilot project for this book, and much of the material underwent se
vere, and salutary, testing, in the fires of discussion there. In particular,
Michael Lynch, Andrew Cortens, and Paul Bloomfield made many use
ful comments both in the seminar and in subsequent discussion. Two
years later a manuscript of the book was discussed in a seminar given by
Nicholas Wolterstorff at Yale University. I received weekly reports from
Wolterstorff on successive chapters, and later in the fall I was privileged
to meet with the seminar. Those comments have greatly improved the
final result. Several other people have read the whole manuscript and
have provided useful suggestions. They include Robert Audi, Mark Hel
ler, Eleonore Stump, and especially Jonathan Bennett, who did his usual
painstaking job of making detailed comments on each chapter. Linda
Alcoff, Alvin Plantinga, and Steve Wagner gave me valuable reactions to
particular chapters. Finally I received very helpful suggestions from two
anonymous readers for Cornell University Press. Because of all these
people the book is much better than it would have been otherwise. How
good that is I leave it to the reader to judge.
Finally, my heartfelt thanks go to my wife, Valerie, for cheerfully put
ting up with an often baffled and frustrated philosopher.
Syracuse, New York
WILLIAM P. ALSTON
xii PREFACE
A REALIST
CONCEPTION
OF TRUTH
Introduction
The central aim of this work is the formulation and defense of what I
call ALETHIC REALISM, that is, realism concerning TRUTH. We may think
of alethic realism as comprising two theses.
1. The REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH is the right way to think of truth
in the sense of 'true' in which it applies to beliefs, statements, and
propositions.
2. Truth is important. It is often a matter of considerable import
whether a particular bearer of truth value is true or false.
Most of the book will be concerned with the first thesis. A consideration
of the second thesis is reserved for Chapter 8. As this division of the
book implies, what I call the realist conception of truth is at the heart of
the enterprise. Most of the book is taken up with seeking the most ade
quate and perspicuous ways to formulate this conception, relating it to
various other things, defending it against objections, and criticizing
competing conceptions.
As an initial stab we can think of the realist conception of truth as
follows. A statement, for example, is true if and only if what the state
ment is about is as the statement says it is. Alternatively in terms of prop
ositions, the conception is such that the schema 'It is true that p if and
only if p' yields a (necessarily, conceptually, analytically) true statement
for any substitution instance. Chapter 1 is devoted to explicating the
realist conception, exploring alternative formulations, relating it to
other accounts of truth, and considering objections. A crucial part of
the explication is deciding what we should regard as the primary bearers
of truth value. The palm is awarded to PROPOSITIONS. It is argued that
statements (assertions) and beliefs can be termed true or false only by
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
virtue of their propositional contents. I argue that our concept of a
proposition is, most basically, the concept of a content of a belief or an
assertion-a concept of what is believed or asserted. There is also a cri
tique of the currently fashionable practice of concentrating on sentences
as bearers of truth value.
I discuss the relation of the realist conception to correspondence the
ories. They are closely connected, but correspondence theories try to
bring out features of the property of truth on which the features embod
ied in our concept of truth supervene. My minimalist account of truth is
distinguished from deflationary views that deny that there is any property
of truth or falsity and seek to construe truth-value talk as not involving
the attribution of any such property. The most prominent deflationary
views are subjected to criticism.
In Chapter 2 I explore various forms of metaphysical realism, their
interrelations and their relations to alethic realism. Much of the discus
sion is built around different forms of antirealism-particularly FLAT
DENIALS and REDUCTIONS. I argue that alethic realism is largely neutral
as between different metaphysically realist and antirealist positions,
though alethic realism can be said to carry a very weak metaphysically
realist commitment.
Chapter 3-7 are devoted to criticisms of the realist conceptions of
truth-with detours into a number of associated issues. Chapter 3 deals
with the argument that on a realist conception of truth it is impossible
to determine what propositions (statements, beliefs) are true, since it is
impossible to compare one of these with facts. The argument is shown
to rest on indefensible conceptions of cognition, perceptual and other
wise, and to place unrealistic demands on the comparison in question.
To this is added an argument in Chapter 7 that we are in a much better
position to determine truth value on a realist conception of truth than
on an epistemic conception-the chief alternative.
Chapter 4 takes up Michael Dummett's verificationist alternative to
realism about truth. Dummett's verificationist semantics is laid out and
subjected to criticism. I don't go into that matter as thoroughly as I
might, since I also contend that this semantics does not have the implica
tions for truth that Dummett supposes it to have. I argue, in fact, that
his semantics is quite compatible with a realist conception of truth. I
also throw cold water on the idea that Dummett's characterizations of
realism cover a large stretch of the waterfront.
Chapters 5 and 6 are devoted to Hilary Putnam's assaults on what
he calls "metaphysical realism", which contains a version of a realist
conception of truth. Chapter 5 is mostly concerned with the much dis
cussed "model-theoretic" argument that Putnam put forward in his
presidential addresses to the American Philosophical Association and
the Association for Symbolic Logic. I find that the attempt to come to
grips with this argument is a salutary exercise that uncovers a number
of fundamental issues. The model-theoretic argument is designed to re
fute the realist contention that it is possible for even an epistemically
ideal theory to be false. My conclusions include the points (1) that the
argument shows at most a logical possibility of an ideal theory's being
true, something a metaphysical (alethic) realist could cheerfully accept,
(2) that if the argument shows anything it shows that any theory we can
construct is too indeterminate to be susceptible of a truth value, and (3)
that Putnam's claim that the realist cannot show that an interpretation on
which the theory is true is not the "intended" interpretation relies on an un
workable extensional construal of 'interpretation'. The chapter ends
with briefer critical looks at arguments for indeterminacy of reference
and against "brain in a vat" scepticism, arguments that are supposed to
prove an embarrassment for the metaphysical realist.
Chapter 6 deals with Putnam's "conceptual relativity", one facet of
which is that there is no unique true answer to the question of what
objects there are in the world. Here I acknowledge that Putnam's case
for this position is not without merit, though I don't make an all-out
surrender. I explore various realist responses, including a number that
are partly concessive. I suggest that all of these responses, even the most
concessive, can preserve alethic realism. Indeed, I go further and argue
that even Putnam's own position is compatible with a realist conception
of truth, though Putnam himself does not avail himself of the possibility
of combining them.
Chapter 7 is devoted to a mapping, and critical analysis, of epistemic
conceptions of truth, the only significant alternatives to a realist concep
tion that take truth to be a genuine property. Most of the discussion is
focused on a version Putnam espoused (though he has since abandoned
it), according to which the concept of truth is the concept of being justi
fied in ideal epistemic circumstances. After an exploration of how to think
of such circumstances, critical fire is directed at this position. Three
objections are presented. (1) There are counterexamples-true propo
sitions that are not ideally justifiable. (2) The account is circular; the
concept of ideal justifiability presupposes the concept of truth. (3) The
position is incompatible with the acceptance of the necessary truth of all
instantiations of the T-schema, since, for any proposition p, that schema
represents the fact that p as both necessary and sufficient for its being
true that p. This would seem to leave no room for epistemic necessary
INTRODUCTION 3
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH4
and sufficient conditions. Two possible replies by the epistemic theorist
are considered, but they are both found to be without significant merit.
Chapter 8 turns to the second component of alethic realism, that
truth is important. The positive case for the importance of truth consists
largely of a gaggle of truisms, typified by "We are more likely to succeed
in our endeavors if they are guided by true beliefs than if they are guided
by false beliefs". The most extensive discussion is accorded to the ques
tion whether a concern for truth value is crucial to various theoretical
concerns, such as logic and epistemology. It is the latter that receives
detailed treatment. The work of a number of epistemologists is exam
ined to see what role truth plays in their accounts of knowledge and of
epistemic justification. Truth is, by well nigh common consent, funda
mental to the former, but the situation vis-à-vis justification is more di
verse. Many epistemologists give truth a crucial role here, but some do
not. I argue that the former are better positioned to deal with various
fundamental problems than are the latter. The chapter ends with a criti
cal examination of Stich's claims for the unimportance of truth.
FD
-
CHAPTER 1
Alethic Realism
i Preliminary Formulation
This book is devoted to the exposition and defense of a particular
brand of realism-one that I take to be especially fundamental. The
core of the position is a certain doctrine about truth. Hence I shall call
it "alethic realism".
At the heart of alethic realism is a conception of truth that I shall call
the "realist conception". As a first approximation:
I. A statement (proposition, belief. .. ) is true if and only if what the
statement says to be the case actually is the case.
For example, the statement that gold is malleable is true if and only if
gold is malleable. The "content" of a statement-what it states to be the
case-gives us everything we need to specify what it takes for the state
ment to be true. In practice this means the "that" clause-the content
specifying clause-that tells us what statement we are referring to can
also be used to make explicit what it takes for the statement to be true.
Nothing more is required for the truth of the statement, and nothing
less will suffice. In particular, and looking forward to the main alterna
tive to this account of truth, there are no epistemic requirements for the
truth of my statement. It is not required that any person or any social
group, however defined, know that gold is malleable or be justified or
rational in believing it. It is not required that science be destined, in
that far-off divine event toward which inquiry moves, to arrive at the
conclusion that gold is malleable. It is not required that it be accepted
by a clear majority of the American Philosophical Association. It is not
required that it have been rendered probable by some body of empirical
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
evidence. So long as gold is malleable, then what I said is true, whatever
the epistemic status of that proposition for any individual or community.
This way of thinking about truth has many distinguished antecedents,
harkening back to Aristotle, who said in a famous passage of the Meta
physics, "To say of what is that it is and of what is not that it is not, is
true" (IV, 6, 1001b, 28). In the course of the discussion I will be alluding
to a number of more recent thinkers who have espoused similar views,
as well as a number of opponents.
The realist conception is the one I claim to be expressed by the predi
cate 'true' only in some of its uses, namely, those involved in attributions
of truth to propositions, statements, and beliefs. There are, of course,
other uses of the term. It sometimes means something like 'genuine', as
we speak of a "true friend", sometimes 'faithful', as in "true to the
cause", sometimes 'legitimate', as "the true heir". I will not be con
cerned with these other senses in this book.
The formulation I just gave for the realist conception of truth as well
as others I will give later, is put forward as constitutive of that concept.
It is by virtue of the (a) meaning of 'true' that a statement is true if
and only if what the statement says is the case actually is the case. This
equivalence is put forward as conceptually or semantically true, and thus
necessarily true in one of the ways a proposition can enjoy that status.
This feature of the position will become important at later stages of the
discussion.
Alethic realism is made up of two theses.
(1) The realist conception of truth is the correct one (for that use of
'true' in which statements, beliefs, and propositions are evaluated
as true or false). This conception embodies what it is for a state
ment. .. to be true.
(2) It is important, for a variety of purposes, that statements, beliefs,
and so on, be assessed for truth value. Truth is important.
As such, there will be two ways of deviating from it: (a) denying that the
realist conception is expressed by 'true' in the relevant uses, and (b)
denying that it is important whether statements. .. are true in this sense.
The bulk of the book will be devoted to the first thesis, but the second
will be treated in Chapter 8.
I have been presenting the realist conception of truth as if it were an
important, exciting, and controversial philosophical position. But, you
may suppose, it is nothing but a miserable truism that no one in his
right mind would deny. What could be more obvious than that it is true
ALETHIC REALISM
that there are books in my study if and only if there are books in my
study? What's all the fuss about? Well, it does seem to me to be an obvi
ous truism that this is the way to think about truth. But nevertheless it
has been frequently and enthusiastically denied, especially in recent
times. I shall be much concerned in this book with philosophers who
have taken contrary positions-what they say in defense of those posi
tions and in criticism of alethic realism. And this reaction is by no means
confined to academic philosophy. It is widespread in theology and reli
gious studies, in literary theory, in the social sciences, and elsewhere.
As indicated above, the main alternatives to the realist conception
construe truth in epistemic terms. At least these are the main alterna
tives that presuppose a property of truth and attempt to say what that
property is. There is also a variety of "deflationary" accounts of truth
talk that deny that there is any such property. I will explain why I regard
them as defective in section xi of this chapter. As for epistemic accounts,
they take the truth of a statement or belief to consist of some positive
epistemic status of that statement or belief-its being justified (perhaps
in conditions of some idealized sort), or being adequately supported by
evidence, or being "warrantably assertable", or cohering with some sys
tem of beliefs. Traditional coherence and pragmatist theories of truth
fall under this rubric, as well as some recent views. A large part of the
book is taken up with criticism of epistemic accounts. Chapters 3-6 ex
amine their objections to alethic realism, and Chapter 7 presents objec
tions to them. I will also have to take account of the fact that epistemic
theorists often take their position not to be incompatible with the realist
conception, as I will be explaining it. Recognizing the obviousness of
the point that it is necessary and sufficient for the truth of the statement
that gold is malleable that gold be malleable, they seek to maintain that
this point is neutral between different accounts of truth, and so perfectly
compatible with their own. In Chapter 7 I seek to show that they can't
get away with this.
Why do I call the position I defend in this book "alethic realism"?
What is realist about it? The basic point is this. What it takes to make a
statement true on the realist conception is the actual obtaining of what
is claimed to obtain in making that statement. If what is stated is that
grass is green then it is grass's being green that is both necessary and
sufficient for the truth of the statement. Nothing else is relevant to its
truth value. This is a realist way of thinking of truth in that the truth
maker is something that is objective vis-à-vis the truth bearer. It has to do
with what the truth bearer is about, rather than with some "internal"
or "intrinsic" feature of the truth bearer, such as its epistemic status, its
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
place in a system of propositions, or the confidence with which it is held.
This is a fundamental sense in which truth has to do with the relation
of a potential truth bearer to a REALITY beyond itself. '
Why do I consider alethic realism to be a particularly fundamental
form of realism? It is because everything we believe can be assessed for
truth value. Therefore our interpretation of truth affects the status of
everything we believe, whatever the subject matter. And if our concept
of truth is a realist one, then all our beliefs owe their truth value to the
fact that they are related in a certain way to a reality beyond themselves.
Thus alethic realism constitutes a global form of realism, one that is not
restricted to any particular domain of reality, as is, for example, realism
about properties or values or physical objects. 2
But however plausible it may be that alethic realism is a genuine, and
indeed basic, form of realism, there is no doubt but that 'realism' is
more widely and more naturally used for a variety of positions that take
something or other to really exist. In the middle ages--and beyond--
"realism" was a view about the status of universals, roughly a Platonic
position. There are various "realist" views about the status of perceptual
objects and their relations to perception-"naive" realism, direct real
ism, neorealism, critical realism, etc. There is scientific realism--
theoretical entities "really exist". There is moral realism. This is
variously conceived, but the common core is the conviction of the objec
tivity of moral standards, properties, or truths. In the next chapter I will
have something to say about some of these views and their relations to
alethic realism. In this chapter I will be concerned with developing a
more refined statement of alethic realism, mapping its relations to other
views on truth, and answering preliminary objections.
That further refinement and elaboration is needed is easily seen. The
initial formulation raises all sorts of questions. Can we provide some
thing more explicit than metaphorical talk about a statement "saying"
something to be the case? Can we give an explicit general formula for
how a state of affairs (or whatever) has to be related to a statement in
order that it make that statement true? How is our formulation related
to the correspondence theory of truth, the idea that a statement is true
if and only if it "corresponds" with the facts, or with a suitable particular
1. This has to be qualified to handle self-referential statements, some of which pose well
advertised problems of their own. But since such statements are in a tiny minority, I will let the
formulation in the text stand as a rationale for the use of the term 'realist'.
2. The foregoing is only a preliminary statement of the realist credentials of the realist con
ception of truth. In Chapter 2 I will carry out an extensive discussion of the relation of alethic
realism to other realist positions particularly various forms of metaphysical realism.
ALETHIC REALISM
fact? Does the position have any implications for the metaphysical status
of the facts (or whatever) that render statements true? We must go into
all this. But first we must turn our attention to the choice of truth bear
ers. Are we to think of truth value as attaching to statements, beliefs,
propositions, sentences, or what? I am convinced that my basic conten
tions are unaffected by how I answer that question. The issues between
a realist conception of truth and its rivals take the same form whether
we pose them in terms of statements, propositions, or whatever (pro
vided we don't make too outrageous a selection). Nevertheless, the dis
cussion will proceed more smoothly if we conduct it in terms of a
particular choice, rather than in terms of a complicated disjunction.
Hence I will survey the most prominent candidates sufficiently to ex
plain and defend my preference.
ii Bearers of Truth Value: Sentences
Many readers will have been puzzled by the absence, in the above
remarks, of any mention of what is currently the most popular candi
date, in philosophical circles, for truth-value bearers: sentences. Since I
feel that this preference is thoroughly misguided and hence decline to
go along with it, I had better explain my determination to swim against
the tide.
First here are what I take to be the main motivations for fastening
on sentences for this purpose. (1) An aversion to "abstract entities", a
category taken to include statements and propositions, and a corre
sponding preference for more "concrete" entities, such as sentences
and other linguistic items. I shall have something to say about that at
the end of this section. (2) Much of the philosophical discussion of truth
is carried on in the context of a logical treatment of formalized possible
"languages" that are not used for anything, either to perform speech
acts or to express beliefs or otherwise articulate thought. Within that
context only sentences are available to bear truth values. As for this sec
ond motivation, I will just say that my interest in this book is in the
concepts of truth and falsity that are used in real life where we are sub
ject to no such restrictions.
And now for my reasons for abstaining from attributing truth values
to sentences. First, so far as I can tell, there is no ordinary, nontechnical
practice of applying 'true' and 'false' to sentences, and no sense of these
terms in ordinary use in which they apply to sentences. But it is easy to
construct such a sense. If the statement that grass is green is true and if
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH10
the English sentence, 'Grass is green' is standardly used to make that
statement, that sentence can, derivatively, be termed true.
(3) Sentence S is true = df. S is standardly used to state that p, and it is
true that p. 3
But (3) does not provide a basis for ascribing a truth value to every
sentence with a standard statement-making potential. At least, it does
not guarantee a unique truth value for every such sentence because with
respect to many sentences there is no unique statement they are fitted
to make. Consider 'Harold Stassen is still running'. That sentence can
be used to state that Stassen is still locomoting by moving his legs rap
idly, and also to state that Stassen is still offering himself as a candidate
for elective office. It may well be that at a certain moment one of these
statements is true and the other false. So what are we to say of the sen
tence? Is it true or false? Both? But there are strong theoretical reasons
for wanting bearers of truth value to be such that each one has a unique
value. If my knowing that p requires that it be true that p, I would feel
cheated if, after having been assured that it is true that p, one adds,
"And it is false as well". Again, many logical relations turn on the truth
values of the relata. Here it is crucial that each item have one and only
one definite truth value.
The case just cited ran into this difficulty because of ambiguity, the
fact that 'run' has at least two meanings, which ensures that the sentence
in question has at least two readings. We could take care of that by modi
fying (3) to range over "sentences on a reading".
(4) Sentence S, on reading R, is true = df. S on R is standardly usable
to state that p and it is true that p.
But more complications loom on the horizon. A sentence containing
what are often called "indexicals" (but are better termed "token reflex
ives") can be used with one and the same meaning to make many differ
ent statements, depending on features of a particular utterance and/or
its circumstances. Thus 'I'm hungry' can be used to make many differ
ent statements, with different truth values, depending on who is making
the statement and when. Indeed, since tensed verbs and temporal ad
3. Note that this does nothing to legitimate applying truth values to all sentences in natural
languages. Many sentences cannot be used to make statements, e. g. , "Is he coming? ", "What a
relief! ", and "Please pass the salt". That poses a problem for the project of giving a general
theory of the meaning of sentences in terms of their truth conditions for sentences, but that
enterprise is outside the scope of this book.
ALETHIC REALISM
verbs exhibit this feature, 'Harold Stassen is still running' lacks a unique
statemental potential for this reason as well as because of the ambiguity
of 'run'. At one time the sentence, on a given reading of 'run', will be
used to make a true statement, and at another time a false statement.
There is more
these difficulties. One move is to shift from taking 'true' and 'false' as
monadic properties of sentences to taking them as relational predicates,
relating sentences and features of circumstances of utterance, just those
features that help determine what statement is made by uttering the
sentence on a particular occasion. Alternatively, one can switch from
sentence types to sentence tokens as bearers of truth value. (A sentence
type is what is ordinarily called a 'sentence', a unit of language that can
be uttered, used, inscribed on many different occasions. A sentence
token can be thought of as one of those utterances or inscriptions of
the sentence type. ) Clearly, a particular sentence token will not be liable
to the variations we have seen to affect sentence types--at least provided
the user of the sentence has made sure that it is being used to make just
one definite statement. In that case, if the sentence is ambiguous the
speaker will be employing it in just one of its senses, and where aspects
of the circumstances are required to interact with the relevant meaning
of the sentence type to determine a particular statement they will have
done so.
than one way for partisans of sentences to respond to
Thus the attribution of truth values to (statement-making) sentence
tokens escapes all the objections thus far considered. But there are oth
ers lying in wait. First, note that there is no more an established practice
of ascribing truth values to sentence tokens than there is with respect to
sentence types. "Is that particular concatenation of chalk marks on the
board true or false? " or "Is that sequence of sounds you just made with
your vocal organs true or false? " has no natural interpretation, available
to each fluent speaker of the language just by virtue of her linguistic
competence. If we are motivated to talk that way, we have to provide a
sense for such attributions. The obvious way to do so is as just laid out.
We consider what statement is made by the production of the sentence
token in question, and we take the latter to enjoy the truth value of the
former. But this means that our understanding of the attribution of a
4. If one holds, as I would not, that a written token of 'It's raining here', being a physical
object that can endure over a long period of time, is itself subject to change of truth value, then
she can consider the ensuing discussion restricted to utterance tokens. I feel comfortable in
setting aside the possibility of a variation in truth-value for sentence tokens, since, if that possibil
ity is realized, the attribution of truth values to tokens is confronted with the same difficulties as
the attribution of truth values to types. And so much the better for my critique.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
truth value to the sentence token is based on our understanding of what
it is for a statement to have a truth value. The latter is the groundwork
for the former, not vice versa; nor do they each enjoy an independent
standing. Thus, given that we must already have a grasp of what it is for
statements to be true in order to make any sense of the truth of sentence
tokens, why concentrate on the latter in our discussion of truth value?
In response the partisan of sentence tokens might invoke the possibil
ity of kicking away the ladder on which we have climbed up. "In order
to establish the practice of ascribing truth values to sentence tokens, we
have initially to make use of ordinary talk of true and false statements.
But once the former practice is in place, we can dispense with state
ments. It is not as if we have to refer explicitly to a statement each time
we say of a token that it is true. We can move directly from what we
would take to show the statement to be true to the ascription of truth to
the token. Thus, confronted with a token of 'It's moving fast' we can
determine what 'it' refers to in this utterance, take into account what
ever is needed for determining relevant standards for rapidity of move
ment for that sort of thing, and determine the time of utterance. We
then determine whether the referent is moving rapidly by those stan
dards at that time. That will give us everything we need to determine
whether the token is true. No statement or proposition need be brought
into the deliberations. "
But this fails to show that attribution of truth values to sentence to
kens is not conceptually dependent on the attribution of truth values to
statements. My opponent is surely right in saying that when assessing
sentence tokens for truth I don't have to first determine, in each case,
the truth value of a correlated statement. But the fact remains that my
understanding of what it is for a sentence token to be true or false is
derived from my understanding of what it is for a statement to be true
or false. That means that we still have statements as truth-value bearers
in our conceptual-ontological repertoire. And we had better not kick
that ladder away, or our posterity will not be able to acquire the ability
to play the sentence token truth-value game. 5
Another difficulty with taking sentences as basic, independent bearers
of truth value has to do with the rationale for giving some sentences
5. Nicholas Wolterstorff has pointed out to me that I have done nothing to rule out the
possibility that a new generation might be introduced to the practice of ascribing truth values
to sentence tokens directly, not by derivation from the practice of ascribing them to statements.
And so I haven't. But I am concerned here to understand our actual practice of truth-value
attribution, not what alternative practices are possible. My concern in sections ii-iv is to make
the choice of truth-value bearer (s) that best reflects that actual practice.
ALETHIC REALISM
rather than others this status. It is clear that only indicative sentences
could qualify; " go to bed' is true" or " 'what time is it' is false" make
no sense. And for that matter, not all indicatives are clearly qualified. J.
L. Austin contended that "performative" sentences like 'I promise to
pay it back tomorrow' are not properly regarded as true or false; and
evaluative sentences are excluded by some thinkers. So we are faced
with the question why some sentences and not others are bearers of
truth value. The natural, and perhaps the only satisfactory, answer is
that a sentence is a bearer of truth value if and only if it has a statement
making potential. So here too it seems that the concept of the truth
value of a statement is prior to that of the truth value of a sentence.
In the light of this discussion let's go back to the point that sentences
are preferable to statements or propositions as truth bearers because
they are "concrete" rather than "abstract", and there are metaphysical
reasons for avoiding commitment to abstract objects. Since I am un
moved by such reasons, this is not a live issue for me, but I should say
something about how this sort of nominalism influences the choice of
truth bearers. First, an aversion to abstract objects provides no basis for
a preference for sentence types over statements because sentence types
are also abstract; they are not spatiotemporally locatable, for example.
But we have, in any case, been driven to sentence tokens as the most
plausible linguistic bearers of truth values, and it cannot be denied that
a sentence token is a concrete entity by the usual standards for that
category. Hence if we could restrict truth value attributions to sentence
tokens, we would avoid positing abstract entities for this purpose. But
we still have to explain the notion of the truth value of a sentence token
in terms of the notion of the truth value of a statement made by produc
ing that token; and so we have to recognize statements after all. Hence,
taking sentence tokens as bearers of truth value does not enable us to
avoid abstract objects.
I don't claim have decisively put the quietus on the claim that sen
tences are the most fundamental bearers of truth value. But I fancy that
I have cast enough doubt on the claim to warrant me in picking some
nonlinguistic candidate as the truth bearer of choice.
iii Bearers of Truth Value: Statements and Beliefs
With sentences out of the way, the main candidates in twentieth-cen
tury English speaking philosophy have been beliefs (judgments), state
6. This latter problem comes up in another connection in section xii.
7. For a penetrating discussion of this problem see Price 1988, esp. Chap. 3.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
ments (assertions), and propositions. I am going to fasten on
propositions as the favored candidate. Here is why.
Let's begin with the attribution of truth values to statements (asser
tions) and beliefs (judgments). All these terms exhibit a familiar act
object ambiguity. An "assertion" can either be an act of asserting or
what is asserted. A belief can either be a certain psychological state one
is in-perhaps a certain neural disposition or pattern of activity-or
what that state is "directed onto", what is believed. Though in many
attributions of truth value it is not made explicit which side of this dis
tinction is the operative one, it is clear to me that truth values attach
primarily to what is believed (asserted), and only secondarily, if at all, to
the state of belief or the act of asserting. Suppose I assert that the tree
is dying, and you reply "That's very true". What is the antecedent of
your 'that'-my act of asserting that the tree is dying, or what I asserted,
namely, that the tree is dying? Clearly the latter. A natural way of spelling
out "That's very true" is "What you said is quite true" or "Yes, it's true
that the tree is dying". While "Your act of asserting that the tree is dying
is true" doesn't have any ready interpretation. Note that the availability
of "Your assertion is quite true" doesn't help to make the choice, just
because of the ambiguity noted above; "your assertion" could be either
your act of asserting or what you asserted. Similar points can be made
about belief. You indicate to me that you believe that Sanders will be
promoted. Perhaps the most natural way to agree with you is to say
"That's right" or "You're quite right about that". But if we insist on an
answer containing 'true' or a cognate, the most natural choice, again,
would be "That's very true". And we will have the same reasons for
taking 'that' to refer to what you believe rather than to your believing
it. "Your believing that Sanders will be promoted is true" has no better
claim to be standard English, or to have a natural interpretation, than
"Your asserting that the tree is dying is true". 8
To be sure, we could introduce a sense of 'true' and 'false' in which
they are applicable to psychological states of belief and acts of asserting.
Since we already understand these terms as they apply to what is believed
or stated, a simple procedure is ready to hand.
(1) Your act of asserting that p is true = df. What you asserted, namely,
that p, is true.
8. I can supplement this description of my linguistic phenomenology with a report of an
exchange with my chief subject among native (nonphilosophical) speakers-my wife. In the
course of a quasi-Socratic dialogue with her on these matters, I was quite unable to elicit from
her any predication of 'true' or 'false' of beliefs (as psychological states) or of acts of asserting.
She was, indeed, bewildered by the suggestion of any such predications.
ALETHIC REALISM
(2) Your belief that p is true = df. What you believe, namely, that p, is
true.
But, obviously, as with the construction of senses of 'true' and 'false'
for sentence tokens, this innovation trades on our prior mastery of the
application of 'true' and 'false' to the contents of beliefs and statements.
It is those applications that are conceptually prior for us. Hence it is on
them that I shall concentrate.
iv Bearers of Truth Value: Propositions
Our concentration on beliefs in the sense of what is believed, and asser
tions in the sense of what is asserted, as bearers of truth value has already
brought us to propositions as the primary bearers. For what is asserted or
what is believed, the content of an assertion or a belief, is a proposition.
Let me be explicit as to the intended import of this statement. It is not
as if I had searched through some list of candidates for the position and
finally discovered that propositions best fill the bill. If that were the way
it went, I would have had some independent way of identifying proposi
tions such that it could be a discovery that this is what the content of a
belief or assertion is. But although, as we shall see, there are various
suggestions as to the nature of propositions, it seems that the concept
of a proposition-at least in the sense of the term in which it figures
prominently in logic, metaphysics, philosophy of language, and philoso
phy of mind-stems primarily from this root. That is, our most basic
notion of a proposition is of what forms the content of assertions and
other illocutionary acts, and what forms the content of beliefs and other
(aptly named) "propositional attitudes". So far as I can see, any other
statements about the nature, individuation, metaphysical status, or en
tanglements of propositions are responsible to this primary context. For
those to whom this claim is not evident on the face of it, here are some
considerations in its support.
(1) The "propositional" phrases that we use to make explicit the con
tent of illocutionary acts like assertions and "propositional" psychologi
cal attitudes like beliefs, most prominently phrases of the form 'that p',
are just the phrases that we use to specify what proposition we are talking
about. I can make explicit what proposition I have in mind by saying 'the
proposition that lemons are sour', just as I can make explicit the assertion I
have in mind by saying 'the assertion that lemons are sour', and make
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
explicit the belief I have in mind by saying 'the belief that lemons are
sour'.
To be sure, propositional content does not always wear a 'that'. It
doesn't with many illocutionary acts other than assertion. What did I
promise? To take him to the meeting. I could say that I promised that I would
take him to the meeting, but the former locution is the more natural. Again
what I requested him to do was to give me a hand with this box, rather than
that he should give me a hand with this box. With psychological proposi
tional attitudes, the 'that' form is more constant. One can hope that p,
doubt that p, suspect that p, be inclined to suppose that p, and be sur
prised that p, as well as believe that p. But here too there are variations.
One questions whether p, and one intends to go to the store. But through
out these variations one can see propositions just below the surface. The
proposition that he gives me a hand with this box is clearly involved in re
questing him to give me a hand with this box. And the proposition that
I go to the store is clearly involved in intending to go to the store. This
implicit involvement of the proposition can be made explicit in various
ways. We can regiment reports of requests, suggestions, orders, etc. , in
terms of "making true" a certain proposition. Thus the above request
could (unnaturally) be reported as my requesting him to make it true
that he gives me a hand with this box. And the intention could be specified
as intending to make it true that I go to the store. Thus what are paradigma
tically propositions can be seen to provide the content for all sorts of
illocutionary acts and psychological attitudes.
(2) The familiar logical relations of propositions can be seen to carry
over to the logic of illocutionary acts and propositional attitudes. If I
believe that all dogs have fleas, then I believe something that entails that
if Fido is a dog then Fido has fleas. This is by virtue of the modus ponens
structure in which the three propositions stand. If I hope that Susie will
come and that Susie will not be late, then I hope that Susie will not be late,
again because of the simplification structure into which these proposi
tions fit.
(3) Illocutionary acts and psychological attitudes can be related by
sharing propositional contents, as well as by the logical and other rela
tions in which these contents stand. You can believe what I doubt,
namely, that Robinson will be elected mayor. I can order you to do what you
intend not to do, namely, (in canonical notation) that you get off my prop
erty. Again, it seems clear that it is the involvement of propositions that
brings about these relationships.
We can also approach this issue by considering how we would intro
duce a novice to the philosophical concept of a proposition, other than
ALETHIC REALISM
in terms of what is asserted or believed or the like. Sometimes proposi
tions are introduced as the meanings of sentences. But, leaving aside
questions about the metaphysical status of meanings, we have seen in
section in that this will not do. There we saw that the meaning of a sen
tence is not, in general, sufficient to determine a unique assertion (i. e. ,
what is asserted, i. e. , a proposition). For this reason, whatever else may
be said about the proposal, the meaning of 'I am hungry' cannot be
thought to be a proposition, for it does not determine any particular
proposition, but rather an indefinitely large class of propositions with
certain features in common.
If one tries to explain 'proposition' by saying that propositions are
bearers of truth values, that doesn't suffice to locate the concept
uniquely until more guidance is provided as to what it is of which truth
values are predicated. At most it puts a constraint on the concept. Noth
ing can be a proposition unless it has a unique determinate truth value.
A perfectly reasonable way of explaining 'proposition' to someone is
to say that it is what is designated by a clause beginning with 'that' and
followed by a declarative sentence that could be used to make an asser
tion. But this is not a real alternative to the explanation in terms of the
content of assertions and psychological attitudes. For this is just the way
in which we specify those contents. Thus there is no real alternative to
taking proposition to be, most basically, the contents of illocutionary
acts and psychological "propositional" attitudes.
"But if what is asserted when I assert that sugar is sweet is the proposition
that. sugar is sweet, and if what is believed when I believe that Sam is strong
is the proposition that Sam is strong, then why is it awkward, at best, to
report the assertion as asserting the proposition that sugar is sweet and to
report the belief as believing the proposition that Sam is strong? After all,
'the proposition that sugar is sweet' refers to the proposition that sugar
is sweet if anything does. " I don't think that this is a serious difficulty. I
would surmise that we tend to reserve the explicit denomination of a
proposition as a proposition (with a phrase like 'the proposition that p')
when we take the proposition "out by itself" and consider it in abstrac
tion from its involvement in illocutionary acts or propositional attitudes.
This would account for the awkwardness in question.
v The Nature of Propositions
But what are propositions? What is their nature, their ontological
status? What sort of thing is it the involvement of which in an illocution
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
ary act or propositional attitude provides that act or attitude with its
content? And do things of this sort live a life of their own when not so
involved?
There are many answers to these questions on the market today.
These may be divided into ONTOLOGICALLY SERIOUS and DEFLATIONARY
answers. Let's begin with the former and first attend to views that take
propositions to have a mode of being independent of the content-bear
ing function we have been discussing.
(1) Propositions are STATES OF AFFAIRS that may or may not "ob
tain". Let's say that states of affairs are designated by gerundial phrases
like the following.
Nixon's living in California
Sam's hitting Harry
2 + 2's being 4
John's being stout
Gold's being malleable
All dogs' having fleas
There being some horned owls left
Some Mormons' being such that if offered a cup of coffee they would
accept it
All gases' being such that they will increase in temperature if com
pressed
can be called a FACT. 10
(2) Propositions are complex abstract objects, where the constituents
vary with the content of the particular propositions, and where the struc
ture into which these constituents fit varies with the form of the proposi
tion. In practice, thinkers have modelled both the contents and the
structure of propositions on the sentences in natural language that are
used to assert or express them. Since the canonical way of designating a
proposition is by a phrase of the form 'the proposition that p', where
what replaces p in a particular case is a declarative sentence that can be
used for asserting just that proposition, one does not have to look be
yond our standard proposition-specifying expressions to find the model
for propositional structure. Thus the proposition that gold is malleable,
modelled on the sentence 'gold is malleable', will consist of the referent
of 'gold', namely, gold, and the property of malleability, glued together
A state of affairs that obtains
9. I'm not suggesting that deflationists about propositions are not serious about ontology,
only that they are not ontologically serious about propositions.
10. See Chisholm 1976, 1981.
ALETHIC REALISM
by the relation of property possession. This view may or may not differ
from (1), depending on just how states of affairs are constituted.
(3) Various difficulties with (1) and (2) have led some thinkers to
take a proposition to be a set of possible worlds, or alternatively, a func
tion from possible worlds to truth values. The intuitive idea is that a
proposition can be identified with the set of those possible worlds in
which the proposition is true. This construal will relieve us of worries
about structure and with a vengeance! A particular proposition will be
so devoid of structure that all propositions necessarily equivalent to each
other will be identical. This has, inter alia, the consequence that all nec
essarily true propositions are identical. There is only one true proposi
tion of pure mathematics, which is the same as the one true proposition
of deductive logic. On a humbler level, the proposition that either
Jones is married or Susie isn't' turns out to be the same proposition as
the proposition that it is not both the case that Jim is not married and
Susie is. '
(4) Let's move now to views that do not take propositions to have a
mode of being independent of their content-bearing involvements
construals that are Aristotelian rather than Platonic. The most meta
physically realist of such views would, following Aristotle, think of them
as really existing but only as aspects of propositional attitudes and illo
cutionary acts. If a tiresomely persistent ontologist were to insist on an
answer to the question as to just what those aspects are, the answer would
be that they are specified by the clauses we use for content specification.
That is what those aspects are. If we can understand, for example, what
it is to insist that Susie is not here or to be thankful that the parade is over,
we have all the understanding of what a proposition is that we need.
(5) There are variations of the only in the context of illocutionary acts
and propositional attitudes move that are less realist, and less ontologically
serious, more deflationary about propositions. There can be an analogue
of the reduction of properties to similarity relations between particulars.
The proposition that gold is malleable simply is a respect in which certain
assertions, expressions of opinion, beliefs, and doubts are similar to
each other and different from other such items. And more draconian
reductions have been suggested. For example, it has been suggested that
the proposition that gold is malleable can be identified with the class of
sentences that could be used to assert that gold is malleable. It should
be noted that on any of these reductive accounts one can, in a way,
countenance a reification of propositions, speaking of them as if they
11. See Stalnaker 1984.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
are independent entities in their own right about which we can say vari
ous things-their logical and other interrelations, their truth values,
their involvement in propositional attitudes, and so on. That is, a reduc
tionist can go along with this in a "fictionalist" or "instrumentalist"
spirit, acknowledging that it is useful to speak of propositions as if they
were entities without supposing this to be the sober truth. This would
parallel the way in which an instrumentalist in science countenances
apparent references to quarks and positrons for the sake of the empiri
cal pay off of such talk, while metaphysically taking it to be an "as if"
kind of discourse.
The above list is not a prelude to an exposition and defense of my
metaphysical theory of propositions. I do have views on the subject. My
preference is for the "Aristotelian" position (4). It is more economical
than (1)-(3), while giving propositions a foothold in reality, but saying
as little as possible about their nature. If one wonders how, on this view,
we are to interpret talk about propositions that have no realization in
(actual) illocutionary acts or propositional attitudes, the answer is that
we are thinking of contents of possible acts and attitudes. 12 Moreover, I
do not consider all the views on the list to be live options. If, as I hold,
our basic grip on propositions is by way of their furnishing content for
illocutionary acts and propositional attitudes, then they must be individ
uated so that items that have different contents must involve different
propositions. And (3) radically fails to satisfy that condition just because
it makes all necessarily true propositions to be identical. Surely the asser
tion that 2 + 2 = 4 is a different assertion, with a different content,
from the assertion that 695 X 2 = 1, 390. Moreover that view makes two
propositions that are necessarily equivalent to be the same. And yet the
belief that either Jim is married or Susie isn't is not the same as the belief
that it is not both the case that Jim is not married and Susie is. One who didn't
realize the necessary equivalence might believe one and disbelieve the
other. 13 As for (1), whether it satisfies this requirement on individuation
depends on how the notion of a state of affairs is developed. To take a
case close to the concerns of this book, is the state of affairs sugar's being
12. That does not necessarily involve taking possible acts and attitudes to exist or have some
kind of being. Whatever construal is given to talk of possibilities (and we can't do without such
talk) can be deployed here.
13. No doubt, the partisans of this view would have various things to say in response to these
criticisms. The issue may largely hang on what one takes to be most fundamental in our pretheo
retical notion of a proposition. I have indicated deficiencies of the "sets of possible worlds" view
if we take propositions to be, most basically, contents of psychological "propositional attitudes"
and illocutionary acts. In any event, I am far from aspiring to a proper discussion of these issues
in this book, as I now go on to make explicit.
ALETHIC REALISM
sweet the same state of affairs as its being true that sugar is sweet? If it is,
then (1) runs into the same difficulty. For it is clear, or so it seems to
me, that an assertion that sugar is sweet is not the same assertion, with the
same content, as the assertion that it is true that sugar is sweet. The latter
involves conceptual content absent from the former. 14
This is a beginning of what I would say if I were to embark on the
metaphysics of propositions. But I will not do so. I would like to refrain
because to do a proper job would require a long and tortuous discussion
that would distract me from the main issues of the book. And the absten
tion is possible because it is not necessary for my purposes here to adopt
a particular position. My central concern here is the articulation and
defense of a realist conception of truth, in opposition to epistemic con
ceptions. For that purpose it doesn't matter what metaphysical status we
take propositions to have. So long as they can serve as subjects for truth
value attributions, the metaphysical chips can fall where they may. For
that matter, propositions don't even have to "be there" in any robustly
metaphysically realist sense. It would be enough to exhibit them as sub
jects of truth values in a "fictional" or "instrumental" spirit. My project
is even tolerant of reductive accounts of propositions.
Lest you think that my choice
permissive as to be vacuous, I will specify what is nonnegotiable in the
position. The position is most deeply committed to the primacy of locu
tions in which 'true' and 'false' are predicated of what is specified by
'that' clauses and other proposition-specifying clauses. These attribu
tions don't have to have the surface grammar of proposition-specifying
phrase + truth-value predicate. They range over 'It is true that p' as well as
The proposition that p is true'. And they also include 'The assertion
that p is true' and 'The belief that p is true', since, as pointed out above,
I take those predications to be of what is asserted (believed) rather than of
the act of assertion or the state of belief. So long as we recognize these
to be the truth-value attributions on which all others are built, then that
amounts to what I have been understanding by "taking propositions to
be the basic truth-value bearers". 15
of propositions as truth bearers is so
I will refrain not only from advancing an ontology of propositions, but
also from giving an account of how illocutionary acts and propositional
attitudes have to be related to a proposition for the latter to be the
content of the former. There are, again, many such accounts in the field
(not all of which take propositions seriously). Many, though not all, are
14. See section xi for discussion of this last point.
15. Cf. Mackie 1973, 21.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
developed under the aegis of some general metaphysical orientation,
such as "physicalism" or "naturalism", and seek to show that the posses
sion of content can be understood in a physicalist or naturalist fashion. 16
I have no sympathy for such programs, but my present point is that the
aims of this book do not require me to go into these issues. So long as
we can understand illocutionary act reports and propositional attitude
reports which contain 'that' clauses or other content-specifying clauses,
we have all that is needed for a working grasp of the notion of an illocu
tionary act or propositional attitude "involving" a propositional con
tent. And that is sufficient for us to extract the notion of a proposition
as a truth-value bearer.
Thus my choice of truth-value bearers is completely neutral with re
spect to the view we adopt on the nature of propositions and of proposi
tional content. In fact, I can be even more permissive than this. So far
as I can see, the issues with which I will be dealing assume the same
shape whatever we take the bearers of truth values to be, provided our
choice is not untenable on other grounds. If it is defensible to take sen
tence tokens to be the primary bearers of truth value, then everything
in the rest of the book could be restated in those terms.
vi General Formulations of a Realist Conception of Truth
We can now return to the task of developing a more explicit statement
of the realist conception of truth. Let's recall the initial formulation.
I. A STATEMENT IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT THE STATEMENT SAYS TO
BE THE CASE ACTUALLY IS THE CASE.
The first point to make about this, in the light of sections ii-v, is that,
since 'statement' here has to mean 'what is stated' rather than 'the act
of stating', and since we have seen good and sufficient reason for identi
fying that with a proposition, I. really tells us what it is for a proposition
to be true. But this claim requires qualification. What is stated when a.
statement is made is to be identified ontologically with a proposition; but
when a proposition is referred to as a statement, we are thinking of it as
figuring in that context, as being what is stated, rather than as existing on
its own as something that may or may not play that role. This is signifi
cant because if we were to think of a proposition in abstraction from any
16. See, e. g. , Davidson 1984; Carnap 1947, chap. 1; Stich 1983; Fodor 1975
ALETHIC REALISM
such context, it would be unnatural to think of it as "saying" anything.
To be sure, we are also speaking figuratively when we speak of a state
ment's "saying" something. It is speakers who literally say something in
the course of making a statement. But we are obviously closer to a literal
use of 'say' when we predicate it of a proposition as the content of a
statement than when we predicate it of a proposition in abstraction from
any such involvement.
Something analogous can be said about an account of truth for be
liefs. A principle for beliefs parallel to I might run:
II. A BELIEF IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT THE BELIEF TAKES TO BE THE
CASE ACTUALLY IS THE CASE.
Again, beliefs don't literally take anything to be so-and-so. It is believers
who do so. But, again, propositions are, so to say, closer to this literal
substratum when they figure as belief content than when they are in
splendid isolation.
We can avoid figures of speech by explicitly linking statements and
beliefs to what staters and believers do, and then, at a second remove,
link propositions to statements and beliefs. Thus:
III. A STATEMENT IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT A MAKER OF THE STATE
MENT IS SAYING TO BE THE CASE IN MAKING THAT STATEMENT, AC
TUALLY IS THE CASE. 17
IV. A BELIEF IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT ONE WHO HOLDS THAT BE
LIEF TAKES TO BE THE CASE IN HOLDING THAT BELIEF, ACTUALLY IS
THE CASE.
Then the extension to propositions as such would go as follows.
V. A PROPOSITION IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT A MAKER OF A STATE
MENT WITH THAT PROPOSITION AS CONTENT IS SAYING TO BE THE
CASE IN MAKING THAT STATEMENT, ACTUALLY IS THE CASE.
VI. A PROPOSITION IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT ONE WHO HOLDS A
BELIEF WITH THAT PROPOSITION AS CONTENT TAKES TO BE THE CASE
IN HOLDING THAT BELIEF, ACTUALLY IS THE CASE. 18
17. Cf. Mackie 1973, 50. "To say that a statement is true is to say that whatever in the making
of the statement is stated to obtain does obtain. "
18. It may be objected that something about statements and something about beliefs cannot
each be both necessary and sufficient for the truth of propositions. For since either of these condi
tions is sufficient, the other one can't be necessary; and since each is necessary the other one
can't be sufficient. Perhaps the objector overlooks the point that what is said to be both neces
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
At a considerable cost of pedantry, this spells out how we can think of
the truth of statements, beliefs, and propositions as determined by
whether the content of the proposition (statement, belief) is actually
realized. A bonus of these transformations is that they permit us to oscil
late freely and in good conscience between speaking of statements, be
liefs, and propositions as bearers of truth value.
At this point I should say something in defense of my limiting these
formulations to BELIEFS and STATEMENTS, in addition to propositions,
given that, as pointed out above, propositions furnish content to illocuti
onary acts and propositional psychological attitudes of all sorts
requests and promises as well as statements, and doubtings and
wonderings as well as beliefs. The basic reason has to do with the fact
that we speak of statements (assertions) as true or false but that we do
not ascribe truth values to requests, promises, appointings, expressions
of gratitude, hopes, doubts, or wonderings. Nor is this selectivity arbi
trary. The reason for it is that in making statements and holding beliefs
we commit ourselves to the propositional content's being true. Whereas
to request someone to bring it about that p or to wonder whether that p
is to make no such commitment. If I assert that p, there is something
wrong with what I did if not-p, 19 but there is nothing analogously wrong
with my performance if I ask you to close the door when the door is not
already closed. Quite the contrary! And a similar contrast holds between
beliefs and other propositional attitudes. A false belief has thereby failed
to achieve the aim of believing, but if I hope for something that will not
eventuate, I have not thereby failed to attain the fundamental goal of
hoping. (Hoping is not designed to bring about what is hoped for. ) No
doubt, the truth value of the propositional content is relevant to these
other illocutionary acts and propositional attitudes, but since they don't
essentially involve a commitment to truth, we don't ascribe truth values
to them. Hence they are not considered truth-value bearers, even
though the embedded propositions are.
Another notable feature of I-VI is that they assume, in effect, that
every statement (belief, proposition) can be construed as being of the
sary and sufficient in each case is what would be the case if the proposition were the content of
a statement (belief), not something that actually happens. But that doesn't suffice to clear up
the difficulty. For if the consequent of V really is sufficient for the truth of the proposition,
how can the consequent of VI also be necessary, whether these consequents are categorical or
hypothetical? The answer has to be that the consequent of VI, for example, is necessary, though
the consequent of V is sufficient, because the former is necessary for the latter and vice versa. A
propositional content can make III true of a statement only if it makes IV true of a belief, and
vice versa.
19. To be sure, even if I assert what is not the case, I might not be rightfully taken to task if
there are sufficient extenuating circumstances.
ALETHIC REALISM
form 'It is the case that. .. . It seems clear that any statement could be
so reformulated, though most are not ordinarily in that form. This re
flects a general point of some importance. One obvious way of being
explicit, in some general fashion, about what it takes, on a realist con
ception, to make a statement (belief, proposition) true, is to use some
account of the structure of statements. A general formulation of what
sort of fact must obtain in order that a given statement be true will be a
recipe for picking out that fact. And that recipe will be in terms of what
a statement states. 20 I-VI provides one example of that strategy. If no
unrestrictedly general account can be given of "what statements state",
we will have to settle for separate principles for statements of different
forms-singular subject-predicate statements, singular relational state
ments, universal quantifications of singular subject-predicate state
ments, conditionals, etc. 21
Although I-VI identifies a general form into which all statements
could be cast, it would be good to find a more natural characterization,
one that, arguably, applies to statements as they are actually made, not
just as they might be transformed. A promising candidate would con
strue all statements as being about something (s), and asserting some
thing of that (those) something (s)--claiming that a certain property
applies to it (them). If we can make good the claim that that there is
such a referential component to every statement, there will be no diffi
culty in construing the rest as what is being asserted of that referent
(those referents). Singular statements obviously fit this model. As for
quantified statements, on a classical understanding of quantification,
they can be understood as saying something about all values of the vari
ables. 222 Conditional and other complex statemental forms can be taken
to complicate the predicate that is being asserted of one or more indi
viduals or of the entities that are the values of variables. Thus the state
ment that If Jim is healthy, he will come to the meeting, could be construed
as asserting will come to the meeting if healthy of Jim. And the statement
that all dogs have fleas can be construed as attributing the property of
having fleas if a dog to all the entities in the domain of the quantifier.
There will, of course, be the usual questions as to what to do about truth
20. This point would apply even more obviously to a general account of the truth of sen
tences.
21. We would have to do that anyway if we were to embark on the Tarskian project of giving
a formal theory of truth conditions for sentences; but that is no part of my agenda here. For
more on this, see section viii.
22. If we allow substitutional quantification, as I will suggest we can do for explaining truth,
this characterization can no longer claim universal coverage.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
evaluation in cases of referential failure; but those questions have to be
faced in any case. This suggests the following formulation.
VII. A STATEMENT IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT THE MAKER OF THE
STATEMENT IS ATTRIBUTING TO WHAT THE STATEMENT IS ABOUT,
IN MAKING THAT STATEMENT, DOES ACTUALLY QUALIFY WHAT THE
STATEMENT IS ABOUT.
This can be seen as an extension of the familiar formulation of a truth
condition for singular statements of the form [s is P], namely, that what
is referred to by 's' have the property connoted by P.
Taking I-VI as our guide, it will be a simple mechanical exercise to
construct accounts of the truth of beliefs and propositions analogous to
VII. For example:
VIII. A PROPOSITION IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT THE MAKER OF A
STATEMENT WITH THAT PROPOSITION AS CONTENT IS ATTRIBUT
ING TO WHAT THE STATEMENT IS ABOUT, IN MAKING THAT STATE
MENT, DOES ACTUALLY QUALIFY WHAT THE STATEMENT IS ABOUT.
IX. A BELIEF IS TRUE IF AND ONLY IF WHAT ONE WHO HOLDS THE BE
LIEF SUPPOSES TO CHARACTERIZE WHAT THE BELIEF IS ABOUT, IN
HOLDING THAT BELIEF, REALLY DOES CHARACTERIZE WHAT THE
BELIEF IS ABOUT.
And so on.
vii Propositional Truth and the T-Schema
The above formulations deal with the truth of propositions via their
involvement in illocutionary acts and propositional attitudes. Can we
find a way to get at propositional truth more directly, a way that would
bring out what it takes for a proposition to be true, apart from its figur
ing as the content of an actual or possible statement or belief?
As noted above, we can't simply ape I and II with propositions taking
the place of statements or beliefs. For no sense can be attached to propo
sitions "saying something to be the case" or "taking something to be the
case". Some classical forms of the correspondence theory of truth
sought to treat propositions directly by developing a theory of the struc
ture of propositions and taking a proposition to be true when there is a
fact that "matches" or "corresponds to" that structure. But this requires
ALETHIC REALISM
an account of the nature of propositions, and I have already eschewed
that for this book.
There is, however, a very simple way of sidestepping this enterprise.
Instead of digging into the structure of propositions in order to say, in
general, what it takes to render them true, we can take the proposition
as an unanalyzed whole and generalize over that. Consider the following
analogue for propositions of Tarski's famous form (T) for sentences. 23
X. The proposition that p is true iff p.
I will call X. the T-schema ('T' for 'truth', not for 'Tarski'). The T
schema can be turned into a statement by substituting the same declara
tive sentence for both occurrences of 'p', restricting substitutends, of
course, to sentences that can be used to make statements. Thus:
XI. The proposition that grass is green is true if and only if grass is
green.
XII. The proposition that Joe is hungry is true if and only if Joe is
hungry. 24
Call any statement of the form specified by the T-schema, such as XI
and XII, a T-statement. The suggestion is that if we understand that any
T-statement is conceptually, analytically true, true by virtue of the mean
ings of the terms involved, in particular the term 'true', then we thereby
understand what it is for a proposition to be true. Understanding that
amounts to recognizing how it is that the content of a proposition, what
it is "a proposition that", determines a (necessarily) necessary and suffi
cient condition for the truth of that proposition. And once we see that,
we grasp what it is for a proposition to be true in a realist sense. This
gives us the realist CONCEPT of propositional truth.
To be sure, this does not amount to an explicit general statement of
what it is for a proposition to be true. The T-schema is not a statement
but a statement schema, a form of statement. And each instantiation
thereof, each T-statement, provides a condition for the truth of a partic
ular proposition, not a general statement of what it is for a proposition
23. That form is 'X is true if, and only if, p'. We get a particular sentence of this form by
replacing 'p' with a declarative sentence and 'X' with an expression referring to that sentence.
See section viii for more on Tarski.
24. Where necessary, the substitution for 'p' is assumed to come with contextual indications
of reference and whatever else is necessary to determine a particular proposition.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
to be true. Nevertheless, there are two ways of turning this suggestion
into a general account of propositional truth.
generalize schema,
XIII. (p) The proposition that p is true iff p.
This certainly seems to be an unrestrictedly general statement of the
conditions under which a proposition is true. The only reason for deny
ing that would be a dissatisfaction with the sort of quantification in
volved. It cannot be standard objectual quantification, in which a
substitution instance of a quantified proposition is achieved by replacing
variables with singular expressions that refer to entities in the domain
of the variable. An objectually universally quantified statement is true if
and only if the open statement quantified is true of every object (or n
tuples of objects) in the relevant domain. An objectually existentially
quantified statement is true if and only if the open statement quantified
is true of some object, or n-tuple of objects, in the relevant domain. XIII
is not a quantified statement of that sort, because what replaces 'p' in a
particular T-sentence does not refer to any entity. That is not because
propositions do not deserve the honorific title of 'entity'. Even assuming
they do, declarative sentences, which are what replace 'p' to yield instan
tiations of the schema, are not referring expressions. They don't refer
to anything, abstract or concrete. Thus if we have an objectual quantifi
cation model of what a general statement is, XIII will not qualify. What
we need to interpret XIII is substitutional quantification. Such quantifi
cation is not to be understood in terms of whether the relevant open
statement is true of certain objects, but whether singular statements that
result from appropriate substitutions for the variables are true. Call such
a singular statement a SUBSTITUTION INSTANCE of the quantified state
ment in question. Then a universally quantified statement is true if and
only if all substitution instances are true, and an "existentially"25 quanti
fied statement is true if some substitution instance is true. Substitutional
quantification puts no restriction on what sort of expressions can re
place variables. Of course, any particular variable will range over some
kinds of expressions rather than others. But the range of expressions
that can replace variables in one or another quantified statement is un
limited. This makes it possible to employ sentential variables as in XIII,
and so makes it possible to say in general what the conditions are under
which a proposition is true on a realist conception of truth.
25. This term is inappropriate for substitutional quantification, since the existence of objects
is not the main point at issue; but I will retain it because of its familiarity.
ALETHIC REALISM
Many philosophers have doubts about the viability of substitutional
quantification. Its logic certainly has not been developed to nearly the
extent of objectual quantification. But the formal logic of the matter is
not my concern here. I am concerned with formulating and defending
a certain view as to the conception of truth we use in application to
propositions, statements, and beliefs. That conception might be felici
tously, informally, expressed in substitutional quantification, even if
there are thus far unresolved difficulties in working out its logic in a
comprehensive manner. Thus I shall take it that XIII is an acceptable
way of saying what it takes, on a realist conception, for a proposition to
be true. 26
There is a specific objection to the use of substitutional quantification
in this connection that is worth special attention. The natural way to
explain substitutional quantification is the one we used above, in terms
of the truth of substitution instances. But doesn't that introduce a circu
larity in the use of a substitutionally quantified formula to explain the
realist conception of truth?
There are three points that make this objection less serious than it
seems at first sight. First, the explanation of substitutional quantification
in terms of truth does not occur in the account given by XIII. Substitu
tional quantification is used but not mentioned, much less explicated. Nor
is it clear that truth must be mentioned to give someone an understand
ing of a formula like XIII. The neophyte could catch on just by being
being shown how to derive instances from the universal statement. Sec
ond, and more fundamentally, XIII is not a definition of 'true'. We'll have
more to say later on what its status is, but it is not a definition of the
classical type, in which a synonymous, and more fully analyzed, expres
sion is equated with the definiendum. Hence there is no danger of a
definition's being invalidated by circularity. Third, and equally impor
tant, even as a kind of explanation of a meaning of 'true', it does not
aim to be reductive, to reduce 'true' to terms at a more fundamental
level. (Again, more on this later. )
But for those who are motivated to shun substitutional quantification
here, there is another way of deriving a general account of propositional
truth from the T-schema-going metalinguistic. Remember that the
basic idea of this approach to the explanation of realist truth is that any
T-statement is conceptually, analytically true. Why not just say that? This
suggests the following formulation.
26. For vigorous defenses of the viability of substitutional quantification see Prior 1971,
chaps. 2, 3; Mackie 1973, chap. 2, sec. 5; C. J. F. Williams 1976, chap. 3.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
XIV. TO DETERMINE A (NECESSARILY) NECESSARY AND SUFFICIENT CON
DITION FOR A GIVEN PROPOSITION, R, USE THE FOLLOWING RECIPE.
FORM A T-STATEMENT BY SUBSTITUTING A SENTENCE THAT EX
PRESSES R FOR P IN THE T-SCHEMA. THIS T-STATEMENT WILL BE
CONCEPTUALLY, ANALYTICALLY TRUE, AND WILL THEREFORE GIVE
US A (NECESSARILY) NECESSARY AND SUFFICIENT CONDITION FOR
THE TRUTH OF R.
Though XIV is not a universal statement that says in general what it
takes for a proposition to be true, it does succeed in explaining how to
specify, for any proposition, what it takes for it to be true. It therefore
constitutes another spelling out of the basic intuition of the realist con
ception of truth-that a proposition is true when its "content" is "real
ized" in the way things are, that by asserting the proposition we have
thereby specified (whether we realize it or not) what would make the
proposition true.
viii Relation to Tarski
I have learned by bitter experience that it is extremely difficult to
prevent people from assimilating X-the T-schema-to formulations of
Tarski. Therefore, before continuing with the exposition of the realist
conception of truth I will pause to set the record straight on the relation
of my enterprise to Tarski's. I have already pointed out that my T
schema is reminiscent of Tarski's "form T", which he formulates as:
XV. X is true iff p.
We get a particular instance of this form by replacing 'p' with a declara
tive sentence and 'X' with an expression referring to that sentence.
Nevertheless there are large differences between Tarski's develop
ment of a "semantic conception of truth" and my development of a
realist conception of truth. Tarski's project is to define 'true' for each
of a number of formalized artificial languages. The semantics of these
languages is such that my earlier objections to attributing truth values
to sentence types do not hold. There is no ambiguity. Each meaningful
unit has one and only one meaning. There are no token reflexives or
other expressions the contribution of which to a statement is, in part,
determined by features of the context. Unlike the case of natural lan
guages, each proper name is assigned a referent as part of the semantics.
The languages are purely extensional. Working within these limits, Tar
ALETHIC REALISM
ski can treat sentence types as bearers of truth value. He is not con
cerned with the attribution of propositional content to propositions,
psychological attitudes, or speech acts. His aim is to provide an explicit
definition of truth for one or another formalized language, using only
extensional notions, subject to the constraint that all sentences of form
T that are formulable in the language should be entailed by the defini
tion. Each distinguishable language will require a different definition.
There is no aspiration to explain TRUTH überhaupt.
This project looks to be worlds away from my project of developing
an informal, discursive understanding of what it is for a proposition
(statement, belief) to be true or false, and so it is. The notion of truth
on which I concentrate has no special connection with any particular
language or, indeed, with language in general, though my primary truth
bearers, propositions, do provide content for speech acts. 27 My account
is something quite different from any formalized logical affair. More
over, Tarski's equivalences of form T are material equivalences, in keep
ing with his restriction to extensional languages, whereas my T
statements are presented as analytically, and hence necessarily, true.
Nevertheless, there is more than an accidental similarity between my
T-statements and Tarski's equivalences of form T. Although Tarski does
not allow himself to say so, I think it is reasonable to surmise that he
takes equivalences of form T to be a "material condition of adequacy"
for a definition of truth just because he is sensitive to the point I have
been making--namely, that the content of a truth bearer contains every
thing we need to specify what it takes to make that bearer true. Hence
the obvious parallelism between:
XV. X (the sentence 'p') is true iff p.
and
X. The proposition that p is true iff p.
27. Contrary to recent practice, I do not treat truth as primarily or essentially a "semantic"
notion. This point is closely connected with the fact that I do not take sentences to be the
primary bearers of truth values. This does not mean that I rule out the possibility that truth
should play some role in semantics. Many notions come into the semantic description of a
language. Even when we recognize that truth cannot be attributed to sentence types, we might
try to think of sentence meaning in terms of its contribution to the truth conditions of state
ments for the making of which the sentence is fitted by its semantics. In saying that I do not
take truth to be primarily or essentially a semantic notion, I mean that in bringing out what
truth is we need not advert to any semantic considerations concerning the meaning of linguistic
items.
I will look further into the putative semantic entanglements of truth in my discussion of
Dummett in Chapter 4.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
Apart from the insight that what is required for a sentence (proposition,
statement, belief) to be true is that its content be also the content of an
actual fact, I don't see any rationale for Tarski's dictum that it is a "mate
rial criterion of adequacy" for a definition of truth that the definition
entail all equivalences of form T.
ix Minimalism about Truth
Borrowing a term from Horwich (1990), XIII and XIV may be said to
be formulations of a MINIMALIST account of truth. There are several
respects in which they are minimal by comparison with a more full
blooded theory of truth, like the correspondence theories in Russell
(1912) and Wittgenstein (1922). I don't mean to suggest that my ac
count contrasts in this way only with correspondence theories. It is also
stripped down relative to coherence and pragmatist theories, and to epi
stemic theories of truth generally. But just because it is more nearly akin
to correspondence theories than to other "robust" theories of truth, its
minimalism is best highlighted by a comparison with rich correspon
dence theories.
(1) I have already stressed the point that XIII and XIV generalize
over propositions as unanalyzed units, rather than being put in terms of
some view as to their internal structure, whereas a full-dress correspon
dence theory must include some account of the structure of proposi
tions (statements. .. ) in order to be in a position to say something
significant about what would constitute correspondence with a fact. What
ever the details of the correspondence that is supposed to constitute
truth, it must involve some structural "matching" or "fitting" of propo
sition and fact to each other. And so any serious elaboration of this idea
will have to be in terms of an account of the structure of propositions.
My minimalist realism delibera steers clear of that.
(2) A deeper difference is this. XIII naturally leads into the idea that
a true proposition is made true by a fact. Mind you, the term 'fact' does
not appear on the right hand side of the equivalence; that is one aspect
of the minimality. But in saying that the proposition that lemons are
sour is true if and only if lemons are sour, we are, in effect, committing
ourselves to the thesis that this proposition is made true by lemons being
sour. And that could just as well be put as saying that it is made true by
the fact that lemons are sour. This nicely brings out the kinship of my
minimal-realist conception of truth with the correspondence theory, for
the latter could be seen as taking off from this point. If a true proposi
ALETHIC REALISM
tion is made true by a fact, there must be something about the relation
ship between that proposition and that fact that is responsible for its
being that fact that does the truth making here, rather than one of the
innumerable other facts that obtain. And the correspondence theory
sets out specifically to say what that relationship is. It seeks, we might
say, to delineate the fact-proposition relationship on which the truth
making supervenes. The proposition that lemons are sour is made true
by the fact that lemons are sour, rather than by the fact that water is wet,
because the proposition corresponds with the former fact and not with
the latter; it "fits" or "matches" the former and not the latter. And the
correspondence theory shoulders the responsibility of delineating that
correspondence.
Having come this far, we can bring out another facet of the relation
ship between the minimal-realist theory and the correspondence theory.
The answer to the question, "By virtue of what does one fact, rather
than any other, make the proposition that lemons are sour true? " is, so
to say, already implicit in the T-schema. For when one looks at a particu
lar T-statement it leaps to the eye that there is an identity of content
between proposition and fact. But we would naturally like to spell out
more explicitly just what this "identity in content" amounts to. And that
is what the more ambitious correspondence theory seeks to do. Shortly
I shall have more to say about the way in which a minimalist realism
could be looked on as an inchoate correspondence theory.
(3) It follows from the difference just mentioned that a robust corre
spondence theory must develop an explicit account of propositions
(statements. .. ) and facts so as to be in a position to spell out what
correspondence amounts to. And classical correspondence theories,
such as those of Russell and Wittgenstein, have sought to do just that,
whereas a minimalist realism, not aspiring to say just what correspon
dence amounts to, can shirk that ontological task.
(4) Neither XIII nor XIV can lay serious claim to being a definition of
truth, whereas a correspondence theory, in purporting to lay bare the
proposition-fact relationship on which truth supervenes, does typically
claim to provide a definition, at least a contextual definition, one that
unpacks what is being said when truth is ascribed to a proposition or
other truth bearer. 28 The statement that there is a fact with which the
proposition that R corresponds (imagine this formulation elaborated by
an account of what that correspondence consists in) is claimed to be
28. A correspondence theory may or may not aspire to provide an explicit definition, in the
sense of providing a synonym that can be substituted for 'true' wherever the latter occurs.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
synonymous with the statement that the proposition that R is true, the
former differing from the latter only in making explicit what is implicit
in the latter. But the equivalence in the T-schema, universally general
ized in XIII, cannot seriously be claimed to be synonymy. The meaning
of 'The proposition that lemons are sour is true' cannot be the same as
that of 'Lemons are sour'. The former has conceptual content absent
from the latter. One could understand 'lemons are sour' perfectly well
without having any concept of truth whatever. I make this point as
though it were obvious, and so it seems to me. But I must admit that it
is widely denied. "Redundancy" theorists, for example, hold that to as
sert 'It is true that lemons are sour' is merely to assert 'Lemons are sour'.
I will shortly be distinguishing such views from my own and explaining
why I find them unacceptable.
These are the most salient respects in which the account of truth em
bodied in XIII and XIV is MINIMAL in contrast to more robust theories. 29
But what about my earlier formulations, I-IX. Are they properly re
garded as "minimalist"?
To answer this question I will have to recognize that minimalism is a
matter of degree. A theory can be more or less ambitious, more or less
modest, more or less rich, more or less sparse. Of the ways just brought
out in which the T-schema based formulations are minimal, some apply
to the other formulations and others do not. (1) and (4) do not. As for
(1), XIII and XIV were explicitly distinguished from their predecessors
by the fact that they eschew any account of the internal structure of
propositions and statements, while those predecessors all proceed on
one or another suggestion as to a universal form for propositions. As for
(4), note that I-IX all make reference to the truth-value bearer on the
right-hand side of the equivalence as well as on the left-hand side, and
attribute a property to it that could seriously lay claim to being an explic
itly spelled out formulation of the property of truth; whereas XIII has
only the propositional content of the truth-value bearer on the right
hand side and attributes no property to it on that side. Thus I-IX are at
least in the right form to constitute a contextual definition of 'S is true'.
They can be taken to provide a more analyzed synonym of the truth
attribution.
But as for (2) and (3), I-IX contrast with correspondence theory in
pretty much the way that XIII and XIV do. The former as well as the
latter make no attempt to spell out the proposition-fact relationship on
which truth making supervenes, and by the same token they make no
29. Cf. the "simple" theory of truth in Mackie 1973. See especially p. 57.
ALETHIC REALISM
pretense of being based on an ontology of propositions and facts. So are
they "minimalist"? Yes, in comparison with classical theories of truth
like the correspondence theory, but not as minimal as the T-schema
based formulations.
If XIII and XIV are not definitions, not even contextual definitions,
then what are they? What status do they have? What is being claimed for
them? Here is the way I see it. These formulations convey the concept of
realist truth in that anyone who realizes that XIII and/or any T-state
ment is analytically, conceptually true, thereby possesses the realist con
cept of truth. Such a person is thereby in a position to employ the
concept and to understand talk in which it figures. In this respect these
formulations are like other nondefinitional devices for identifying, de
limiting, or inculcating a concept. Think of applying a term to paradigm
cases, of bringing out salient features of items to which the term applies,
and of putting the term through its paces in a theory. We have become
familiar in this century with many such ways of conveying a concept
other than definition. I take XIII and XIV to belong to this category.
More specifically, the species of that genus which is exemplified here
could be put as follows: providing particularly illuminating necessary and
sufficient conditions for the application of a term without thereby providing a
synonym for such an application. In any event, it is, I maintain, clear on
inspection that one who appreciates the conceptual truth of XIII or of
any T-statement thereby understands propositional truth in the realist
sense.
The time has come for me to say something more about the relation
between my various formulations, particularly between the two groups,
I-IX, and XIII-XIV. I take it to be unproblematic that inside each group
there is substantial equivalence. But we have already seen significant
differences between the groups, particularly with respect to whether a
contextual definition of 'true' is being proposed and whether a commit
ment is made to a universal form for propositions. Given differences of
this magnitude, how can I put them all forward as specifying the realist
concept of truth? Isn't this mere shilly-shallying? Shouldn't I buckle
down and decide which of them "tells it like it is" with respect to that
concept of truth? How can they all be doing an acceptable job of identi
fying the concept?
In response to this I can only say that I will continue to shilly-shally.
My apologia for this is that I believe all these formulations bring out the
central realist conception of propositional truth in one way or another.
I have sought to make a case for the intuitive plausibility of taking them
to be formulating the same basic conception of what it is for a proposi
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
tion to be true, but doing so in slightly different ways. "But", you may
say, "how can a statement's being true both be a matter of what the
statement's saying to be the case actually being the case, and also a matter
of the right side of an appropriate T-statement's obtaining? " Well, why
not? It seems clear to me that when I say that the statement that water
is wet is true if and only if water is wet, I am saying, in a more concrete,
more first-level, less formal way what I say when I say that this statement
is true if and only if what it says to be the case is the case. I am just
putting the point differently. The T-statement version is all in the object
language, while I-IX move up to a metalevel and talk about what state
ments say and whether what they say "obtains" or "is real". I throw this
multiplicity of versions at the reader rather than picking one version
and suppressing the others, just because here as elsewhere, I believe,
the underlying idea can be more more fully, more richly, grasped if it is
displayed in several ways, from several perspectives, rather than in a sin
gle portrayal.
Although I took the term 'minimalism' from Horwich (1990), and
although our accounts are in much the same spirit, they also differ in
more than one respect. For one thing, he relies exclusively on the T
schema. In fact, what he calls his theory of truth is said to consist of all
the instantiations of that schema. He eschews substitutional quantifica
tion, thus depriving himself of my XIII, nor does he present analogues
of my other formulations. I will note other differences below. A closer
antecedent of the present account is Mackie (1973). In chapter 2 he
presents an account of what he calls "simple truth" that is very much in
the same vein as mine, though the details are different. My attention
was called to this book only after I had substantially completed this one,
or else the parallels might have been still closer.
Having said what I did about the multiple-formulation character of
my account, I am committed to allowing the reader to think of the real
ist conception of truth in terms of any of my versions-I-IX, or XIII
XIV. It will make no difference to the issues discussed, and to my
arguments for alethic realism and against its opponents, which choice
you make. Even the most minimal formulation, XIII, contains every
thing that we need to determine a distinctively realist conception of
truth, although it doesn't make explicit everything that is involved. Still,
it would be helpful if I were to pick a single canonical version that I can
be taken to be referring to whenever I mention "the realist conception
of truth" without further qualification. For this purpose I pick the initial
formulations in terms of what is being said or believed to be the case
actually being the case. This means III for statements, IV for beliefs, and
ALETHIC REALISM
V or VI for propositions. These formulations give a more explicit ac
count of what is being said in truth attributions without getting into the
problems raised by VII-IX concerning the assumption made there
about a universal form for propositions. Nevertheless, much of the sub
sequent discussion will be in terms of the T-schema and its generaliza
tion, XIII.
x Minimalist Realism and the Correspondence Theory
Now I want to "locate" my realist conception of truth vis-à-vis other
approaches to truth in the literature. This will serve several purposes. It
will enable me to define more sharply the contours of my account by
specifying what it does and doesn't imply, what it is and isn't consistent
with. It should help the reader by relating the present account to others
in the literature with which she is familiar. And it should place the pres
ent enterprise in the larger context of the ongoing discussion of truth,
currently a very lively affair.
I can (almost) ignore at this point the relation of my account of truth
to epistemic accounts, since the entire book is structured around this
opposition, and a large proportion is devoted to criticizing epistemic
theories and responding to their criticisms. Suffice it to say here that the
realist and the epistemic accounts propound incompatible answers to
the question: "What is it for a truth-value bearer to be true? ". As I noted
earlier, many philosophers think that epistemic theories of truth are
compatible with a minimalist realism about truth, especially in its T
schema based versions. But in Chapter 7 I will seek to show that this is
not the case.
I have already had a fair amount to say about the relation of my ac
count and correspondence theory. I have just two additions to make.
First, I have already suggested that my minimalist realism might be
thought of as an inchoate correspondence theory. I can put more flesh
on that skeleton by alluding to the distinction between concept and prop
erty. It is familiar point nowadays, thanks to the work of Putnam and
Kripke, that a property (or a kind) may have features, may have a consti
tution, that is not reflected in our concept that picks out that property.
What heat really is is mean kinetic energy, though our (ordinary) con
cept of heat is not in those terms at all. The essential nature of water is
to be H2O, though our ordinary concept of water is in terms of its observ
able properties. And so on. In the same way, the property of truth may
have various features that are not reflected in our concept of truth. In
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
terms of this distinction, my realist account of truth is an account of our
ordinary concept of truth. It holds, to deploy one of my versions, that in
saying that a statement is true we are saying that what the statement is
about is as the statement says it (them) to be. But the property of state
ments, etc. , thus identified and delimited may have features that go be
yond our conceptual access to it. In particular, it may have the features
embodied in the correspondence theory, features on which the aspect
embodied in our concept supervenes. Thus we can think of the corre
spondence theory of truth (or rather a successful correspondence the
ory) as related to my minimalist account in the way an analysis of the
ordinary concept of anger is related to a successful psychophysiological
theory of the nature of anger. This helps us to see that there is room for
both.
Second, my minimalist account could be a rather less inchoate corre
spondence theory without going beyond the concept to the property. In
laying out the second way in which my account is minimal, I pointed out
that the T-statement 'The proposition that lemons are sour is true if and
only if lemons are sour' naturally suggests that lemons being sour is what
makes that proposition true, which in turn could just as well be put by
saying that it is the fact that lemons are sour that makes the proposition
true. To be sure, this talk of facts making propositions true is not on the
surface in the T-statement, but it is not difficult to see it just below the
surface. So we might formulate a minimalist correspondence account as
follows:
XVI. (p) If the proposition that p is true it is made true by the fact
that p.
Or still more minimally:
XVII. (p) The proposition that p is true iff it is a fact that p.
That this marks out the right sort of correspondence between proposi
tion and fact is guaranteed by the requirement for instantiations of the
schema, that the same substitution be made for 'p' in its two occur
rences. This guarantees that the proposition and the fact that makes it
true share the same propositional content. What the fact is a fact that, is
the same as what the proposition is a proposition that. My suggestion,
one of startling simplicity (and hence minimal), is that this feature of
the T-schema ensures that any instantiation will imply the right kind
of correspondence between truth bearer and truth maker. How more
ALETHIC REALISM
intimately could a proposition and fact be related than by virtue of shar
ing the same content?
This "correspondence theory" is minimalist in that it does nothing to
spell out what the relation is between the proposition that p and the fact
that p by virtue of which the fact makes the proposition true. In true
minimalist spirit, it displays that relationship by the identity of content,
by the fact that the same sentence is used to specify the content of both
the proposition and the fact. Whatever the best story is on the details of
the correspondence relation, we can know in advance that it will satisfy
the constraints laid down by XVII. The right kind of correspondence
will obtain if and only if the same declarative sentence can be used to
specify the contents of proposition and fact. And though this is not all
we would like to know about correspondence, it is enough to assure us
that truth and correspondence are tightly connected. 30
Lest it be thought that this minimalist correspondence has been pur
chased at the price of trivializing the concept of a fact-making facts
mere shadows of propositions-let me hasten to point out that this is
not so. Though XVII makes no commitments as to the nature or the
ontological status of facts, it is quite compatible with taking facts to be
genuine denizens of the extralinguistic, extraintentional world. And I
do so regard them and think of my minimalist correspondence theory
in those terms. But the role of XVII is only to place a crucial constraint
on how the correspondence relation is to be construed. It has no precise
implications for the ontological character of the relata.
But if we do take facts to be full-blooded constituents of reality, that
will expose us to attack on another flank. Some philosophers regard
facts as mere shadows of our practice of making statements-mere
pseudo entities that have no standing independent of our linguistic ac
tivity. Hence the supposition that the statement that grass is green is
made true by the fact that grass is green is not so much false as vacuous.
It no more throws light on the nature of truth than saying "Dancing is
good when you dance a good dance" brings out what makes a case of
dancing good. A fact no more has resources of its own that are usable
to confer truth on a statement than a "dance" has any status indepen
dent of the dancing that constitutes dancing that dance. Here are some
remarks along this line from P. F. Strawson's contribution to his famous
Aristotelian Society symposium on truth with J. L. Austin (Strawson
1950a).
30. Cf. the minimalist statement of correspondence in Wright 1992, 25, and in Horwich
1990, Chap. 7.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
'Fact', like 'true', 'states' and 'statement' is wedded to 'that'-clauses;
and there is nothing unholy about this union. Facts are known, stated,
learnt, forgotten, overlooked, commented, communicated or noticed.
(136)
[W]hat could fit more perfectly the fact that it is raining than the
statement that it is raining? Of course, statements and facts fit. They
were made for each other. If you prise the statements off the world
you prise the facts off it too; but the world would be none the poorer.
(137) 31
In opposition to this position, it can be pointed out that it is a fact,
for example, that the earth was previously much hotter; and this fact
obtained long before any human beings busied themselves with making
statements. How then, can facts be dependent on language? Strawson
would, no doubt, reply that when we talk about the early condition of
the earth in fact language, rather than just making a statement about
the earth at that time, we are talking about these states of the earth
(which themselves are, obviously, not dependent on our linguistic activi
ties) in a way that reflects our present statemental ways of encoding this
subject matter. I don't think that this is an adequate reply, but rather
than get into an argument about that, I prefer to rest my case on a
consideration that can scarcely be denied to be crucial. Strawson's posi
tion rests on the claim that there is an intimate conceptual dependence
of fact talk on statement talk. We couldn't have the concept of a fact
unless we had the concept of a statement or assertion or other fact
related linguistic activity or cognitive state. But it seems to me quite pos
sible that there should be a language community that had developed
the capacity to use 'fact that '(and 'proposition that _______') locu
tions, but had not yet attained the kind of reflective self-consciousness
required for developing concepts of, and capacities to talk about, their
own speech acts. They engage in speech acts, of course; but they have not
yet developed higher level speech in which to speak of those speech
acts. Until it is shown that this is not a human possibility (I won't insist
31. I omit mention of Strawson's repeatedly pointing out that facts are different in funda
mental ways from things or happenings. ("Facts are not broken or overturned, interrupted or
prolonged, kicked, destroyed, mended, or noisy" (136). ) This is all clear enough but of doubt
ful relevance. Strawson takes it to be relevant because he thinks that "the whole charm of talking
of situations, states of affairs or facts as included in, or parts of, the world, consists in thinking
of them as things, and groups of things" (139). By contrast, as I go on to say in the text, I believe
a convincing case can be made for taking facts to have an objective reality independent of our
linguistic and cognitive activities, while resolutely eschewing the conflations and assimilations
Strawson rightly deplores.
ALETHIC REALISM
on a demonstration that it is not a logical possibility), I see no reason to
suppose that facts are not objectively real, and as such capable of render
ing true propositions true in a nontrivial sense. Their mode of reality is,
no doubt, quite different from that of substances, states, properties of
substances, and events, as Strawson and others have been at pains to
point out. But that should not, and does not, prevent them from playing
a truth-conferring role. 32
xi Minimalist Realism and "Deflationary" Accounts of Truth
I am mostly concerned to relate my minimalism to "deflationary" ac
counts of truth, since it is widely believed that the latter constitute the
only alternative to a far from minimal, "robust" theory of truth, such
as we have in traditional correspondence, coherence, and pragmatist
theories. 33 It is important for my project to insist that my minimalist
realism is fundamentally different both from deflationary views and
from classical theories that present an explicit ontology of truth.
First we have to decide how to use the term 'deflationary'. As the
name implies, any view properly so called will be concerned to oppose
various attempts to construct richer accounts of truth. It declares at
tempts to do so to be misguided, thus seeking to "deflate" them. Thus
what counts as "deflationary" will vary with the "inflated" target to
which it is directed. For present purposes I am particularly interested in
the claim that it is mistake to suppose that there is a property of truth
(falsity) that one attributes to propositions, statements, beliefs, and/or
sentences. The view is not that people just never have occasion to make
such attributions. It is rather that truth talk that appears on the surface
to involve property attribution is properly understood in some different
way. Deflationary accounts differ primarily in the alternative construals
they offer.
My minimalism (along with the minimalism in Horwich (1990) ) is
firmly committed to there being a property of truth, and to apparent
attributions of truth values being just what they seem. My formulations
are designed to identify that property by way of identifying the concept
by which we grasp it. As I brought out in discussing the relation of mini
malism to the correspondence theory, minimalism does not answer all
the questions one might be interested in asking about the property, but
32. For a penetrating recent account of facts, and their differences from other "entities", see
Bennett 1988.
33. See, e. g. , M. Williams 1986, 223; C. J. F. Williams 1976.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
it does not foreclose attempts to answer them. It leaves room for answers
like those proffered by one or another version of the correspondence
theory.
I will now survey the most prominent forms of deflationism and indi
cate briefly in each case why I take the position to be inadequate. I will
not undertake to provide detailed expositions and criticism of each
form. As I pointed out, the main concern of the book is the opposition
between realist and epistemic accounts of truth. But since this is an op
position over how to think of the property of truth, I must give some
attention to accounts that deny the common presupposition of those
rivals that apparent attribution of truth values is just that. I must at
least indicate why I find the denials of this presupposition to lack force.
Moreover, deflationists rely heavily on the T-schema (or allied schemata
like Tarski's), something that is central to my account as well. Hence it
is important for me to show that my claim that generalizations of the T
schema, XIII and XIV, convey the realist conception of truth does not
play into the hands of deflationists, rendering my view deflationary after
all.
As just indicated, deflationists typically employ the T-schema to argue
that since 'The proposition that p is true' is equivalent to 'p', in saying
the former one is asserting only that p. Hence it is a mistake to suppose
that the former involves the predication of a property of truth to a prop
osition or to anything else. The locus classicus for this contention is the
dictum of F. P. Ramsey. "It is true that Caesar was murdered' means
no more than that Caesar was murdered. .. ."34 This has come to be
called the "redundancy theory", since it holds that 'true' is redundant
in that it makes no contribution to what is asserted. Ramsey, of course,
realized that not all uses of 'true' involve an apparent attribution to a
specified proposition; and he realized that other uses have to be expli
cated in other ways. (See Ramsey 1978, 45. ) All the prominent defla
tionary accounts start from Ramsey's redundancy claim and provide
different accounts of what we are doing with the term 'true' in apparent
attributions of truth to propositions, etc. , as well as seeking to deal with
the whole range of uses of the term.
First let's look at what is often called the "speech act theory". This is
an infelicitous way of referring to it. It is so called because it holds that
what we are doing when we make an apparent attribution of truth to
the proposition that p, other than asserting that p, is not to make some
Ramsey 1978, 44. The essay in question was written in 1927. In this discussion I will call
equivalences of the form ' It is true that p iff p' "Ramsey equivalences".
ALETHIC REALISM
further assertion but to perform some other kind of speech act, such as
agreeing with a speaker that p, confirming the claim that p, or conced
ing the point that p. (The term 'speech act theory' is infelicitous here
because assertion has just as much right to be called a "speech act" as
these alternatives. ) The standard exposition of this view is an essay of
Strawson's, "Truth", published in Analysis in 1949 and republished in
Macdonald (1954). In that essay Strawson roundly affirms that "The
phrase 'is true' never has a statement-making role" (1954, 271).
"That's true' makes no statement in its own right. It makes no meta
statement" (273). "The phrase 'is true' is not applied to sentences; for it
is not applied to anything. " And hence "Truth is not a property of sym
bols; for it is not a property" (262).
Strawson has since abandoned this theory, 35 and with good reason.
There are three crucial objections. First, although utterances like
'That's true' do often have concessive force, and often express agree
ment, and so with the other uses Strawson mentions, there are many
cases in which making an assertion about a proposition is the only thing
in sight. For example, I am initially incredulous when it is claimed that
Jim can jump 14 feet, but then when I see him do it, I am moved to say
'It really is true that he can jump 14 feet', thereby registering my realiza
tion that the proposition in question is true. Second, the view is power
less to deal with many other contexts in which 'true' is used, particularly
its use in conditionals and in generalizations. "If it's true that he put
arsenic in the soup, he must be the murderer. " "A belief counts as
knowledge only if it is true. " What analogue of agreeing or conceding
is involved in these cases? Third, and most fundamental, even if when
the locution is used to concede a point or to express agreement, or do
one of the other things mentioned by Strawson, this is by no means
incompatible with its also being used to do what on the surface it seems
to be used to do, namely, attribute the property of truth to a proposi
tion. When I express my agreement with you by saying "What you've just
said is very true", I do so by attributing truth to the proposition you
asserted. At least, the fact that I was expressing agreement has no ten
dency to show that I wasn't asserting that the proposition is true. And so
the "speech act theory" is useless as a device for deflation.
With Strawson's apostasy it is difficult to find an adherent of his 1949
account. The closest thing to it on the current scene is found in Price
(1988), in which the author presents the view that apparent truth and
falsity ascriptions have the function of rewarding (punishing) speakers
35. See Strawson 1964, 68.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
for saying things we agree (disagree) with, thereby providing them "with
an incentive to justify their utterances to others". Price arrives at this
"explanatory" account of the function of truth talk after having argued
for the impossibility of a satisfactory theory of the nature of truth. 36 The
idea is that since such a theory is impossible, the reasonable approach
to take to the topic is to explain why we find it useful to employ 'true'
and 'false' as normative terms. But once again, even if truth-value ascrip
tions have the functions Price emphasizes (and I find this quite implausi
ble), that is quite compatible with their being used to attribute
properties to propositions and, indeed, could well be based on their use
to make such attributions.
The other leading forms of deflationism do not stick as closely to
Ramsey's redundancy suggestion. They recognize that 'true' is often
used to make assertions that are not simply assertions of some proposi
tion that has been called true. But they seek to construe those assertions
in such a way that no property of truth is in the picture. They take it that
the surface structure of these utterances is misleading, and that when
their deep structure is revealed it turns out that the apparent property
of truth has disappeared. I will discuss two versions of this kind of defla
tionism, in C. F. J. Williams (1976) and Grover (1992). 37
Williams's book, strangely enough, deals only with sentences in which
'true' is predicated of a definite description like 'What Percy said',
though it is readily apparent how his account would be applied to quan
tified statements generally. What is not clear is how he would handle
apparent ascription of truth to a specified proposition-"The proposi
tion that sugar is sweet is true". I will take him as buying the redundancy
account for those cases, and seeking to supplement this with a treatment
36. His basis for this is what I take to be arbitrary requirements for a satisfactory theory of
truth. See a brief discussion of these in section xii.
37. One approach that I will not treat in this rather sketchy discussion is "disquotationalism".
The term stems from Quine's suggestion that the truth predicate is a "device for disquotation".
The idea behind this characterization seems to be that in the Tarski formula, " "Snow is white'
is true if and only if snow is white", by applying the truth predicate to the quoted sentence, we
are enabled to pass, via the equivalence, to the unquoted sentence. So far this sounds like the
Ramseyan redundancy suggestion; the equivalence cancels out any assertive force of the predica
tion of 'true'. But Quine, in fact, holds that truth attribution is required for certain kinds of
generalization like principles of entailment. If you want to generalize over all cases like 'She is
slim and she is wealthy; therefore she is wealthy', we have no alternative, short of substitutional
quantification, to saying "Whenever something of the form 'p and q' is true, something of the
correlated form 'p' is true". So it is not clear that this is really deflationism at all. (For an
elaborate development of a kind of "disquotationalism" that claims to be deflationist, along
with some acute criticism of the view, see David 1994. ) My basic excuse for ignoring this ap
proach is that it necessarily involves treating sentences as truth-value-bearers; otherwise there is
nothing to "disquote". And I have already set this choice of truth bearers aside for purposes of
this book.
ALETHIC REALISM
of quantified statements. His treatment is rather complex, and I will give
a simplified version. The initial analysis of 'What Percy said is true' is
'For some p, both Percy says that pand p'. At a later stage Russell's theory
of definite descriptions is employed to guarantee uniqueness, and the
analysis is complicated to "There is some p such that, for all q, qis identi
cal to p if and only if Percy says that q, and p'. Or more simply put,
'There is exactly one p such that Percy says that p, and p'. A universal
generalization like 'A belief counts as knowledge only if it is true' comes
out as 'For every p, if there is a q such that q believes that p, then q
knows that p only if p'. (Clearly these formulations use substitutional
quantification. ) The point of all this is that there is not only no predicate
in the analysans that can be substituted for 'true' in the analysandum;
in addition, the analysans contains no predicate that can be applied to
what 'true' is (apparently) applied to-statements, propositions, and the
like. Thus these analyses, Williams claims, make it clear that is true' is
not a predicate and truth is not a property of propositions or of anything
else (1976, xii, 28, 84-85).
The "prosentential" account of truth developed by Grover, Camp,
and Belnap, 38 takes a different and ingenious route to the same goal.
The authors point out that there are expressions other than pronouns
that have an anaphoric function, that is, substitute for a previous pri
mary expression of the same syntactical form. There are proverbs (Mary
ran quickly, so Bill did too'), proadjectives ('To make men happy and to
keep them so'), and even prosentences (I don't believe Rachel is sick,
but if so, she should stay home'. (Grover 1992, 83-85) Their suggestion
is that 'It's true' and 'That's true' can be treated as prosentences. Thus
"It's true that gold is malleable" can be construed as "Gold is malleable.
That's true".
Moreover, pronouns and other pro-forms can be used as variables for
quantifications, as well as used to substitute for an "antecedent" (82
83). "If any car overheats, don't buy it. " "Whatever Mary did, Bill did. "
And so with prosentences. Whatever John says is true' is construed as
'For each proposition, if John said that it is true, then it is true. ' 'John's
last assertion is true' becomes 'There is a proposition such that John
asserted it last, and it is true'. (Again the quantification involved will
have to be substitutional. )
It is crucial for the deflationary force of this account that prosen
38. My references are to Grover 1992, a book that contains essays written and coauthored by
Grover. The central essay, "A Prosentential Theory of Truth, " by Grover, Camp and Belnap,
Philosophical Studies 27 (1975) appears as Chap. 3 of the book.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
tences be treated as semantically unanalyzed units. And since all occur
rences of 'true' (as applied to propositions) are, in their analyzed form,
in prosentences, and since 'true' there is a but a fragment of the prosen
tence that has no separate meaning (80), 'true' is not a genuine predi
cate (108ff. ).
Thus we have different accounts that are taken by their protagonists
to show that we can take all our sentences that apparently use 'true'
as a predicate applied to propositions and as expressing a property of
propositions, and analyze them (reveal their deep structure) so as to
show that no such truth predicate is involved. Furthermore, in arguing
this Williams, at least, relies heavily on the T-schema. It is the equiva
lence of 'It is true that p' and 'p' that enables him to do the rewriting of
apparent truth ascriptions in which that ascription disappears. Just as
that equivalence is supposed to enable us to replace 'It is true that gold
is malleable' with 'Gold is malleable', so it permits us to replace 'what
Percy said is true' with (in simplified form) 'If what Percy said is that p,
then p'. The T-schema does not figure as obviously in the prosentential
theory, but it is behind the scenes nonetheless. It is because of the equiv
alence of 'It is true that p' and'p' that 'that is true' in 'If John said that
p, then that is true' can be construed as a prosentence. That construal
implies that 'that is true' in the last conditional functions as an anaphor
ically related substitute for the sentence John used to say what he said.
And whatever plausibility that has rests on the principle that it is true
that p' is necessarily equivalent to 'p'.
Thus if I am both to defend the assumption that what appear to be
attributions of truth to propositions really have that status, and to show
that a principle like XIII. is a formulation of a realist account of the
concept of truth, rather than a deflationary account of the function of
'true', then I must indicate what is wrong with the way in which these
deflationists exploit the T-schema.
A variety of questions can be raised about the claim of these theories
to provide analyses for all the contexts in which 'true' occurs, but in line
with my policy of eschewing detailed criticism of the positions, I will not
go into that here. 99 I will restrict myself to two fundamental points. First,
the deflationary force of these views depends on the analysans in each
case having the same propositional content as the analysandum. If, for
example, (1) 'For all p, if S asserts that p, then p' does not capture all
the content of (2) 'Everything S asserts is true', then trotting out the
39. For a number of such criticisms see Kirkham 1992 and the articles cited there, and David
ALETHIC REALISM
former will not suffice to show that we can say what is said by the latter
without predicating 'true' of anything. And in some cases, I contend,
it is clear that the propositional content is not the same. This disability
can be found at the basis of the whole enterprise in Ramsey's initial
redundancy claim. (3) 'Caesar was murdered' clearly does not contain
all the propositional content of (4) 'The proposition that Caesar was
murdered is true', for the latter includes in its content the concept of a
proposition, which it uses to set up a subject of predication; and the
concept of truth is used in that predication. While (3) is about Caesar,
(4) is about a proposition. Moreover, it is clear to me that prosentential
analyses do not capture the content of ordinary putative truth-value at
tributions. The idea that it is true' and 'That's true' are semantically
unanalyzable prosentences, the constituents of which have no specifi
able meanings, will come as a great shock to any ordinary speaker of a
natural language in which expressions like that occur. I realize, of
course, that naive speakers are often mistaken in their suppositions
about the linguistic status and structure of various expressions in their
languages. But the prosentential claim would seem to be concerned with
a point on which it is highly implausible that he naive speaker could be
so far wrong. Surely, fluency in a language carries with a knowledge of
which components of complex expressions possess meanings that they
contribute to the meaning of the whole. And even if a fluent speaker
could be mistaken at certain points about this, how could millions of
speakers be mistaken in supposing that 'true' and 'false' have meanings
that they carry around from one context to another in which they occur?
If this is right, the prosentential theory cannot be accepted as an ac
count of the semantics of truth talk as that is ordinarily understood. At
best, it is an interesting proposal as to how that talk might be replaced
by something different.
One is led to assume an identity of content in these cases because of
the analytic, conceptual equivalence that obtains. I have no objection to
a claim for such equivalences. Indeed, such an equivalence is guaran
teed for Ramsey cases by the conceptual necessity of XIII. It is easy to
40. In that case one could still propose that we restrict ourselves to sentences like (1) and
abstain from using sentences like (2). But that would be a different ball game, and a different
set of considerations would be required to support such a proposal.
41. Don't suppose that this is just a rerun of that old saw, the "paradox of analysis". That
arises from the fact that an analysans explicitly spells out content that is not explicit in the
analysandum. But here, it is the "analysandum" that contains the extra content. Furthermore,
in cases that give rise to the paradox of analysis it seems clear that there is an identity of mean
ing. That is what is supposed to be paradoxical about the apparent differences between the two
sides.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
suppose that such equivalences are always equivalences of meaning or
content. But such is not the case. There are innumerable conceptual
equivalences that do not exhibit an identity of propositional content.
(5) The tie is red iff the tie exemplifies the property of redness.
(6) Columbus is north of Cincinnati iff the relation of being north of
holds between Columbus and Cincinnati, in that order.
And to take a case that is closer to our central topic:
(7) An omniscient being would know that sugar is sweet iff sugar is
sweet.
In both (5) and (6) it is clear that the right hand side involves concep
tual material absent from the left-hand side. In (5) that includes the
concepts of exemplification and of a property, while in (6) we have the
concept of a relation and of a relation holding between relata. The lack
of identity of content is particularly clear in (7). Surely 'sugar is sweet'
is completely innocent of any involvement with the concept of an omni
scient being! And in each case a speaker might understand one side of
the equivalence while lacking some of the concepts employed by the
other side the concepts of exemplification, a property, an omniscient
being, and so on. Similarly, with Ramsey equivalences. One might per
fectly understand 'Caesar was murdered' and yet lack the concept of
truth that is needed to understand (4). Thus analytic, conceptual equiv
alence is by no means a guarantee of identity of content.
If the above is right, the prosentential translations and the Ramsey
translations cannot claim to be identical in content with the sentences
they purport to translate. And hence those translations cannot support
a claim that apparent truth-value attributions are not what they seem.
My second criticism runs as follows. I am not prepared to contest a
claim of identity of content for all the translations undertaken in a de
flationary spirit. In particular, I am prepared to recognize that the 'true'
free reformulations Williams gives of generalizations involving 'true' do
capture the meaning of the latter. It seems intuitively right to me that
when I say 'There is exactly one p such that Percy said that p, and p' what
I say is the same, though differently put, as what I say when I utter 'What
Percy said is true'. And, be that as it may, I want to consider whether, if
and when the translations proffered by a deflationist do involve an iden
tity of content, this has the intended deflationary force of showing that
apparent truth attributions are nothing of the sort. For this purpose I
ALETHIC REALISM
will even accept, for the sake of argument, that the prosentential transla
tions attain identity of content, though I balk at the Ramsey equiva
lences. In any event, take such translations as do have this status, and
consider whether they show what deflationists claim they show-that the
originals do not, after all, amount to attributing a truth value to, for
example, propositions.
Well, why suppose that they do show that? The deflationist says they
do because they show that we can say what we were saying with a truth
predicate without using any such predicate, or any other predicate that
applies to what we were allegedly applying that truth predicate to. But
perhaps that only shows that there are different ways of saying the same
thing. Perhaps it doesn't show anything about what we are saying, what
that "same thing" is. Here there is a head-on confrontation between the
deflationist and the minimalist, Both Williams and I acknowledge that
(8) "What Percy said is true iff (9) There is exactly one p such that Percy
said that p, and p" is analytically, conceptually true. Moreover, we agree
that there is an identity of content between the left-hand (8) and right
hand (9) sides of the equivalence. But Williams takes this to show that
on neither side are we really attributing truth to what Percy said, whereas
I take it show what attributing truth to a statement amounts to. How can
we tell who is in the right here? Why should we suppose that the right
hand side is to be given priority when we try to characterize the content
they have in common? Equivalence is a symmetrical relation, so (9) is
just as much equivalent to (8) as (8) is to (9). Why shouldn't we say that
the equivalence shows that when we assert (9) we are really, contrary to
surface appearances, attributing the property of truth to a proposition,
rather than saying that the equivalence shows that when we assert (8)
we are really, contrary to appearances, doing something other than that,
something that is perspicuously represented by (9)? One who denies
that the synonymy tells against the "attribution of a truth property"
reading of (8) doesn't have to take the position that (9) does nothing
to illuminate the content of (8). On the contrary, my position is that it
brings out a way in which truth is a realist affair, having to do with things
being as they are stated to be. But it can make explicit certain features
of the common content without militating against supposing that this
content involves the attribution of a truth property to a statement.
There are, of course, various reasons for giving the deflationist read
ing of the situation. 42 Considerations of ontological economy dictate
42. Kirkham 1992, sec. 10. 7, stresses the need for extra assumptions if a philosopher is to
draw deflationist conclusions from analyses of the sort we have been considering.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
that if we can get along without committing ourselves to a property of
truth we should do so. Disillusionment with traditional theories of truth
motivate the disillusioned to eschew the object of such a theory. Suppo
sitions that truth is somehow "mysterious", "obscure", "nonphysical",
"non-naturalistic", or suffers from some equally disabling defect, plays
a role. I can't get into all that here, though I will say that I find these
considerations much less than compelling. My basic point, however, is
that it is far from clear on the face of it that even if there is an identity
of content in the equivalences we have been considering, we should
give the situation a deflationist rather than a minimalist reading. In this
connection we would do well to think about a similar issue with respect
to "reductions" like the reduction of beliefs to various disposition, the
issue as to whether the reduction should be taken as showing that there
are no beliefs but only dispositions, or taken as showing what sort of
thing a belief is. (This issue is touched on in chapter 2, section iv. ) Ab
sent compelling reasons to give the deflationist reading, I would con
tend that where there is an identity of content in the equivalences, it is
just as reasonable to say that the equivalences show something about
what kind of property truth is as to say that they show that there is no
property of truth.
It will also illuminate the matter to contrast this situation with one in
which there is much a stronger case for the nonexistence of a property.
Consider the standard twentieth-century arguments against taking
'exist' to be a property. As in the truth case (on the synonymy assump
tion), we can translate 'Crows exist' into a formulation in which neither
'exist' nor any other grammatical predicate is asserted of crows: 'There
is at least one X such that X is a crow'. So far the two cases are on a par.
But in the existence case there are additional considerations that sup
port a deflationist reading. Quite apart from this reformulation, 'Crows
exist' lacks some of the paradigmatic features of subject-predicate state
ments. Most crucially, in an ordinary subject-predicate statement we pre
suppose that the subject exists and then go on to predicate something
of it. But if we try to treat 'exists' as a predicate, we find that the exis
tence of the subject of predication is something we are already commit
ted to before we get around to the predication. A predicate of existence
comes onto the scene too late, as we might say. This basic point is re
flected in various ways 'exists' differs from undoubted predicates. It
makes sense to say 'Some crows are not black' but not 'Some crows do
not exist'. There are important differences between 'All crows are
43. Of course, we can say that some crows do not really exist (fictional or mythical ones), but
we can't deny existence totally of some crows.
ALETHIC REALISM
black', 'Most crows are black', and 'Some crows are black', but if we
substitute 'exist' for 'are black' in these sentences, the resulting sen
tences are either meaningless, or they all come to the same thing. There
are no analogues for these points with respect to using 'true' as a predi
cate. For example, the statements 'All propositions are true', 'Most prop
ositions are true' and 'Some propositions are true' are all different and
are all perfectly in order. Thus the translations don't give us anything
like the case for denying that there is a property of truth that the analo
gous translations give us for denying that existence is a property.
Before leaving the question of whether there really is a property of
truth, I should mention that some thinkers, while not denying that truth
is a property, deny that it is a property of a certain type: substantial,
theoretically important (interesting, explanatory), that it is a natural kind, or
that it possesses an underlying nature. Horwich, for example, denies that
that truth is "an ordinary sort of property-a characteristic whose un
derlying nature will account for its relations to other ingredients of real
ity. Therefore, unlike most other predicates, 'is true' should not be
expected to participate in some deep theory of that to which it refers-a
theory that goes beyond a specification of what the word means" (1990,
2). As his discussion indicates, Horwich is here contrasting 'true' with
theoretical terms in science. And there certainly are differences. But I
fail to see that this prevents us from developing a "deep theory" (how
deep remains to be seen) of what truth is, a theory that goes beyond
saying what the word 'true' means. As I have pointed out, the project of
developing a correspondence theory of the nature of truth, a project
that goes beyond the minimalist account of the meaning of 'true', is a
reasonable project to undertake, though I do not undertake it in this
book. Again, it seems clear to me that truth enters into various explana
tions. (Here Horwich is on my side. ) When I am successful in reaching
a goal, part of the explanation is often that my efforts were guided by
true rather than by false beliefs. Thus, though I agree that truth differs
markedly from theoretically important concepts in science, that merely
contributes to showing what kind of property it is, and this difference
in no way prevents the property of truth from enjoying other sorts of
importance, some of which will be detailed in Chapter 8.
44. Moreover, Horwich is clearly misguided in supposing that it is only theoretically impor
tant properties or natural kinds that deserve the title of "ordinary". We attribute countless prop
erties that are not "characteristics whose underlying nature accounts for their relations to other
ingredients of reality". There are the properties of congeniality, high fat content, being a table
or a chair, being a sophomore, being unchurched, etc. , etc. We would search in vain for an
"underlying nature" for these and innumerable other familiar properties, nor do they have any
significant theoretical or explanatory importance.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
xii Objections to the Minimal-Realist Account of Truth
My claims for the account of truth presented above will undoubtedly
elicit various objections. In this section I will respond to the most impor
tant of those I have encountered, whether from others or from my own
reflections.
(1) As a confidence builder, I begin with an objection that can be
easily answered. One might feel that the account is completely trivial
and unilluminating. This reaction takes different forms for different for
mulations. I have already responded in section x to such an objection to
my minimalist-correspondence account the objection that facts are but
"shadows" of statements. A triviality reaction to I-VI might run as fol
lows. "In explaining 'is true' in terms of 'is the case that' we have not
moved beyond alternative locutions for the same thing, or near enough
the same thing. There is no important difference between saying 'It is
true that lemons are sour' and 'It is the case that lemons are sour'. The
display of such verbal equivalents provides no real advance in under
standing. "
But 'is true' and 'is the case that' are importantly different. 'Is true'
applies to the likes of propositions, statements, and beliefs, items on the
thought side of the thought-world relationship, whereas 'is the case that'
belongs to the other side. A proposition is true when it is related in the
right kind of way (identity of content) to something that is the case. A
state of affairs' being the case is the worldly realization that renders the
proposition true. What is the case is the truth maker. What is true is the
truth bearer. And this is precisely the the realist conception of truth. To
bring this out is to bring out the content of that concept.
As for the T-schema and its progeny, a charge of triviality might runs
as follows. "In saying that the proposition that sugar is sweet is true iff
sugar is sweet, aren't we, in effect, saying that what is asserted by assert
ing that sugar is sweet constitutes a necessary and sufficient condition
for the truth of the proposition? But that condition just amounts to the
truth of the assertion that sugar is sweet. And that, in turn just amounts
to the truth of the proposition asserted, namely, the proposition that
sugar is sweet. And so in the end, the T-statement just comes down to
saying that the proposition that sugar is sweet is true if and only if the
proposition that sugar is sweet is true. And that is a miserable tautology. "
I don't think we should be worried by this. The crucial point is that
the T-statement doesn't explicitly present the truth of the proposition
that p as equivalent to the truth of the proposition that p. The above
account shows that we can provide a chain of entailments from the con
ALETHIC REALISM
dition that is given to what it is a condition of. But that just shows that
the condition works, that it is (necessarily) equivalent to what it is a
condition for. And that is what the account is supposed to do.
(2) I have maintained that the T-schema suffices to uniquely locate
the concept of propositional truth. If we realize that it is conceptually
true that for any p, the proposition that p is true if and only if p, we
thereby have grasped the realist conception of propositional truth. But
that assumes that 'true' is the only predicate that makes propositions of
the form 'The proposition that pis. iff p' analytically true. And this
is not the case. 'Is known by God' is another. 45 Or, in order to avoid
problems about the reference of 'God', and to sidestep doubts about
whether 'The proposition that p is known by God iff p' is analytically,
conceptually true even if necessarily true in some way, let's change the
example to 'would be known by an omniscient being'. Surely the propo
sition 'The proposition that p would be known by an omniscient being
iff p' has as much claim to being analytically true as 'The proposition
that p is true iff p'. Hence the T-schema does not uniquely pick out the
concept of truth.
One response to this would be to moderate the claim against which
the objection is directed. The objection does show that 'true' is not the
only predicate that fits into the slot 'The proposition that p is -- iff
p' in such a way as to make the statement conceptually true. But it does
not show that the T-schema fails to provide a recipe for constructing
a (necessarily) necessary and sufficient condition for the truth of any
proposition. Even if that schema can do a similar job for other predi
cates, that doesn't nullify the fact that it works for 'true'. However, to
be warranted in claiming that XIII is one way of presenting the realist
conception of truth, I need more than this. I need to claim that one
who has no prior understanding of 'true' at all could, in accepting the
conceptual truth of XIII, come into possession of the realist conception
of truth, just by seeing how it fits into that context. But that is possible
(or guaranteed) only if the concept of truth is the only one that is identi
fied by this schema. And the above counterexample seems to disprove
that claim.
What I need to find, then, is some further feature that is unique to
the way in which 'true' functions in this context, or that is distinctive of
the relation of the schema to the realist conception of truth when it is
'true' that fills the slot in question. In thinking about this, we should
be struck by the fact that in the omniscience case, there is additional
45. I am indebted to José Benardete for calling this difficulty to my attention.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
conceptual content that could not possibly be acquired just by recogniz
ing the analytic truth of the omniscience analogue to XIII. Imagine
someone with no prior understanding of 'would be known by an omni
scient being' being confronted with 'For any p, the proposition that p
would be known by an omniscient being iff p'. Suppose this person un
derstands all the rest of the sentence and takes my word for it that the
statement is conceptually true, understanding what that amounts to.
Would she thereby come into possession of the concept, would be known
by an omniscient being? Not except by a miracle. The specific content of
'known' and 'omniscient' could not possibly be imparted by this means.
To grasp the concept of knowledge one has to understand many
things-what it is to be a cognitive subject, a potential knower; what is
the difference between knowledge and (mere) belief; how knowledge is
restricted to what is true or what is the case; and so on. This content
goes far beyond what is constituted by the term in question fitting into
this particular context so as to make the whole conceptually true. Hence
just seeing that the term does that is radically insufficient to convey that
content. It seems plausible, however, that the concept of propositional
truth can be conveyed in this way. That is not to say that the T-schema
or XIII is a definition of 'true'. I have already made it sufficiently clear
that it is not. Formulations I-VI. bring out aspects of the meaning of
'true' that are not made explicit in the T-schema. Nevertheless, as I have
argued, these aspects are latent in that schema, in such a way that the
concept can be conveyed by pointing out the conceptual truth of any T
statement; whereas the concept of knowledge, and much more the more
complex concept expressed by 'would be known by an omniscient
being', cannot be so conveyed. Hence even though 'true' is not the only
predicate that, when inserted into the slot in 'For any p, pisiff p',
renders the whole statement conceptually true, it is the only predicate
such that, when one appreciates that the statement generated by that
insertion is conceptually true, one is thereby in possession of the con
cept expressed by that predicate. And that is the claim that is of central
importance to me.
Though I believe that the considerations just proffered suffice to de
fuse the objection, there is another aspect to the matter that deserves
notice. We can also discern the following difference between the ways
the two predicates function in the schema. We can explain why 'would
be known by an omniscient being' turns the schema into a conceptually
true statement. It is because the concept of omniscience is such that an
omniscient being would know all true propositions. Thus the feature this
predicate shares with 'true' has a complex explanation that turns on the
ALETHIC REALISM
relation of concepts expressed by this predicate with other concepts,
particularly the concept of a true proposition. Whereas there is no such
explanation in other terms of the fact that 'For any p, the proposition
that p is true iff p'. Here we can only say "That's just the way truth is;
that's what it is for a proposition to be true. "46 Indeed, the explanation
for the functioning of 'would be known by an omniscient being' cru
cially involved the concept of propositional truth! What I take all this to
indicate is that 'true' is the only predicate that functions fundamentally
in this way in the schema, and that any other concept that functions in
this way does so because it bears a certain kind of relation to the concept
of truth.
(3) Here is a difficulty with the T-schema and its offspring in particu
lar. Consider an "emotivist" theory of evaluative discourse, according to
which evaluative utterances are not to be construed as assertions that
are intended to correspond to objective facts, but rather as expressions of
the speaker's attitudes or emotions. 47 An emotivist is not prepared to
"seriously" assess such utterances for truth value. But wouldn't XIII le
gitimate the application of the realist concept of truth to them? Isn't
The proposition that stealing is wrong is true iff stealing is wrong' just
as respectable (and just as necessarily true) a T-statement as 'The propo
sition that sugar is sweet is true iff sugar is sweet'? So it looks as if this
version of the realist account of truth makes it impossible for the emoti
vist to say what he wants to say that ethical utterances do not express
propositions with truth values. The same point holds for other views
according to which one or another kind of declarative sentence cannot
be used to make true-or-false statements-counterfactual conditionals,
probability assignments, and "performative" utterances like "I promise
to pay you 5 percent interest".
One emotivist response to this problem is an "If you can't lick 'em,
join 'em" move. Why can't the emotivist avail himself of the equivalence
schema, while continuing to hold the position he takes on the status of
evaluative discourse? Suppose he were to say, as I have heard Charles
Stevenson say, "I don't object to speaking of ethical utterances (state
ments) as having a truth value. That is just to say that it is true that
stealing is wrong if and only if stealing is wrong. And there can be no
46. Of course, one can say: "It is because a true proposition is one concerning what is the
case", or "because a true proposition is one that corresponds to a fact". But that is just to display
the connection between 'true', 'the case', and 'fact', to revolve in a small circle. Whereas the
other explanation got us out of the circle of close equivalents to 'know' and made contact with,
e. g. , 'true proposition'.
47. The locus classicus for this view is Stevenson 1944.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
objection to saying that. " But to let our emotivist into the club in this
way has the effect that the minimalist theory becomes indistinguishable
from a "redundancy" theory, according to which 'It is true that p' has
no "assertive", "cognitive", or "propositional" content over and above
that of 'p'. Insofar as there is a point in using the truth attribution, it is
for emphasis, lending one's authority to the statement that p, or doing
something else that does not constitute asserting a proposition other
than p. But this is to subvert the realist position, which, as I pointed
out in section xi, is firmly committed to truth as a genuine property of
propositions, statements, and beliefs. Hence I will not avail myself of this
"permissive" option.
If we are to prevent the T-schema and the realist conception of truth
it identifies from being hospitable to items that are not candidates for
realist truth, we must place some restrictions on what can replace 'p' in
that schema. But before looking at candidates for a principle of restric
tion I need to define the problem better. We don't want a principle that
would exclude all evaluative sentences. That would freeze out the moral
realist (objectivist) just as surely as the lack of restrictions prevents the
emotivist from formulating his position. What we need is a principle that
would prevent a person from forming T-statements with a declarative
sentence that person doesn't take to be usable to specify a subject of
realist truth value.
So what principle will do this job? The most obvious suggestion is to
use the formulation just proffered. A person, P, is not entitled to use sentence
S as a substitute for 'p'in a T-sentence if P does not regard S as usable to formulate
the subject of an attribution of realist truth value. But the trouble with this is
that it makes use of the notion of realist truth, thereby raising the spec
tre of circularity. Of course, the points made earlier about the charge of
circularity leveled at the use of substitutional quantification apply here
as well. XIII is not put forward as a definition. Moreover, the restriction
on permissible substitution is no part of what is explicitly stated in XIII.
And the present account makes no pretension of being a reductive ac
count of truth. An explication of the concept by relating it to other
concepts would satisfy the aims of the endeavor. Nevertheless, and with
all that noted, the account would be more illuminating if we could avoid
utilizing the realist concept of truth in formulating our restriction, espe
cially avoid utilizing it so centrally and so early. How else might we do
the job?
Since XIII deals with propositions, a natural suggestion is that the per
missible substitutions are those that express propositions. And that is
obviously a necessary condition. But there are various problems with the
ALETHIC REALISM
suggestion that it is sufficient. There are different ways of expressing
propositions. Clearly, 'Lemons are sour' expresses a proposition in such
a way as to be a suitable substitution for p. But it is often said that inter
rogative, imperative, and optative sentences express propositions as well.
'Is it raining? ' expresses the proposition that it is raining, though in a
different way from 'It is raining'. 'Please close the door' expresses the
proposition that the door is closed, though in a different way from 'The
door is closed'. To be sure, interrogative and imperative sentences are
regularly excluded on syntactical grounds. It is always taken for granted,
but rarely mentioned, that only declarative sentences may be used. No
one, to my knowledge, has objected to the minimalist theory that it
would imply that questions and orders have truth values, since we may
as well instantiate the schema by saying 'The proposition that is it rain
ing? is true iffis it raining? ', or 'The proposition that leave the room! is true
iff leave the room! '. But limiting substitutions to declarative sentences is
not our present problem anyway. We are concerned to make discrimina
tions within that class. We are concerned to lay down conditions under
which it is permissible for a person to substitute a certain declarative
sentence for 'p'.
Getting back to the "express a proposition" requirement, it may be
that an emotivist, or anyone else who takes a certain declarative sentence
not to be usable to formulate a subject of realist truth value, would like
wise not be prepared to regard that sentence as expressing a proposi
tion. But even if we could secure an extensional equivalence here, it
would leave the situation shrouded in mystery. Just what is it to "express
a proposition" in a way that it is reasonable to require as a condition for
a permissible substitute? And how does that differ from other ways of
expressing a proposition?
At this point we might do well to remember that realist truth value is
ascribed to statements and beliefs as well as to propositions, that is, to
propositions as stated and as believed, as well as to propositions in isola
tion. Perhaps that holds a clue to the mystery. Emotivists typically hold
that evaluative utterances are not (full-blooded) statements, not "state
ments of fact", not claims as to what objective facts obtain, not claims as
to "what is the case" objectively. This last locution is reminiscent of my
initial formulation of the realist conception of truth in terms of "what
is said to be the case actually being the case". Perhaps the key to the
substitutivity requirement lies here. Might it not be that what should
inhibit the emotivist from inserting 'killing is wrong' in the T-schema is
that she does not regard that sentence as usable to make a statement of
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
fact, a claim as to "what is the case". So the restriction is to sentences
that have (are taken to have) a statement-making potential.
Again a threat of circularity looms on the horizon. If the only way of
distinguishing statements (assertions) from other illocutionary acts is in
terms of their susceptibility to realist truth and falsity, that notion has
entered into the explanation, albeit not so quickly as the last time. But
the panoply of terms just exhibited in characterizing "genuine" state
ments shows that we need not rely on the terms 'true' and 'false'. No
doubt these other terms are closely related to 'true' and 'false'. The
conviction that is the case' is closely related is what lies behind my initial
formulations. And the close connection of 'is a fact' lies behind my mini
malist correspondence formulation (XVII). But if we were to forbid the
use of terms that are themselves usable to define 'true', we would truly
be hamstrung. So let us think of a statement as an illocutionary act that
is most basically assessed in terms of whether what it says to be the case
is the case, or in terms of whether there is a fact to which it corresponds.
Alternatively, we could put this in terms of what the issuer of a statement
that p thereby commits herself to-that it is the case that p or that it is a
fact that p. With this background we can say that P is entitled to form a
T-statement by substituting S for'p' in the T-schema provided P regards
S as usable to make a statement.
Since we have put this restriction in terms of what a person takes to
be the case, there is always the possibility that the person is mistaken.
The emotivist may be mistaken in supposing that evaluative sentences
can't be used to make genuine statements of fact, and the objectivist
may be mistaken in supposing that they can. If there is such a mistake,
some T-statements will be ill-formed, or some chances to form T-state
ments will have been missed, but the person will have proceeded cor
rectly according to his lights. Of course, we can formulate an objective
restriction as well. "S is a permissible substitute for 'p' in the T-schema
provided it is usable to make a genuine statement. " We got off on the
more subjective foot because our approach to this problem was by way
of whether the reliance on the T-schema left room for the emotivist's
convictions. But we could have focused on the more objective principle
of substitutivity, and then portrayed the emotivist as believing that the
principle does not allow the substitution of evaluative sentences.
Finally, turning to the other kind of bearer of realist truth values, we
could distinguish statements from other illocutionary acts by the fact
that they express beliefs rather than other propositional attitudes. Again,
if we wanted to avoid bringing truth into the account, we would assume,
or show, that the concept of belief can be explicated in other terms,
ALETHIC REALISM
for example, in terms of the functional role beliefs play in the psychic
economy. In so doing, we would not have to deny that beliefs are assessa
ble as true or false. We would only maintain that it is not necessary to
say this in explaining what distinguishes beliefs from other kinds of psy
chological states. And we could appeal to belief more directly by think
ing of sentences as expressing beliefs and allowing those sentences to
substitute for 'p' that do so. 18
(4) There is another complaint about a minimalist account like mine
that might be considered a triviality charge, but of a different sort from
those considered under (1). 49 This objection consists of the allegation
that the account is not a substantial theory of truth. This term, and allied
terms like 'serious', 'philosophically (theoretically) interesting (impor
tant)', is used somewhat differently by different writers. But the sugges
tion is always that a minimalist account fails to do a job or to have
implications or uses with which the writer is particularly concerned.
Since the jobs emphasized are often explanatory, the charge tends to be
that the minimalist theory does not suffice to explain one thing or an
other. Among the explananda that are most often said to be neglected
by the minimalist theory are linguistic meaning and assertion or fact-stating
discourse. A substantial theory of truth would provide the basis for a the
ory of linguistic meaning and/or provide the basis for bringing out what
is distinctive about assertion among the total range of illocutionary acts.
An account of truth that fails to throw sufficient light on the particular
philosopher's favorite explanandum is deemed not to be "substantial"
or "philosophically interesting", not what a theory of truth should be. 50
The need to undergird a theory of meaning, along with related mat
ters such as (radical) translation and linguistic understanding, is
stressed, for example, by Davidson (1984 and 1990), by Dummett
48. Price 1988 is an extended discussion of how to distinguish genuine statements of fact
from expressions of attitude, and beliefs from attitudes, in connection with the problem of
understanding truth. Though I have no sympathy at all with Price's deflationary approach to
truth, it is a great merit of his argument to emphasize the importance of these questions for an
understanding of truth.
49. I did not introduce it at that earlier stage because in one prominent version (that of
Price) it is closely connected with the demarcation problem of how to distinguish suitable from
unsuitable substitutes for 'p' in the T-schema, the problem just discussed.
50. Although I present these claims as a call to develop a substantial theory of truth and, as
a spin off from this, a negative evaluation of accounts that are not directed to this end, at least
one of the authors I cite in this section, Huw Price, is concerned rather to show no such theory
is possible. He uses this conclusion as a way of rejecting what he calls "analytic" theories of
truth, attempts to say "what truth is". But he shares with those who endorse the attempt to
develop such a theory the conviction that an attempt to say what truth is lives up to its billing
only if it is a "substantial" theory. The negative assessment of nonsubstantial theories is what is
common to all these thinkers.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
(1973) and by Wiggins (1980). Wiggins enumerates a number of marks
of truth, marks it must have if it is to furnish the basis for a theory of
meaning of the Davidsonian sort that incorporates a theory of radical
interpretation of a language; and he insists that a "substantial" theory
of truth develop a conception of truth that will embody those marks. A
concern with distinguishing assertion from nonassertive uses of lan
guage is pre-eminent in Price (1988), as I pointed out earlier. With re
spect to this aim he lays down certain desiderata for a substantial theory
of truth. He points out that the account of truth cannot be in terms of
the notion of assertion or of anything else it is designed to explicate,
which for Price includes bringing out what distinguishes beliefs from
other propositional attitudes (23-25). Nor can the theory just assume
that, for example, only indicative sentences can replace 'p' in the T
schema, for that is one thing on which the theory of truth should throw
light. For this last reason accounts like the versions of mine that are
based on the T-schema are not "substantial". 51
It would be a long and tortuous affair to determine whether my ac
count of truth can make an important contribution to theories of the
sorts these writers stress, and my primary concerns here are such as to
leave me insufficient space for that enterprise. I am convinced that my
minimalist account of truth explains various facts about truth, for exam
ple, the fact that it is important for the guidance of behavior that we
have true rather false beliefs. For since it is obviously important that
where our success in a certain enterprise depends on whether it is the
case that p, that enterprise will be more likely to succeed if we believe
that p only if p. And, on my account, that will be the case if and only if
the belief is true. 52 But I need not establish an explanatory role for my
account to make the point I am chiefly concerned to make here,
namely, that it is arbitrary to evaluate accounts of truth on the basis
of whether they make important contributions to the explanation of,
explication of, or theory of one or another phenomenon in which the
philosopher in question happens to be particularly interested. The most
basic aim of a philosophical account of truth is to explain what we are
saying when we attribute truth to one or another truth bearer, and,
more generally, how we are to understand discourse containing the
term 'true'; that is, we want to spell out the concept(s) expressed by the
51. See similar allegations in Davidson 1990; Putnam 1978; Wiggins 1980, 190; and B. Wil
liams 1973, 202-3.
52. Horwich 1990, an account of truth which is more minimal than mine, provides a spirited
defense of the claim that the view of truth presented there can explain a variety of things that
people often try to use a theory of truth to explain. See chap. 3.
ALETHIC REALISM
term. If, in the course of so doing, we elaborate material that is useful
for a theory of meaning, or the assertive use of language, or whatever,
so much the better. But it is misguided to make any such explanatory
usefulness a basic requirement for the interest, importance, seriousness,
or "substantiality" of an account of truth. And since there are a number
of different explanatory projects in the course of which truth has been
appealed to, to pick out one or two of these as the basic requirement for
the interest or adequacy of a theory of truth tells us more about the
interests of the writer in question than about truth. 53 If my account of
truth is not "substantial" as judged by such criteria, this leaves me wholly
untroubled.
(5) The next item on the agenda is not so much an objection as a
problem. So far all my formulations have concerned truth. How is falsity
to be handled? The simplest way is to take it to be the contradictory of
truth. Any truth-value bearer is false if and only if it is not true. This
would be a commitment to bivalence for propositions, but I am not
prepared to accept that. In Chapter 4 I will consider, and criticize, Dum
mett's verificationist reasons for rejecting bivalence. But there are other
reasons available. I will concentrate here on reference failures that have
been taken, notably by Strawson, 54 to generate propositions that are nei
ther true nor false.
As a change of pace from the present king of France, let's consider
my youngest sister. (I have no siblings at all. ) Suppose that in a deranged
state I am convinced that I had several sisters all of whom died before
reaching maturity. While in that state I say to a friend, "My youngest
sister had great musical talent". Clearly I haven't said something true,
but have I thereby said something false? This question was the occasion
of a notable debate between Russell and Strawson. According to Rus
sell's theory of descriptions, the sentence I used is to be construed as
equivalent to "There exists exactly one person who is my sister and
younger than any other sister I have; and whoever satisfies that descrip
tion had great musical talent. "55 This statement is obviously false, since
the initial existentially quantified conjunct is false. But Strawson main
tained that this analysis is incorrect. Whereas the Russellian analysis rep
resents me as asserting that there exists a person who is my youngest
sister, that is presupposed rather than asserted. I operate on a background
53. In Chapter 4, section iii, I point out the parochial character of Dummett's claim that
"philosophical theories of truth have usually been intended as contributions to delineating the
outlines of some theory of meaning. .. "
54. See Strawson 1950b.
55. Russell 1919, chap. 16.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
assumption that I have a sister younger than any other sister of mine,
and on that basis I go on to assert something of the person in question.
The existential presupposition is false, but my statement is neither true
or false. In order for it to be false there would have to exist someone to
whom I attributed musical talent. And since there isn't, my statement
does not get so far as to be false. There must be a subject for a singular
subject-predicate statement to be about in order that it possess a truth
value.
I have no intention here of deciding between Russell and Strawson.
My own view is that Strawson has the better of the argument, but that is
not my present concern. My only point is that if, here or elsewhere,
there are propositions that lack truth value, the present account can
accommodate them. This will require a more complicated account of
falsity than merely taking it to consist in the failure of a sufficient condi
tion for truth. The account will need to spell out separately the condi
tions under which a proposition is false. And it would also be useful
to make some general remarks concerning situations in which neither
conditions of truth nor conditions for falsity obtain. But I will not enter
onto that project in this book.
(6) One category of live candidates for a neither-true-nor-false status
is worth separate consideration, namely, propositions formulated by the
use of vague terms. It may be thought that all my formulations of a
realist conception of truth run into trouble over the fact that our lan
guage is pervasively infected with vagueness. How can it be a determi
nate objective matter whether the statement that Ithaca, N. Y. , is a city
(in the ordinary, nontechnical sense of 'city') is true, given that 'city'
suffers from degree vagueness? Its meaning doesn't "lay down" any pre
cise number of inhabitants that a community must have in order to
count as a "city", rather than as a "town" or a "village". (For that mat
ter, 'inhabitant' is interestingly vague also. Is a person who owns a house
in Albany that he occupies, on the average, four months of the year an
inhabitant or not? ) It is determinate that, for example, Paris is a city and
that a tiny English village like Lower Slaughter is not; but there are many
cases in between for which there is no objectively correct answer to the
question. For those cases there is no fact of the matter as to whether or
not the community is a city. And so XIII and our other formulations fail
to provide determinate truth conditions for all statements of the form
'X is a city'. And so for many terms in our language, including those
that exhibit other forms of vagueness, not just degree vagueness. 56
56. Consider, for example, terms like 'religion' that exhibit what I call "combination of con
ALETHIC REALISM
Does this problem affect attributions of truth value to propositions
and beliefs as well? It must, since, as we have seen, when a truth value is
attributed to a statement it is attributed to what is stated, and that is a
proposition. Thus if a statement is neither true nor false because of
vagueness, it is the proposition that is stated that suffers this disability.
And the same disability will attach to the proposition when it is what is
believed, when someone believes, for example, that Ithaca is a city. On
many accounts of propositions they cannot be indeterminate; any inde
terminacy attaches to our attempts to linguistically express them. But on
my way of getting at the concept of a proposition, a proposition is the
sort of thing that provides the content of a statement or a belief, and so
if statements or beliefs can be indeterminate, it follows that propositions
can as well.
At one time I thought that this was a serious difficulty for a realist
conception of truth. I was even tempted to take the position that such a
conception applies only to idealized, perfectly precise languages, and
that with respect to (at least many) statements, made by our far from
completely precise natural languages, the best we can do is to suppose
the realist conception to apply approximately. But after some illuminating
conversation with Jonathan Bennett I see that this was a mistake. The
only way in which the vagueness of language affects the situation is by
preventing us from formulating a precise set of conditions for the truth
of many statements and propositions. If, to go back to the minimalist
version, what is necessary and sufficient for the truth of a proposition of
the form X is bald is that X is bald, then, since there is sometimes no
objectively determinate answer as to whether X is bald, we have failed to
provide a condition of truth that will always settle the question of
whether a proposition or statement is true. But that just means that we
can no more always talk (think) about truth with absolute precision,
than we can about cities, baldness, religion, and countless other matters.
And just as the vagueness of 'city' does not prevent us from engaging in
much useful thought and talk about cities, so it is with truth. To think
or talk with less with perfect precision is not to think and talk with no
intelligible content. To give less than perfectly precise conditions for X's
being P is not to say nothing useful (and even true) about what it takes
for X to be P. Why should this situation be more fatal when 'P' is 'true'
than when it is 'city' or 'religion'? Indeed, the vagueness that infects our
ditions" vagueness. Just what combination of typical features of religion is both necessary and
sufficient for a form of social organization to be a religion? Again, there seems to be no determi
nate answer to this question. See my article, "Religion", in The Encyclopedia of Philosophy, ed. P.
Edwards 1967.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
talk of truth is wholly traceable to the vagueness of the terms we use to
pick out the truth bearer and the conditions of its truth. V and XIII fail
to yield a completely precise condition for the truth of the proposition
that Ithaca is a city just because of the fact that we fail, for the same rea
son, to pick out a perfectly precise proposition by the phrase 'the propo
sition that Ithaca is a city'. The vagueness of the truth condition exactly
matches the vagueness of the the truth bearer. We have the strongest
guarantee of such a match, since we use the same linguistic resources to
do both jobs. Thus, even though we are unable to speak and think about
truth with perfect precision, we are not thereby prevented from saying
useful and true things about it. 57
It is also worth mentioning that insofar as vagueness does present a
problem for the realist conception of truth, it is not a problem that
attaches specifically or uniquely to that conception. Since the problem,
if any, stems from pervasive features of the languages we use to say any
thing about anything, it will affect all our talk about truth, whatever
views we have on the subject. 58
57. I certainly don't mean to deny that there are important problems concerning vagueness,
problems concerning its implications for logic, for the formulation of criteria of the application
of terms, and so on. Here I am only concerned with the question whether the phenomenon of
vagueness makes special problems for a realist conception of truth.
58. In conversation Bernard Katz has urged the thesis that a "true realist" would not allow
that a proposition lacks determinate truth value and determinate truth conditions. He thinks
the proper realist position is to make a distinction between a proposition and our cognitive
grasp thereof. The latter can be indeterminate, but not the former. No doubt, this is a realist
position, more realist, perhaps, than my own. But my concern is not to be as realist as possible,
but to delineate things as they are, in so far as in me lies. And, as I see it, truth-value bearers do
suffer, more or less, from vagueness, and this affects the extent to which they can be determi
nately true or false.
CHAPTER 2
Alethic Realism and
Metaphysical Realism
i Metaphysical Antirealism: Flat Denials
I now turn to a survey of various forms of what we may properly call
"metaphysical realism" and to a consideration of the relations of these
forms to each other and to alethic realism.
As a perfunctory gesture at penitence for my use of the term 'alethic
realism', let me repeat that 'realism' is most felicitously used for views
that items of certain kinds are "real", "really exist", "have an indepen
dent status in reality", and the like. Such views differ both as to what
kinds they have to do with and as to what being "real" or "really exist
ing" is thought to be. As for the former, the field is wide open. One
can be a realist or not about physical objects, events, universals, facts,
propositions, intentional psychological states, space, time, meaning,
God, and so on. As for the latter, I believe we can best bring out what it
is to be realist about Xs by considering what that excludes, by consider
ing what would be involved in being nonrealist about them. It will be
convenient to begin with a distinction, among ways of rejecting realism
about Xs, between (1) a flat denial that Xs exist and (2) a reduction of Xs
to Ys. We shall see that the line between these two is not always clear,
and we shall also see various complications on both sides of the realism
nonrealism divide.
To begin with what is apparently the simpler case, we find many phi
losophers forthrightly denying the existence of propositions, meanings,
theoretical entities, moral properties, or God. There are no such things.
The category is empty. In other times there were such bold thinkers as
Parmenides, Zeno, and Bradley who denied the existence of multiplic
ity, motion, time, and relations. Surely, if someone is committed to the
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
proposition that there are no such things as Xs, that counts as being
nonrealist about Xs in the strongest possible way.
But though it may seem perfectly clear what it is to deny the existence
of Xs, that appearance can be deceiving. Sometimes the denial is not
clear just because it is not clear what it is to assert the real existence of
the entity. Consider disputes over the existence of "abstract entities"
like properties, propositions, and facts. When someone takes an antire
alist position here, just what is he denying? If I deny that "there are any
such things" as properties or facts, am I denying that, for example, it is
a fact that Paris is the capital of France or that science has developed
many ways of measuring physical properties? If so, I am in a peck of trou
ble. Antirealists about properties or facts try a variety of moves to get out
of this uncomfortable situation.
(1) "We aren't denying commonsense or, more broadly, nonphilo
sophical statements that seem to be about properties or facts. We are
only opposing metaphysical commitments to the ULTIMATE REALITY of
such entities. We are denying that they belong to the 'ultimate furniture
of the universe". " But this doesn't help much unless something is done
to explain the difference between recognizing such facts as the fact that
Paris is the capital of France, and the commitment to facts as something
"ultimate", something "out there" in a metaphysical sense. There are,
to be sure, distinctions between more and less basic entities. If mental
facts, properties, states, and processes are wholly determined by physical
facts, events. .. , then there is a real sense in which the mental is less
basic in the scheme of things than the physical. But to hold that mental
phenomena are not part of the "ultimate furniture of the universe" in
this sense could not possibly be construed as denying their existence.
This understanding of ultimacy does not help to pin down what a person
is denying when he denies the existence of facts.
(2) A more promising approach is that taken by Quine. We make the
linguistic turn, and instead of trying to clarify in ontological terms what
it is to regard Xs as "metaphysically real", we make the distinction in
terms of the place reference to Xs has in our discourse. It becomes a
question of what we are ineliminably committed to by what we say. If
putative references to facts or to properties cannot be replaced by some
thing that does not make such references, then we are "ontologically
committed" to facts or properties. On the other hand, if we can say
everything we wish to say without any such apparent references, we are
not ontologically committed to them. For example, I might replace 'It
is a fact that Paris is the capital of France' with 'Paris is the capital of
France' and be satisfied with the latter as formulating everything I was
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
concerned to assert with the former. Or, in Quine's quantificational ver
sion of this, I am ontologically committed to facts if and only if the truth
of all the assertions I am prepared to make requires that facts be among
the values of my variables. I am ontologically committed to facts if and
only if the variables of my quantified statements have to include facts in
the domain over which they range in order that those statements all be
true. In Quine's famous slogan, "to be is to be the value of a variable".
This approach does seem to substitute a clear issue for a muddy one.
But the question remains as to whether being ontologically committed
to Xs in this sense captures what people were after in disputes over
whether Xs really exist. Suppose I acknowledge that I could say every
thing I want to say without referring to facts, but still insist that I take
facts to be real when I say things like "The facts of the matter tell against
your hypothesis", take them to be real in any way in which people do
take facts to be real. In that case the locus of the problem will have
shifted to the question whether Quine's criterion of ontological commit
ment succeeds in capturing what it is to be committed to the thesis that
entities of a certain type really exist. 2
It is far from my intention to try to settle this issue here, or any other
issue concerning metaphysical realism. I am surveying forms of meta
physical realism (antirealism) only as a foil for my central concern in
this book, alethic realism. Hence I can confine myself here to pointing
out that there are problems as to what many cases of philosophical de
nial of the existence of Xs come to. This is by no means always the case.
No obscurity attaches to denials of the real existence of theoretical enti
ties like quarks and positrons, or of God. We must scrutinize each case
to determine whether it is puzzling in these ways or not.
However we seek to clarify the distinction between asserting and deny
ing the real existence of Xs, it is worthy of note that those on the antire
alist side of the divide often seek to find some place for discourse that is
superficially about Xs, while stoutly denying that Xs really exist. There
are several ways of doing this.
(a) One way is illustrated by "instrumentalist" or "conventionalist"
or "fictionalist" views about the status of theoretical entities in science.
One who has scruples about recognizing the existence of unobservables,
or who for some other reason is averse to supposing that unobservable
entities in terms of which scientific theories are constructed are really
1. But not one that is totally unproblematic. There are still nagging questions as to the
criterion of "what I wanted to say", when we consider whether a second formulation preserves
everything I wanted to say in using the first.
2. See Alston 1958 for more on this.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
"out there" independently of our theorizing, may still acknowledge that
talking in these terms has scientific utility. Theories that deal in posi
trons, quarks, and wave functions give us mathematically elegant formu
las which can be used to generate empirically testable predictions and
to guide our attempts to control the course of events. Talking and think
ing as if there were such things can be useful because it gives us a man
ageably simple way of getting from observations to observations; whereas
if we tried to do it all in terms of observables, the complexity of the route
would overload our psyches. Similar suggestions are made by those who
deny properties or propositions. In Chapter 1 I provided an example of
this by suggesting that one who balked at the real existence of proposi
tions could follow the discussion in the rest of the book by treating prop
ositions as convenient fictions.
(b) An older tradition invokes a reality-appearance distinction.
Though space and time are not truly real, they constitute a form under
which things appear to us, just as perceptual objects appear to us as
variously colored, even if colors do not attach to them as they are in
themselves. Though thoughts, experiences, and desires are really neu
rophysiological states and activities, they do not present themselves to
our awareness as such, but rather as items of a nonphysical sort. The
fact that we talk of them as nonphysical is explained, and justified in a
way, by the fact that we naturally tend to think of them as they appear
to our experience.
(c) One who denies the real existence of Xs may seek to preserve
X-talk by construing it as nonstatemental, as not saying anything that is
to be evaluated as true or false. On this approach X-talk that looks to be
statemental will be construed as "expressive", "directive", or nonassert
ive in some other way. This move has been made most often with respect
to the moral and, more generally, the evaluative. Imputations of obliga
tion, moral rightness or wrongness, goodness, and value that look for all
the world like statements that are designed to be objectively true, are
really to be construed as expressions of attitudes toward what is being
evaluated. Indeed, we could well count taking X-talk to be merely expressive
as a third major way of denying the real existence of Xs, along with flat
denial of existence and reduction.
(d) Finally we might try to reconcile the denial of the metaphysical
reality of facts with the preservation of ordinary fact talk by holding the
3. This is, of course, highly controversial. I mention it only as an example of something that
is often claimed.
4. For suggestions of expressivist approaches to matters other than the evaluative, see Black
burn 1984, chaps. 5 and 6.
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
latter to be neutral as between opposing metaphysical positions on facts.
Though it looks as if one who says "It is a fact that Paris is the capital of
France" is committing herself to the real existence of facts, an adequate
account of the way this sentence is used in ordinary discourse will show
this to be a mistake. Such a statement does the job it is supposed to do
and can be true as intended, even if there really are no such things as
facts. For further development of this line of thought see van Inwagen
(1990, chapters 10 and 11).
ii Metaphysical Antirealism: Reductions
Rather than say more about the "flat denial" version of antirealism at
this point, I will bring in the next category of antirealism-REDUCTION;
for it will turn out that we can best appreciate what flat denial does and
does not amount to, as well as the difficulty of drawing boundaries
around it, by looking at its relations with reduction. As I am using the
term, to "reduce" a type of entity is to show that entities of that type are
really so-and-sos, where this differs from what they are commonly
thought to be or taken unreflectively to be. The account of what I's
"really are" must come as a surprise to the neophyte, or it would not
deserve the label "reduction". It would hardly count as a "reduction"
to point out that mammals are animals that suckle their young or that
races are events in which there is competition with respect to speed of
movement. Moreover, although I just now followed the ordinary seman
tics of 'reduce' as a "success term" by saying that to reduce an entity is
to show it to be so-and-so, I will use 'reduce' in a more relaxed fashion,
so that any attempt to show this will be placed under the REDUCTION
category.
Familiar examples of reduction in this sense are the (attempted) re
ductions of:
(a) Physical objects to patterns of actual and possible sense data. (Phe
nomenalism)
(b) Mathematical entities to logical constructions.
(c) Linguistic meanings to synonymy relations.
(d) Social entities (communities, organizations, nations. .. ) to patterns
of relationships between individual persons.
(e) Space to patterns of spatial relations.
(f) Mental states to complexes of behavioral dispositions.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
(g) Mental states to neurophysiological states.
(h) Properties to classes of individuals that are similar in a certain re
spect.
For convenience, let's use the dummy term 'X' for an entity (or type of
entity) to be reduced, and 'Y' for the entity to which it is reduced.
There are two important distinctions to be made between types of
reductions. First, when philosophers advocate such reductions, they
often make the claim that it is a conceptual, semantic, or analytic truth
that Xs are Ys. The claim is that we can recognize Xs to be Ys if we reflect
carefully enough on what we mean by 'X' and 'Y or on our concepts of
Xs and Ys. Examples (a)-(c) are typically understood in this way. But
the fact that I include both (f) and (g) on the list shows that I am not
restricting myself to conceptual reductions. Although (f) has usually
been put forward as a thesis of "logical behaviorism" to the effect that
our concept of an intention, for example, is a concept of certain disposi
tions to behavior, (g) is almost never held in this form. Practically no
one thinks that our concept of believing that it will rain tomorrow is the
concept of a certain kind of neural activity or state. The claim rather is
that the relevant facts of the matter are such that this belief is best
thought of as a neurophysiological state or activity of a certain sort. Here
we have what is sometimes called a "theoretical" identification. 5 Exam
ples (d) and (e) are often thought of in the same way. It strikes me that
we are much less likely to regard the second kind of reduction as a form
of antirealism than we are the former. "Central state materialists" who
take mental states to be neurophysiological states of the brain are not
typically regarded as antirealists about the mental as logical behaviorists
have been. It is not clear to me just what is responsible for this. But
because of it I shall henceforth ignore the nonconceptual forms of re
duction in this quick survey.
The second major distinction is between a straighforwardly metaphysi
cal reduction and a more linguistically conceived version. The oldest
forms of phenomenalism were cast in the form of a thesis about the
constitution of physical objects. A given physical object is a certain com
plex of actual or possible sense data. Difficulties with this gave rise to a
5. There is also the distinction between type and token physicalism about the mental. The
former holds that each type of mental state can be identified with a certain type of neurophysio
logical state. The latter does not claim any such type-type identity, but holds that each particular
mental state is identical with some particular neurophysiological state. If I were concerned with
metaphysical realism and antirealism for its own sake, I would have to get into this distinction;
but I can ignore it for present purposes.
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
linguistic version in which there was no attempt to identify each physical
object with some particular set of sense data. Instead the view was that
each statement in which terms for physical objects occur can be "trans
lated" into statements the only singular referring terms of which refer
to sense data. 6
Reductive theories are embraced for various reasons. (1) There may
be background metaphysical commitments that conflict with recogniz
ing Xs in an unreduced form. A materialist or physicalist ontology may
seem incompatible with recognizing the existence of "abstract entities"
like properties, propositions, or relations as entities in their own right;
whereas if propositions can be identified with sets of sentences that bear
a certain kind of equivalence to each other, or properties to sets of physi
cal particulars that would ordinarily be said to have the property, those
scruples will be satisfied. The same metaphysical prepossessions may en
courage the reduction of psychological states to complexes of behavioral
dispositions.
(2) Epistemological considerations often play a role in sparking re
ductive enterprises. Suppose that one is impressed with the idea that
if physical objects are taken to have an existence independent of our
experience, they are forever hidden from us behind a "veil of percep
tion". That will provide an impetus for showing that physical objects are
not impenetrable to our experience after all, since they are nothing but
patterns or complexes of such experiences. To know about the physical
world through experience is, at bottom, nothing but a matter of know
ing about experience through experience. Again, it may seem mysteri
ous that one should know anything about meanings, construed as
independently existing abstract objects that are related in certain ways
to linguistic expressions. But if to ascribe a meaning to a word is just to
talk about the semantic relations of that word to other words, it may
seem to fall more clearly within human cognitive powers to find out
what words mean.
(3) A powerful motive for reductions in this century has been the
sense that entities of a certain kind, left unreduced, are "obscure",
"puzzling", or even "unintelligible". Many philosophers have reacted
in this way to "abstract objects" of all kinds, particularly propositions.
What is it, one asks, for there to be a complex consisting of Napoleon
6. There is a further distinction between the linguistic version just adumbrated and a more
holistic view in which there is no claim to produce a sense-datum equivalent for each physical
object sentence, but where the claim is that physical discourse as a whole can be replaced bydiscourse in which there are terms referring to sense data but no terms referring to physical
objects.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
and the property of timidity, related by the relationship of exemplifica
tion, just sitting out in logical space somewhere, forever unrealized.
Even if we can understand what an actual fact that Napoleon is timid
would be, how can we grasp what it would be for the corresponding
proposition to be a constituent of reality, given that there is no such
fact? Identifying propositions with sets of sentences brings them "down
to earth". Possibilities, especially their inflation into possible worlds,
have elicited similar reactions. What is it for there to be states of affairs,
and even worlds-maximal consistent states of affairs-that do not exist?
Possible individuals have especially drawn fire. How can we understand
the "existence" of an individual that doesn't exist? If possible worlds
can be reduced to sets of propositions (with, perhaps, further reductions
being performed on the propositions), things look more manageable.
(4) There are also more purely linguistic grounds for reduction. The
most familiar of these concern attachment to languages of certain re
stricted sorts. This often stems from the fact that logic has been more
fully and satisfactorily developed for some languages than for others.
Better for extensional than for intensional languages. Better for first
order quantification than for higher-order quantification. Better for
truth-functional complex sentences than for those involving proposi
tional attitudes. This can lead to an attempt to get rid of modal contexts
or opaque contexts or propositional-attitude contexts by showing that
such talk can be replaced with other talk that does not exhibit these
undesirable logical features. Another linguistic motivation for reduction
involves a desire to save a certain account of linguistic meaning. A fa
mous historical example is Russell's theory of definite descriptions.
Since Russell did not recognize any distinction between meaning and
reference, he felt that if we left the sentence 'The present king of France
is bald' (spoken at a time at which France has no king) in that form, the
sentence would be meaningless, since the subject term fails to refer to
anything. But the sentence is obviously meaningful. Therefore its sur
face form is misleading. It does not have to be construed as a statement
about a being that is king of France at present. Instead, it can be under
stood as a generalization that refers only to properties: 'The property of
being king of France at present is possessed by exactly one thing, and
whatever has that property is bald. ' This move has been expanded by
Quine into a way of getting rid of any reference to individuals at all,
leaving us with just predicates and quantificational apparatus. Thus,
metaphysically speaking, individuals have been reduced to properties.
(5) This list would be incomplete without mentioning the fact that
reductions are sometimes undertaken in a spirit of "fun and games". It
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
can be a sporting challenge to show how one can get along with as few
ontological commitments as possible. Thus one sets out to show that we
can say everything we want to say without referring to any abstract enti
ties, or to any substantial bearers of properties, or to events, or to inten
tional psychological states. One's response to such challenges may be
largely a matter of taste. Those with a "taste for desert landscapes" will
seek to get along with as little as possible. Those who prefer luxuriant
jungles will tend to resist reductions and will seek to show how we can
get along comfortably with a more crowded ontology.
iii Realism and Idealism
In thinking about reductive forms of antirealism, we should give a
special place to those that seek to reduce the nonmental to the mental.
What is called 'realism' is often concerned to assert that physical objects,
universals, propositions, or whatever enjoy an "independent" existence.
This is not taken to imply independence of any connections with any
thing. Presumably nothing except the whole of reality (and possibly
God) enjoys that absolute an exception from dependence. It is indepen
dence of mind that is typically stressed. Hence the traditional opposition
of REALISM and IDEALISM. Nor should we suppose that any kind of de
pendence on mind is incompatible with realism in this sense. Most obvi
ously, the dependence of the mental on mind is not incompatible with
being a realist about mental contents, properties, and states. No one
would deny a philosopher the title of "realist" because he accorded
mental states a place in the scheme of things. Even with respect to the
nonmental it is not every kind of dependence on mind that derogates
from "real existence". Causal dependence need not do so. Within the
natural world human minds and their operations exercise a variety of
impacts on the environment. The landscape of populated areas would
not be what it is apart from the mind-directed activities of human beings
and other animals; yet this doesn't count against realism with respect
to the environment. More globally, theism is not necessarily an idealist
position. Berkeley is paradigmatically an idealist, but most forms of the
ism are properly thought of as realist. And yet theism holds that every
thing other than God depends for its existence on the divine mind.
So what kind of dependence on mind is incompatible with a realist
status? What is the difference between the way in which Berkeley thinks
of physical things as dependent on God, and the way in which Aquinas,
Descartes, and Leibniz do? The answer is that the kind of dependence
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
that is incompatible with a realist status is what we may call constitutive
dependence. If physical substances, space and time, universals, or what
ever, depend on a relation to mind for being what they are, for their
essential character, for their constitution, then they lack the kind of in
dependence of mind that is required for realist status. There are various
ways in which mind, minds, or MIND can play what I have called a "con
stitutive" role vis-à-vis, for example, physical objects. They can be identi
fied with "ideas" in the divine mind, à la Berkeley. Panpsychism
construes them as made up of (low-level, rudimentary) minds. They can
be construed as aspects of the activity of the Absolute Spirit, as in Hegel
and other forms of absolute idealism. All of the above are "absolute"
modes of constitutive dependence on mind. The "constitutive" depen
dence is so complete that things realists take to be nonmental are men
tal through and through. But there are also views of partial dependence,
the most renowned of which is Kant's. For Kant the structure of the
physical world-spatiotemporal order, causal interconnection, division
into substances with their attributes and interrelations is what it is be
cause of the conceptualizing activity of the human mind. Apart from
the ways our conceptual and judgmental apparatus works none of these
features have any place. And since these features enter into everything
we find in the physical world, that world as we know it would not exist
apart from the organizing activity of the human mind. Nevertheless, on
Kant's view the human mind does not operate in a vacuum. It imposes
structure on raw material contributed by "things in themselves". We
can't know anything about that raw material in abstraction from the
finished product, but we can be assured that it plays a role. This Kantian
"partial constitutive dependence" is standardly taken to constitute a
form of idealism. Kant himself said that on his view the physical world is
"transcendentally ideal but empirically real". The physical world is shot
through and through by the contributions of mind. But given this
"wholesale" dependence on mental activity, particular physical facts are
of them or believe them to be. what they are, regardless of how we think
It will be clear that what I have just been calling a "constitutive" de
pendence of the nonmental on mind belongs under the heading of
reduction; it is reduction of the nonmental to the mental. ' It deserves
7. If this formula is to be acceptable we will have to use 'reduction' in a somewhat wider
sense than the one I explained above. Many idealists take physical objects, for example, not to
be mental, but rather to be what they are by virtue of their relations to minds or to mental
phenomena, or to items that are what they are by virtue of their relations to minds, or. .. . In
this wider sense we can speak of reducing Xs to Ys when one of these latter relations is alleged,
as well as to claims that Xs are Ys.
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
special treatment only because of its prominence in uses of the term
'realism' and its contraries. Well, almost "only". There is one other rea
son for special treatment. We have been talking all along about what
might be called "departmental realisms"-realism about this or that
kind of thing. But is there, or can there be, a global realism or antireal
ism, an unqualifiedly general metaphysical position, one that concerns
whatever there is? Positions that stand in the realism-idealism contrast
are typically so regarded. Let's consider that for a moment.
One can, of course, be realist or idealist about some domains and not
others-idealist about physical objects (considering them to be mind
dependent) but not about properties, for example. Nevertheless, real
ism and idealism are often construed as more global positions. But how
can this be? How can one recognize everything or nothing to be consti
tuted by the mental? Well, one could recognize nothing to be consti
tuted by the mental if one denied that there are any minds; but that is
not taken to be a requirement for being a metaphysical realist. Perhaps
the best way to represent the matter is this. Assuming that mind has a
fundamental sort of reality, we think of idealism as the position that
everything else is reducible in one way or another to mind. If you like, we
could think of the dependence of the mental on itself as a limiting case
of reduction to the mental, thereby getting a global idealism that takes
everything to be reducible to the mental. A global realism holds, on the
other hand, that everything not commonly regarded as mental is not
constituted by, is not reducible to, the mental, but exists in its own right
as a nonmental sort of reality.
To be sure, there could be a global realism that denies that minds
exist, and a global idealism that flatly denies the existence of anything
commonly regarded as nonmental, rather than taking it to be reducible
to the mental. But these are much less common positions and are not
what people have in mind when they contrast realism and idealism. Real
ists, so called, typically recognize the basic existence of minds; they just
resist any imperialist pretensions for the mental. And idealists, so called,
do not deny any reality to the physical world, abstract entities, space and
time, and the like. They only insist that these items are somehow mental
in nature.
iv The Boundary between Flat Denials and Reductions
When presenting the first way of being antirealist about Xs (flat-out
denial of real existence), I said that I would wait to discuss it further
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
until we had reduction on the table with which to compare it. I now want
to suggest that the line between these modes of antirealism is by no
means a sharp one. What is the difference between denying that physical
objects exist, and saying that they are really congeries of sensations?
What is the difference between saying that properties do not exist and
saying that they are really classes of particulars bound together by simi
larity relations? What is the difference between saying that mental states
do not really exist and saying that they are really dispositions to overt
behavior? It is often not clear which way to jump. To be sure, not all
cases are up for grabs. Your typical atheist is unequivocally denying that
there is any such being as God, rather than proposing some iconoclastic
view of the nature of God. Whereas the typical relational theorist of
space and time would never dream of claiming that space and time are
not real; he simply propounds a certain view as to their nature. But often
the classification could go either way, depending on various features of
the case. Let's take a look at some of the factors that tip the balance one
way or the other.
(1) First, if the theorist has no interest in preserving statements in
volving Xs, at least no interest in preserving them as literally true, then
she is best taken as denying the existence of Xs. This is the case with the
usual kind of atheists, with mechanists who have no use for any descrip
tions or explanations in terms of teleology, and with those who think
that "theoretical entities" like positrons and quarks just aren't "out
there" anywhere. On the other side, it is (in part) because people want
to hold that there are many true statements about organizations, fami
lies, and nations that a reduction of such social entities to relations be
tween individuals is construed as telling us what these social entities are,
rather than as a denial that they exist.
(2) Among those who hold to the literal truth of various statements
about Xs (and on that basis are on the reduction side of the divide)
there are still important distinctions to be drawn. Perhaps the most im
portant is this. It makes a big difference whether the view involves point
by-point correlations between particular Xs and particular Ys, or
whether the two bodies of discourse are related in a more holistic way.
With both behavioristic and neurophysiological reductions of mental
states and processes, the usual view involves a case-by-case identification.
Each mental state or process is deemed to be identical with a particular
set of behavioral dispositions or a particular neurophysiological state or
process. This tells in favor of classing the view as an attempt to provide
8. That is not to deny that some people do the latter.
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
a novel account of what mental states are, rather than a denial of their
existence. At least it encourages such an interpretation. For it enables
us to preserve the "demographics" of the reduced. After the reduction
we wind up with just as many items as we had at the beginning, related
in basically the same ways, just because each reduced item is linked up
individually with a reducing item. Contrast this with the situation in
which a recipe is provided for translating any statement putatively about
Xs into a statement about Ys, but where there is no attempt to identify
each individual X with an individual Y. Some reductive accounts of lin
guistic meaning are good examples. Statements that x "has the same
meaning" as y are reduced to assertions of a synonymy relation (charac
terized without appealing to meanings as entities) between x and y.
Statements to the effect that S "knows the meaning of x" are explicated
in terms of how S is disposed to use x in various sorts of speech acts. And
so on. Each context in which 'meaning' occurs is given an explication
in which 'meaning' does not occur. But this battery of reductions pro
vides no resources for picking out some entity with which a given mean
ing is identified. Meanings have disappeared in the reduction rather than
having been reidentified.
(3) Perhaps the ontological "distance" between the reduced and the
reducing also plays a role. The greater the distance, the more tendency,
ceteris paribus, to think of the view as a denial of the existence of Xs.
The lesser the distance, the more tendency to think of the view as an
unorthodox account of what Xs are. Thus where numbers are reduced
to classes of classes, both Xs and Ys are on, roughly, the same level of
abstractness, and it can seem right to say that the view is telling us what
numbers are rather than denying their existence. On the other hand, if
physical objects are reduced to patterns of actual and possible sense
data, the latter is so far from the way physical objects are commonsensi
cally conceived that it can seem more natural to take the phenomenalist
to be denying their existence.
v Logical Relations of Alethic Realism
and Metaphysical Realisms
This will suffice, for purposes of this book, as a survey of metaphysical
realisms, their varieties and interrelations. Now we are ready to tackle
the question for which all the foregoing was background: How is alethic
realism related to one or another of these metaphysical realisms? I will
consider the question of implications or other significant connections
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
in both directions. The discussion will focus exclusively on the first com
ponent of alethic realism, the claim that the realist account of truth
correctly identifies our ordinary concept of propositional truth. I take it
to be obvious on the face of it that the second component, that truth is
important, has no special connection with any position on metaphysical
realism or nonrealism.
First consider whether any metaphysical realism or nonrealism has
any implications, positive or negative, for the realist account of truth. I
take it to be clear that they do not. Though a particular realist or antirealist
metaphysical position (of the sorts we have been considering) has implications for
what propositions are true or false, they have no implications for what it is for a
proposition to be true or false. And it is the latter with which the realist
account of truth is concerned. Let's explore this point with a couple of
examples.
Consider the opposition between a realist and a "flat denial" antireal
ist about theoretical entities. If there are no such things as quarks, then
no proposition that requires the existence of quarks for its truth can be
true; whereas realism about quarks would have the opposite result. But
the resolution of this issue has no bearing at all on the correct answer
to the question of what it is for a proposition to be true. How could
it? In taking a position on what propositions are or are not true, the
metaphysical positions presuppose an understanding of truth; they do
not contribute to it. We get the same result with the issue between a
realist account of theoretical entities and a reductionist form of antireal
ism, for example, one that reduces quarks and the like to regularities
in what would be observed under certain observable conditions. This
reductive account has direct bearing on the propositional content of
statements about quarks, a different bearing from that of the realist posi
tion. But there is no reason to think that either position has any implica
tions for what we are saying when we say that one of those propositions
is true. The metaphysical realist or antirealist about quarks, like the rest
of us, makes use of some concept of truth but is not concerned, qua
metaphysical realist or antirealist, to determine its nature.
A similar point is to be made concerning the issue between a realist
and a phenomenalist concerning physical objects. If physical objects are
correctly viewed in terms of a phenomenalist reduction, that will affect
the nature of the proposition that pine trees are coniferous (P), con
strued so that it has a chance of being true. The proposition will be
much more complex in its structure than one might think. But whatever
the constitution of the proposition that P, it will be true if and only if P.
Or rather, since we are not presupposing the truth of alethic realism in
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
this discussion, the phenomenalist reduction or its rejection has no
bearing on whether alethic realism is true. Assuming sufficient reasons
for accepting alethic realism, a decision on the phenomenalist form of
antirealism about physical objects will have no tendency to shake that
position. On alethic realism the proposition that there is a computer on
my desk (understood in a commonsensically realist way) will be true if
and only if there is a computer on my desk (understood in the same
way). On a phenomenalist position, the closest proposition to that one
that has any chance of being true will be some complex proposition as
to what sensory experiences one would have under certain conditions.
But then, assuming alethic realism, that proposition will be true if and
only if one would have sensory experiences of those kinds under those
conditions. Again, the decision on the metaphysical issue has a bearing
on what propositions are true, but no bearing on what it is for a proposi
tion to be true.
It is hardly necessary to add that a parallel point holds for the more
global realism-antirealism contrasts that go under the heading of "real
ism vs. idealism". If everything other than minds are, as Berkeley sup
posed, congeries of ideas, then the proposition that a spruce tree is in
front of my house, understood in a Berkeleyan way, will be true if and
only if there certain ideas related in certain ways (i. e. , if and only if there
is a spruce tree in front of my house, where that is construed in the Berke
leyan fashion). Whereas on the realist position, the corresponding prop
osition will be true if and only if there is a spruce tree in front of my
house, where that is understood in a more familiar realist way. Alethic
realism is just as acceptable (or unacceptable) either way. A parallel
point holds for other forms of idealism, for example, the form accord
ing to which a tree exists only as a certain stage in the development of
the self-realization of the Absolute. On that construal (if the realist ac
count of truth is correct) the proposition that beech trees are deciduous
will be true if and only if some appropriate fact obtains with respect to
the self-realization of the Absolute. Absolute idealist metaphysics is in
no tension with a realist conception of truth.
Now let's consider the other direction of possible bearings. Does a
realist account of truth carry any implications for metaphysical realism
or nonrealism? Here the situation is rather more complex. I will suggest
that the situation is basically the converse of the other direction, that
alethic realism has no bearing on disputes between metaphysical realism
and antirealism, but there are qualifications to be made. I will first pre
sent the case for an unqualified view that there is no significant connec
tion and then proceed to consider possible qualifications.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
The basic point is the mirror image of the previous one. Just as the
issues between a metaphysical realism and a nonrealist opposition is not
an issue about what truth is, so the question of how truth should be
construed is not an issue over the existence, or metaphysical constitution
or status, of one or another type of entity. Alethic realism is a view about
what truth is, whereas the metaphysical positions in question have to do
with what kinds of propositions are true. And just as we must not confuse
the question of what virtue is with the question of what virtues there are,
as Socrates liked to remind us, so we must not confuse the question of
what truth is with the question of what truths there are.
But it may appear that this beautifully simple picture needs complicat
ing at a couple of points. First, there is the question whether a particular
account of truth, such as my own, has metaphysical presuppositions. I
have presented my position as a way of spelling out what it is for a proposi
tion, statement, or belief to be true. Moreover, I have insisted, against de
flationists, that there is a property of truth. Doesn't this mean that my
alethic realism is committed to a metaphysically realist position on prop
ositions, statements, beliefs, and truth-value properties? 9
I don't think there is much in this. First, as I have been at pains to
claim in Chapter 1, section v, it makes no difference to the viability of
my account of truth what metaphysical status we accord propositions,
statements, and beliefs. As I said there, even an instrumentalist or fic
tionalist construal of propositions would leave the account of truth in
tact, as I mean it to be taken. I said that what is nonnegotiable in the
position is the ability to use 'that' clauses to specify the contents of state
ments and beliefs, and to use them independently to identify particular
truth-value bearers (as in 'It is true that salt contains sodium'). So long as
we have that, the metaphysical chips can fall where they may, as far as
alethic realism is concerned. And as for a commitment to there being a
property of truth, I take that to be, most basically, a view as to how appar
ent truth-value attributions are to be understood (as really being of the
form they appear to be), rather than any metaphysical commitment that
can properly be considered a form of realism or nonrealism. The com
mitment to a property of truth does not, for example, involve a realist
or nonrealist account of the metaphysical status of properties. It merely
holds that, whatever metaphysical status properties have, truth and fal
sity are among them. Though this might be reckoned as an existential
assumption, it is, I claim, no more "metaphysical" (and no more realist
9. I am indebted to the participants in Wolterstorff's seminar (at Yale) on the manuscript
of this book for calling this problem to my attention.
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
or nonrealist) than the assumption that there is a property of flabbi
ness, 10
But there is a reason for qualifying the position that alethic realism
has no bearing on metaphysical realism, a reason that I will take more
seriously. To get into this, let's consider the idea that realism about, for
example, physical objects or abstract entities is more conducive to
alethic realism than idealism or other reductionist views in these do
mains, just because the realist position is the one that takes truth makers
to be "out there", enjoying a mode of existence independent of our
thought, experience, or discourse. Well, there may be something to this.
To determine what, if anything, that is, we have to be more explicit
about certain distinctions.
First, let us set aside the oppositions in which the antirealist is flatly
denying the reality of Xs, and those in which the antirealist is advocating
a reduction (except for reductions of the apparently nonmental to the
mental). In those cases no qualification is needed to the denial of any
significant connection between alethic realism and the realist side of the
metaphysical dispute. The nominalist about properties or the atheist can
embrace alethic realism with as good a conscience as her realist rival.
The proponent of a reduction of mental states to behavioral dispositions
can be as staunch an alethic realist as one who takes mental states to
have a basic, irreducible mode of reality.
It is in the oppositions that most felicitously go under the banner of
realism vs. idealism that we will find some interesting connection with
alethic realism, if anywhere. Those oppositions, at least the ones I am
thinking of now, all have to do with some kind of reduction of the appar
ently nonmental to the mental. But here too there are distinctions that
are crucial. The most important is between those forms of idealism that
take various domains of reality to be independent of human cognition
and those that do not. Among idealist positions that take most of reality
to be independent of anything human are Berkeleyan idealism, Leibniz
ian and Whiteheadian panpsychism, and absolute idealism. Here, as
pointed out above, the idealist can be as enthusiastic an alethic realist
10. Note that if my account of truth really did have substantial metaphysical commitments of
a realist sort, this would also require qualification of the claim that metaphysical realisms and
nonrealisms have no bearing on accounts of truth. For in that case a nonrealist denial of those
commitments would imply that the account of truth is not acceptable by reason of the falsity of
some of its presuppositions.
There is also the point that even if I were to accept the suggestion I have been rejecting, that
would only show that alethic realism has a bearing on issues of metaphysical realism by virtue of
what it presupposes. It would still not be the case that anything in the position itself that is erected
on the basis of those presuppositions has any such bearing.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
as his realist opponent. And even phenomenalism concerning physical
objects takes them to be independent of human cognition. True, accord
ing to phenomenalism the reality of physical things is not independent
of human experience, since what it is for there to be a bush outside my
window is a matter of what sensory experiences we would have under
certain conditions. But even here the reality of the physical is not at all
constituted by our cognitive activity-how we think about the world or
what conceptual scheme we use, or anything of the sort. The facts that
make physical-object assertions true-facts about the conditions under
which we would have sensory experiences of one or another sort-are
just as objective vis-à-vis our thought as physical facts are on a realist
construal.
But with the other group-those who take (all or much of) reality to
be constitutively dependent on human cognition-the issue is not as
clear. For a number of years I tended to think, without having thought
hard enough about the matter, that alethic realism is committed to the
(constitutive) independence of (most of) reality from human thought.
After all, in most of our cognitive activity don't we mean to be talking
and thinking about things that are what they are independent of us and
our doings? And if so, alethic realism would hold that the truth values
of these statements and beliefs are determined by what is independent
of our cognition. Hence alethic realism is committed to the indepen
dent (of human cognition) reality of everything we think or talk about,
except, of course, human cognition itself.
After having thought harder, I still find a grain of truth in this. But
only a grain. The line of argument just sketched is defective for what
should have been an obvious reason. Whether most, or any, of what we
think and talk about is constitutively independent of human cognition
depends on precisely the metaphysical issues involved here. Kant and his
numerous progeny think that, aside from noumena about which little or
nothing can be said, everything we are cognitively concerned with is
what it is, at least in part, because of the structuring provided by the
human mind. In Putnam's updated, relativized Kantianism, anything we
have beliefs or make assertions about exists and is what it is only
"within" or "relative to" some "conceptual scheme" or "theoretical
scheme" of human devising.
Let's focus on a view like Putnam's, which is relativized Kantianism
without the noumena, since it is a more extreme version of the constitu
tive dependence of what there is on human cognitive activity. Why isn't
this view of Putnam's perfectly compatible with alethic realism? As we
shall see, he denies that it is, or at least makes claims that imply such a
ALETHIC REALISM AND METAPHYSICAL REALISM
denial. But I will, in turn, deny his denial. That discussion will be coming
up in Chapter 6. For now the point is only that there is a prima facie
case for the compatibility of alethic realism even with a view that holds
that everything is constitutively dependent on human cognition. For
doesn't this view, as much as the other forms of metaphysical antireal
ism, simply amount to a certain view as to the mode of reality of what
makes our beliefs and statements true, not as to what that truth consists
in? Isn't Putnam free to recognize that even though the statement that
that tree has no leaves is one that can be true (indeed, can only exist)
in a certain "conceptual scheme", still the statement is true if and only
if that tree does have no leaves (in that conceptual scheme)? And if so, he
is free to recognize that the necessary and sufficient conditions for its
truth follow the pattern laid down by alethic realism. That is not Put
nam's position on truth, but why couldn't it be? I can't see that his
relativized Kantian metaphysics prevents him from being an alethic real
ist. As I said, this matter will be thrashed out in Chapter 6. But mean
while this brief discussion will serve as an indication of why I will not
maintain that alethic realism implies that (most of) what determines the
truth values of propositions is (constitutively) independent of human
cognition.
But then what is the grain of truth in the idea that alethic realism has
such an implication? It goes like this. Alethic realism, together with an
obvious truth, does imply that what makes a particular assertion (belief)
of mine true or false is (almost always) constitutively independent of
that assertion (belief) itself and its features. Since alethic realism holds
that what it takes for an assertion to be true is determined by whether
the state of affairs that constitutes its propositional content actually ob
tains, it is rarely, if ever, the case that that statement itself-its being
issued, its epistemic status, its content-determines whether that propo
sitional content obtains. In order for that to be so, the content would
have to concern the statement itself, including its properties-its episte
mic status or whatever. In other words the statement would have to be
self-referential. And even where self-reference is coherent, we rarely
make a statement about that statement itself. If we can coherently say
something like "This statement is justified" (where the reference of 'this
statement' is to the statement being made), then, on alethic realism the
truth of the statement would depend on the epistemic status of that
statement itself, for that is what the statement is about. But such cases
are rare, at best. Almost invariably the truth value of a statement will
depend on something other than features of the statement, or of the
belief expressed by the statement, since its content concerns something
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
other than that statement. This being the case, if truth is determined as
alethic realism has it, then what determines the truth of almost any true
statement, that is, the fact that makes it true, is constitutively indepen
dent of that statement. Hence alethic realism, together with the obvious
fact that self-reference in statement or belief is rare at best, implies that
(almost always) what confers a truth value on a statement is something
independent of the cognitive-linguistic goings on that issued in that
statement, including any epistemic status of those goings on. To that ex
tent, alethic realism implies that what makes statements true or false is
independent of our thought and talk. This could be taken as a minimal
sense in which alethic realism carries with it a metaphysical realism con
cerning the status of truth makers. But that doesn't alter the main point
I have been making that alethic realism is neutral with respect to virtu
ally all the controversies over the metaphysical status of this or that do
main that go under the name of "realism vs. antirealism", including the
relatively global ones.
So we are left with only the thinnest sort of significant connection
between alethic realism and metaphysical realisms. Does that mean that
since our focus is on the former, we can (almost entirely) ignore the
latter? I'm afraid things are not that neat. The reason is that not all of
those who discuss these matters agree with me on the relations between
various modes of realism. More than one thinker, notably Putnam,
brings metaphysically antirealist considerations to bear in attacking
alethic realism. Hence, even though my policy is to stick to issues con
cerning alethic realism, I can ignore debates over certain forms of meta
physical realism only by ignoring some of the most important literature
on the subject. Hence there will be discussion of one or another form
of metaphysical realism in these pages, but only so far as that is relevant
to the debates over alethic realism.
CHAPTER 3
An Epistemological Objection
to Alethic Realism
I now begin my defense of alethic realism. Remember that it involves
two theses (1) the realist conception of truth is faithful to our standard
concept of propositional truth, and (2) that concept is important; it is
often very important to consider whether a given proposition is true in
that sense. In Chapter 1 I alleged that (1) is overwhelmingly obvious on
the face of it. That being the case, I consider it proper to omit any
positive argument for the position and confine myself to rebutting ob
jections to it, along with a criticism of alternatives. Where a position
seems that obvious, this procedure constitutes sufficient support. Chap
ters 2-6 are devoted to rebutting criticisms of (1) and Chapter 7 to my
critique of the most prominent alternative-an epistemic conception of
truth. (In Chapter 1, section xi, I criticized another kind of alternative,
"deflationary" views. ) Chapter 8 is devoted to thesis (2). There I do
seek to provide something that might be called positive support for the
thesis, as well as rebutting criticism.
i The Alleged Impossibility of Comparing Judgments and Facts
I begin the case for (1) by considering one of the commonest criti
cisms of a realist conception of truth-that on that conception it is im
possible to determine whether a given proposition is true. The present
chapter will be devoted to this criticism. It is most often directed at a
correspondence version of the realist conception, and I shall generally
be discussing it in those terms. But we will see that if it has any force
against that version, it tells equally against formulations that say nothing
about correspondence.
The criticism can be briefly formulated as follows. "On the realist
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
conception, in order to determine whether a proposition, statement,
belief, or judgment is true we would have to ascertain whether it corre
sponds to some fact in the appropriate way. But this is impossible. We
can never get 'outside' our thought (experience, discourse, beliefs. .. )
and scrutinize reality itself. All our cognition of the world is mediated
by our thoughts (experiences, statements, beliefs. .. ); hence we can
never get at the reality side of the relation so as to see how the two sides
match up. No matter what we do, we are pinned inside the circle of our
beliefs'. " Here are some typical formulations of this claim.
Each statement may be combined or compared with other statements,
e. g. , in order to draw conclusions from the combined statements, or
to see if they are compatible with each other or not. But statements
are never compared with a "reality", with "facts". None of those who
support a cleavage between statements and reality is able to give a
precise account of how a comparison between statements and facts
may possibly be accomplished, and how we may possibly ascertain the
structure of facts. (Hempel 1935, 50-51)
If meanings are given by objective truth conditions there is a question
how we can know that the conditions are satisfied, for this would ap
pear to require a confrontation between what we believe and reality;
and the idea of such a confrontation is absurd. (Davidson, "A Coher
ence Theory of Truth and Knowledge", in LePore, ed. , 1986, 307)
Justification is a matter of accommodating beliefs that are being ques
tioned to a body of accepted beliefs. Justification always terminates
with other beliefs and not with our confronting raw chunks of reality,
for that idea is incoherent. (Michael Williams, 1977, 112)1
A short way with this objection would be to say that even if its claims
are true they have no force against a realist theory of truth; for the the
ory aims only at saying what truth is not at providing a way of determin
ing what is true and what false. Thus Davidson, arguing against his
earlier self as quoted above:
This complaint against correspondence theories is not sound. One
reason it is not sound is that it depends on assuming that some form
1. I abstain from citing remarks like the following. "In whatever way a man might attempt
to justify his beliefs, whether to himself or to another, he must always appeal to some belief.
There is nothing other than one's beliefs to which one can appeal in the justification of belief.
There is no exit from the circle of one's beliefs" (Lehrer 1974, 187-88). For this thesis only has
to do with what is involved in the activity of justifying one's beliefs, i. e. , the activity of showing
them to be true or to have some positive epistemic status. It has no implications for what is
involved in any cognition of facts.
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM
of epistemic theory is correct; therefore, it would be a legitimate com
plaint only if truth were an epistemic concept. If this were the only
reason for rejecting correspondence theories, the realist could simply
reply that his position is untouched; he always maintained truth was
independent of our beliefs or our ability to learn the truth. (Davidson,
1990, 302-3)
Though Davidson's point is accurate enough, I do not think it takes
all the sting out of the "no way of telling" objection. Even though an
account of what truth is is not an account of how one determines what
is true, it would still be a heavy cross for the realist to bear if it should
turn out that on the realist account of truth, no one could ever deter
mine the truth value of any truth-value bearer. Certainly the realist con
ception of truth would be in a much happier state if that were not the
case. Hence I want to look into the question of whether the "no way of
telling" reproach is warranted. Why should anyone think that it is? In
the above quotes we have only the claim. We must see what arguments
are forthcoming.
ii Can We Cognize Anything Other Than Judgments?
The usual argument, only hinted at above, for the thesis that it is
impossible to "compare" beliefs (statements, judgments. .. ) with "real
ity", "facts", "the world", to see whether they "correspond", "fit", or
"match", runs as follows. There is no pure, unmediated apprehension
of reality, things, objects, or facts as they are in themselves apart from our
ways of conceptualizing them or "propositionalizing" them, apart from what we
judge them to be. Hence, in seeking to apprehend the other term of the
correspondence relation to check its relation to the truth-value-bearing
term, we wind up, in spite of ourselves, with another belief, judgment,
or statement, rather than with the extracognitive and extralinguistic
item which we were seeking.
It will be useful to have a live example of this argument before us. I
choose a presentation by Brand Blanshard in his chapter entitled "The
Tests of Truth" (1939, vol. 2). This passage is typical of such arguments
in that it concentrates on sense perception. To be sure, the thesis argued
for ranges over all cognition. But it is natural to think that if we are
directly aware of facts anywhere, it would be in our perceptual awareness
of the environment. Hence it is understandable that those who pro
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
pound the argument tend to concentrate on showing that facts are not
directly given to us even there. 2
In implementing this strategy Blanshard represents the advocate of a
correspondence test as saying:
When we turn to judgments where appeal to correspondence is possi
ble, we find that it is always resorted to, and that in such cases uncer
tainty is banished. Take the judgement, "That bird is a cardinal". If
you heard someone make that remark, how would you test it? You
would look and see. If there was a correspondence between what was
asserted and what you saw, you would call the judgement true; if not,
false. That is the way we actually assure ourselves of the truth of all
such judgements, and it is correspondence that assures us. (227-28)
Blanshard then responds as follows.
Now plausible as this argument is, it goes to pieces on inspection. It
assumes that, corresponding to our judgement, there is some solid
chunk of fact, directly presented to sense and beyond all question, to
which thought must adjust itself. And this "solid fact" is a fiction.
What the theory takes as fact and actually uses as such is another
judgement or set of judgements, and what provides the verification is
the coherence between the initial judgement and these.
Consider the cardinal. This is
brute fact, given directly to our senses and providing a solid reality to
which our thought is to correspond. But no bird is a mere sense
datum, or even a collection of sense data. Suppose that standing in
our place were an animal with all our senses, each developed to the
highest acuteness, but unable to attach meanings to sense data as we
do, or note likenesses, implications, and differences. Would such a
creature perceive what we perceive? Plainly not. To recognize a cardi
nal is a considerable intellectual achievement, for to do it one must
grasp, implicitly but none the less really, the concept of cardinal, and
this can only be done by a leap far out of the given into ideal classifi
cation. The most ignorant person among us who achieves such recog
nition could unpack from it a surprising wealth of contents. The idea
of living organisms, the thought of the bird kingdom and its outstand
ing characteristics, the notions of flight and a peculiar song and a
determinate colour-these and many other notions are so bound up
supposed to be fact, unadulterated
2. Introspective awareness of one's own conscious states would seem to be an even stronger
candidate for direct awareness. But because the knowledge gained there can hardly be supposed
to furnish an adequate foundation for knowledge generally, there is a tendency to concentrate
on sense perception, the output of which has a stronger claim to undergird our knowledge
generally.
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM 89
with the identification that our thought would lose its character with
the removal of any one of them. .. . They are elements in a theory, a
theory of no little complexity, which is based on sense data if you will,
but could not possibly consist of them.
Indeed, that the brute-fact view of perception is untrue is proved by
this alone, that perception may be mistaken; I may take the cardinal
for a robin. If the object were mere given fact, such a mistake would
be impossible. A fact is what it is, and cannot possibly be something
else. If it appears to be something else, the seeming must be in our
thought, and the perception that involves such seemings has advanced
beyond the given into the region of judgement. What makes the error
possible is a theory of ours. (228-29)
Before isolating the nub of this argument I will set aside certain gratu
itous and otherwise unfortunate elements in the passage.
(1) Blanshard identifies the thesis that the fact that the bird in question
is a cardinal is an "unadulterated brute fact, given directly to our senses
and providing a solid reality to which our thought is to correspond",
with the thesis that the bird is a sense datum or a collection of sense data.
But if 'sense datum' is used here in its usual philosophical sense to refer
to a nonphysical direct object of sensory awareness that carries the sensory proper
ties and functions as an intermediary in the perception of external physical ob
jects, then one who holds that facts are directly presented to one's
awareness in sense perception need not suppose that these are facts
about sense data. Direct realists, at least some who wear that label, hold
that external physical objects are directly presented to sensory aware
ness.
(2) Though Blanshard's main conclusion is that "What the theory
[correspondence theory] takes as fact is another judgement or set of
judgements", he neglects to specify what in this case are the judgments
that play this role. Presumably he has something like this in mind.
Whereas his opponents thinks that the belief that this bird is a cardinal
is based on a direct sensory presentation of certain properties of the
bird-its shape, coloration, etc. -that belief is really based on the beliefs
(judgments) that the bird has those properties, and the former is ade
quately based on the latter if and only if it coheres sufficiently with them.
(3) The claims that all perception is shot through with concepts, and
that it always involves judgments seem to be conflated in this presenta
tion. The two theses are clearly distinct. I might be using concepts in a
certain perception (e. g. , seeing something as a bear) without making
any judgment about the object or believing anything about it. At least,
if this is not a possibility, if all application of concepts to something
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
necessarily involves judging, we need an argument to that effect. It can't
be taken for granted. The details of Blanshard's argument are mostly
in terms of the involvement of concepts, but it is the inescapability of
judgments that Blanshard needs for his conclusion that instead of a
given fact what we find is simply another judgment. So I will take Blansh
ard to be arguing that perception necessarily involves judgments as well
as concepts.
With these bugs out of the way we can see that the nub of Blanshard's
argument conforms to the sketch I gave above of this sort of argument.
His argument can be summarized as follows:
(1) Perception essentially involves judgment. There is no pre- or sub
judgmental sense perception of anything.
(2) Therefore we are not directly presented with external facts (exter
nal to our thought) in sense perception.
(3) Therefore when we try to get a fact, a bit of non-judgmental reality,
before the mind in order to see whether it "corresponds" with a
judgment, we only succeed in getting at a different judgment.
The alleged comparison of judgment with reality turns out to be merely
a comparison of judgment with judgment. There is no escape from the
"circle of belief". Judgments, even perceptual judgments, can be sup
ported only by coherence in a system of judgments.
What are we to say of this argument? My difficulties begin with the first
step the necessity of judgments, or even of concepts, for perceptual
awareness. So far as I can see, there is such a phenomenon as the presen
tation or givenness of something to one's awareness. Speaking of vision
in particular and following Dretske (1969), I would say that all that is
required for my seeing something (my being aware of it in a distinctively
visual way) is that I "visually discriminate" it from its background, that
it stands out for me visually, and therefore looks a certain way to me (red,
round, lumpy, or whatever). It is arguable that this mere presentation
never exists alone, but is always accompanied by conceptualization (or
even by judgment, though this is a further step), but I am not convinced
by such arguments. No doubt, ordinary mature perception almost always
involves conceptualization and judgment-taking perceived objects to
be so-and-so. But it remains to be shown that there is no perception
without concepts and judgments. I would suppose that in certain re
duced states of visual consciousness-when just waking up, for exam
ple-and at the periphery of the visual field, one has pure presentation
without the intrusion of higher cognitive processes. And perhaps the
sensory experience of very young infants is barren of conceptualization.
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM
It is worthy of note in this connection that when Blanshard argues for
the concept and judgment ladenness of perception, he concentrates on
judgments and other propositionally structured aspects of perception,
rather than on the perceptual awareness of objects. Thus he writes. "To
recognize a cardinal is a considerable intellectual achievement, for to do
it one must grasp, implicitly but none the less really, the concept of cardi
nal, and this can only be done by a leap far out of the given into ideal
classification. " (Emphasis of "recognize" is mine. ) Sure. To recognize a
cardinal is to form the belief that it is a cardinal, and, like all beliefs, this
involves using concepts. But this does not show that to be visually aware
of a cardinal one must employ that concept. Indeed, it is obvious that
one need not employ the concept of a cardinal in order to see a cardi
nal. I can see a cardinal (i. e. , it can be that what I see is a cardinal), even
though I do not recognize it as such, and even though I totally lack any
such concept. Acknowledging in effect this last point, Blanshard writes:
"Indeed, that the brute-fact view of perception is untrue is proved by
this alone, that perception may be mistaken; I may take the cardinal for
a robin. If the object were mere given fact, such a mistake would be
impossible. " But in speaking of a "mistaken" perception, Blanshard
must be talking about the judgmental or doxastic element in percep
tion. The mere visual awareness of a cardinal cannot be mistaken; it is
not the sort of thing that can be correct or incorrect. It is the belief or
judgment that what I see is a robin that is susceptible of mistake. The
argument depends, at least in part, on focusing on the judgmental as
pect of perception and ignoring the presentational aspect.
But I don't want my objections to Blanshard's argument to hang, even
in part, on my reservations concerning step (1). There are two reasons
for this. First, to make the above contentions convincing I would have
to go into many issues concerning perception, a notoriously complex
topic; and there is no space for that in this book. Second, and more
importantly, the question of whether there is or can be subconceptual,
subjudgmental perceptual awareness of objects is not the central issue
here. Though Blanshard formulates his contentions as applying to per
ception überhaupt in an undiscriminating fashion (and here, too, he is
typical of partisans of proposition-laden perception), the real concern
is with the question whether there is any direct presentation of facts in
perception. It is this possibility that Blanshard is concerned to dismiss.
Hence he could accept my contentions concerning the perceptual
awareness of objects and still maintain that there is no judgmentally
unmediated awareness of facts in sense perception; and this would give
him what he needs for step (1) of the argument.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
To be sure, if I were discussing Blanshard's coherentist epistemology
rather than his views on truth, it would be a different story. For it is
certainly arguable, and I would be prepared to argue, that if a percep
tual object is sensorily presented to me as so-and-so (as looking, sounding,
smelling, etc. a certain way), that would give me a basis for judging that
the object is so-and-so. And that would be a justification for perceptual
judgments that is other than their coherence with other judgments. 3
But this is not the current topic. We are currently considering a certain
argument against the view that it is possible to determine the truth value
of a belief by determining whether there is a fact it "fits" or "matches".
More specifically, we are interested in whether sense perception pro
vides us with the facts we need for this purpose.
To return to this central concern, I will accept, for the sake of argu
ment, Blanshard's step (1), where the awareness in question is aware
ness of facts. Let's rewrite (1) as follows.
(1) Perception of facts essentially involves judgment. There is no pre
or subjudgmental awareness of facts in sense perception.
Even if the tree can be visually presented to me without my taking it to
be, for example, bare, still one cannot be perceptually aware of the fact
that the tree is bare without wielding the concepts of tree and bareness, in
deed, without entertaining the proposition that the tree is bare. Facts are not
simply given to us. The world is not presented to our passive awareness
already carved up into facts. We become aware of facts only by virtue of
imposing a propositional structure on what is perceptually given. We
have to think of what we are seeing as a tree's being bare before we can
be said to be aware of the fact that it is bare. *
By accepting (1) I am thereby committed to accepting (2) as well,
that we are not directly presented with external facts (external to our
thought) in sense perception. Indeed, if we construe 'direct presenta
tion' as presentation without the mediation of conceptualization and
judgment, (2) is just a rewrite of (1) And so, if I am to contest the
argument at all, it will have to be at the transition from (2) to (3)-that
when we try to get an external fact before the mind, all we succeed in getting is
another judgment. That I will now proceed to do.
Start with the point that even if sensory presentation of an object never
3. For a good presentation of this point see Van Cleve 1985.
4. Note that the only plausible examples of perception that does not involve concepts and/
or judgments, like those mentioned above, are definitely not cases in which we are concerned to
compare judgments with facts to see whether they match.
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM
occurs alone, it is still an element of normal perceptual cognition that is
different from any deployment of concepts or acts of judgment. This is
clear from the mere fact that actually seeing something is strikingly dif
ferent from merely applying concepts to it, having beliefs about it, or
making judgments about it. Try the following simple experiment. Close
your eyes, and think about the things and people around you. Remem
ber what they are like, form judgments about them, speculate about
where they will be tomorrow, wonder where they came from, and so on.
Then open your eyes, and look at them. There is a world of difference
in your cognitive consciousness before and after that eye-opening expe
rience. What is the difference? It is felicitously put by saying that when
you open your eyes these things and people are presented to your aware
ness, whereas before they were not. It is this element of perceptual pre
sentation that makes the difference. While your eyes were closed, you
were conceptualizing, judging, believing, and engaging in other cogni
tive acts with propositional content, just as you were after opening your
eyes. That isn't what makes the difference. Indeed, you could have been
using just the same concepts and making just the same judgments whether
you were seeing anything or not. It is the visual presentation that makes
the difference between seeing something and just thinking about it (re
membering it, wondering about it. .. ).
I must confess that in what I just said I employed my favorite way of
bringing out what makes the difference between mere judgment and
perceptual consciousness. On that view the extra element in perception
is a sensory presentation of (what are usually) external objects in the envi
ronment. But although I take it to be absolutely undeniable that there
is a crucial difference between merely thinking about an object and per
ceiving it, there are other accounts of what makes the difference, what
is in the latter and not in the former. And on some of those accounts,
unlike the "theory of appearing" account I favor, that additional ele
ment is itself propositionally structured. 5 So far as I can see, my objec
tion to Blanshard's step (3) will go through just as well on any (not
maximally implausible) view as to what makes perceiving an object dif
ferent from just thinking about it, so long as the difference is recog
nized. I will continue to present my criticism in terms of the theory of
appearing, with the tacit understanding that it could be carried through
on other views that recognize something in perceptual cognition that is
nonjudgmental in character.
Thus even if Blanshard is right in supposing that there is no sensory
5. For such views see, e. g. , Searle 1983.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
consciousness of a fact without judgment, that doesn't show that when I
perceive that the bird is a cardinal I am merely judging it to be a cardinal.
For the simple experiment just mentioned shows that that even if judg
ment is always involved in perception it is never the whole story; it isn't
what makes perceptual cognition distinctively perceptual. Even if my
perceptual awareness that there is a robin on that branch involves the judg
ment that there is a robin on that branch, it involves more, and must involve
more if it is to be a perceptual cognition of the fact in question and
not a mere judgment that the fact obtains. Therefore, the concept and
judgment ladenness of perception is radically insufficient to show that
in perception we do not (much less cannot) succeed in gaining knowl
edge of a fact that is something other than a judgment (belief, state
ment, proposition) and that is something with which a judgment can be
compared for the assessment of its truth value. Why can't the whole
perceptual package-sensory consciousness structured by conceptual
propositional-judgmental activity-be a way of cognizing external facts?
It certainly seems that this is what is going on in perception, and the
points Blanshard and other thinkers adduce fail to show otherwise. It is
because the judgment informs and structures a visual presentation that I
can be said, in this perception, to be aware of the extrajudgmental fact
that a robin is on the branch, as well as judging this to be the case.
And so even if all perceptual awareness of facts involves judgment, it
by no means follows that all we are aware of in such perception is a
judgment. This is no better than arguing from the fact that all eating
involves chewing and swallowing to the conclusion that the only things
I can eat is my teeth, throat, and esophagus. Indeed, it doesn't even
follow from the judgmental nature of perception that we are perceptually
aware of judgments at all They may function as part of what enables us to
be perceptually aware of something, rather than themselves functioning
as objects of perception. The way is left open for perception to involve
an awareness of facts that is different from, or at least not exhaustively
comprised of, an awareness of our judgments.
Thus even if perception and other relatively "direct" modes of aware
ness of facts, such as introspection, always involve judgment, it by no
means follows that when I perceive things in the physical environment,
or when I am introspectively aware of my own conscious states, I am not
aware of facts that make my judgments true or false. Hence it does not
follow that I cannot inspect, examine, and scrutinize these facts to deter
mine whether they are such as a given judgment takes them to be.
At the beginning of this chapter I quoted Hempel as denying the
possibility of a comparison of statements with facts. Here is a wonderfully
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM
vigorous defense of this possibility by Moritz Schlick. It is occurs in a
response by Schlick to the essay of Hempel's from which that quotation
was taken.
I have been accused of maintaining that statements can be com
pared with facts. I plead guilty. I have maintained this. But I protest
against my punishment: I refuse to sit in the seat of the metaphysi
cians. I have often compared propositions to facts; so I had no reason
to say that it couldn't be done. I found, for instance, in my Baedeker
the statement: "This cathedral has two spires. " I was able to compare
it with "reality" by looking at the cathedral, and this comparison con
vinced me that Baedeker's assertion was true. .. .
Perhaps you say: "But if we analyze the process of verification of
Baedeker's assertion we shall find that it amounts to a comparison of
propositions. " I answer: I don't know; it will depend on what you
mean by "analysis'. But whatever the result of your analysis may be, at
any rate we can distinguish between cases in which a written, printed
or spoken sentence is compared with some other written, printed or
spoken sentence, and cases like our example, where a sentence is com
pared with the thing of which it speaks. And it is this latter case which
I took the liberty of describing as a "comparison of a proposition with
a fact. "
You insist that a statement cannot or must not be compared to any
thing but statements. But why? It is my humble opinion that we can
compare anything to anything if we choose. Do you believe that prop
ositions and facts are too far removed from each other? Too different?
Is it a mysterious property of propositions that they cannot be com
pared with anything else? That would seem to be a rather mystical
view. .. .
Is it true that we are unable "to give a precise account of how a
comparison between statements and facts may possibly be accom
plished and how we may possibly ascertain the structure of facts"? I
think it is not true. Or was the description faulty which I gave of such
a comparison a little while ago? It consisted of the simplest empirical
prescription of a kind which we carry out many times almost every day.
(Schlick, in Macdonald 1954, 232-35)
In this passage Schlick does not respond to the argument Blanshard and
others give in support of Hempel's claim. But I find his remarks a vivid
example of the way in which it seems for all the world as if we really do
6. We are here in the heyday of logical positivism when the accusation of being a metaphysi
cian was a capital charge.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
have "external" facts (facts that are not aspects of our thought) before
compare with other items. the mind in sense perception as items we can
At the beginning of section i I suggested that though the argument
under consideration is directed specifically at a correspondence theory
of truth, we can see that if it had any merit at all it would tell equally
against any form of a realist account of truth, including the most mini
mal form that we have in XIII and XIV For what the argument is de
signed to show is that it is impossible to "get at" the other side of the
supposed correspondence relationship so as to see whether there is a
fact to which the judgment (belief) corresponds; the only things to
which we have cognitive access are judgments (beliefs). But if that is so,
it is equally impossible to determine whether the condition for the truth
of the belief that sugar is sweet that is set out in the T-statement-'The
belief that sugar is sweet is true if and only if sugar is sweet'-is satisfied.
If we cannot get beyond our judgments to cognize anything else, we
cannot apprehend the fact that sugar is sweet. And that means we can
not tell whether the belief that sugar is sweet is true by determining that
sugar is sweet. There is no need to get into correspondence talk to set
up a realist account of truth that would make it impossible to tell what
is true if Blanshard's argument were cogent.
In what I just said I was, of course, assuming that knowing that sugar
is sweet does not amount to knowing anything about judgments, whether
they cohere with each other in certain ways or anything else. And this
will be contested by the likes of Bradley and Blanshard. They take it to
be a fundamental mistake to suppose that thought is (to a large extent)
"about" a reality that is other than thought. The "reality" to which
thought refers is simply thought itself in its ideal completion. On this
view the fact that sugar is sweet is a fact about the shape a fragment of
thought will take when thought attains an ideally complete and coher
ent form. Thus if we accept this kind of absolute idealism, we can hold
that we never cognize anything other than judgments and the like, while
hanging on to the T-schema account of the concept of truth. So what my
criticism shows is that it is only at the price of this kind of metaphysical
commitment that the argument we have been discussing would fail to
tell against a minimalist realism about truth.
There are, of course, other arguments that are directed specifically
against correspondence theories of truth, and some of these have episte
mological implications. It has often been argued, against a theory of
propositional truth that makes it consist in a structural isomorphism
7. See Bradley 1914, chaps. 5, 11; Blanshard 1939, chap. 26.
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM
between proposition and truth-making fact, that we cannot find extralin
guistic, extramental correlates for all propositional constituents-not,
for example, for the copula or quantifiers. And if the truth of a proposi
tion requires such correlates in the world, it would follow that on this
view it is impossible for us to determine the truth values of propositions.
This argument definitely does not tell against the T-schema generated
versions of my view or against the minimalist correspondence account
(XVII). But the argument I have been criticizing is not of this sort. It
does not trade on distinctive features of specific forms of correspon
dence theory. It aims to establish the more general point that it is impos
sible for us to get nonmental, nonlinguistic facts into our cognitive
sights so as to use them to assess the truth value of propositions, judg
ments (beliefs), and statements. And this claim is incompatible with any
sort of realist account of truth. I have limited the discussion to this argu
ment because I have no interest in defending forms of correspondence
theory that give rise to other arguments like the one just mentioned.
iii Counterattack by Blanshard
Blanshard might reply to the above as follows. "Even if what you say
is correct, it fails to show that in perception we have direct, unmediated
awareness of external facts. Since, as you concede for the sake of argu
ment, all perception of facts involves judgments, our apprehension of
those facts is achieved through those judgments. It is not a matter of our
simply being confronted by the fact. It is not a matter of the fact's being
directly presented to our awareness, with our role confined to receiving
and registering what has been given to us. No, we make a more active
contribution than that. Our judgmental, interpretive activity is crucially
involved, shaping and molding what it is we come perceptually to know,
shaping it in terms of the concepts we bring to the experience. We still
don't have what the correspondence theorist needs for his project-a
purely external fact that is what it is whatever our conceptual schemata,
and which can therefore lay claim to be an independent standard
against which our judgments can be tested for truth value. "
By way of counterresponse, my first point is that I do not plead guilty
to having conceded all that I am imagining Blanshard to have just said.
In particular, I have not conceded that our conceptual-judgmental activ
ity plays an essential role in determining (some of the content) of the
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
facts we come to know perceptually. But let that pass. In this Blanshar
dian response we have reached what I take to be the heart of the argu
ment we have been considering. For the argument is based on the
assumption that a correspondence theory, or other realist account of
truth, requires a pure, unmediated presentation of facts to our aware
ness if it is to be viable. And that is an assumption I will now proceed to
challenge. Why should we suppose that I must be directly confronted with
a certain fact, for example, that there is a lamp on my desk, in order to use
that fact to test the belief that there is a lamp on my desk for truth value?
What difference does it make how I come to know it, provided only that
I do know it? The essential thing is that I come into (cognitive) posses
sion of this fact, add it to the store of things I know. So long as that
condition is satisfied I am in a position to use it as a check on my beliefs
about what is on my desk, in accordance with a realist conception of
truth. Any supposition to the contrary would appear to reflect a confu
sion between what I know and how I come to know it. So long as I know that
there is a lamp on my desk, whether I learn it perceptually as that is
construed by Blanshard, or I learn it by direct sensory presentation in
terms of the "theory of appearing", or I learn it from reliable testimony,
or I infer it from my knowledge that the lamp is somewhere in the house
and it is not anywhere else in the house, or. .. , I will be in a position
to assess my belief that there is a lamp on my desk for realist truth. I
suspect that one source of the thesis I am criticizing is an attachment to
picture thinking. There is a powerful tendency to picture realist truth in
terms of an immediate confrontation with facts that are what they are in
complete independence of the way we think of them. The indepen
dence part of this notion is certainly the heart of a familiar form of
metaphysical realism, a position I argued in Chapter 2 to be independent
of alethic realism. 10 But the idea that we can test a statement for realist
truth value by reference to whether what it says to be the case is the case
only if we enjoy an unmediated cognitive access to the relevant range of
fact will not survive careful examination. And the picture thinking that
is behind this, according to my diagnosis, is not worthy of serious philo
sophical thinking.
This is the point at which to note another feature of Blanshard's argu
8. In Chapter 6 I will argue that Putnam's position of "conceptual relativity", which does
hold that our conceptual-theoretical activity makes an essential contribution to what it is we
come to know, is itself compatible with alethic realism.
9. This is a widely shared view among critics of realism. A recent influential example is Rorty
1979.
made in n. 8 becomes relevant. 10. Once more the point
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM
ment, again one that is widely shared by thinkers of his persuasion. He
assumes that anything that would count as an apprehension of "exter
nal" fact-an awareness of extracognitive, extralinguistic reality-would
have to be infallible, not susceptible of error. We found Blanshard saying
"that the brute-fact view of perception is untrue is proved by this alone,
that perception may be mistaken". He takes his realist opponent to be
committed to a quest for a mistake-proof mode of cognition. And Hem
pel, in the essay from which I quoted earlier, writes: "The third and last
phase of the logical evolution here considered [away from a correspon
dence theory of truth] may be characterized as the process of eliminat
ing" the idea that there are "basic propositions which are conceived to
be ultimate and not to admit of any doubt". (1935, 53). In other words,
in order to hold a correspondence theory of truth one must take there
to be indubitable statements. In the same essay he makes it clear that he
takes the correspondence theory to be incompatible with supposing that
"basic statements" are subject to confirmation or disconfirmation by
considerations outside themselves. Thus Blanshard and Hempel be
tween them saddle the correspondence theory with the requirement
that our cognition enjoys the three basic "epistemic immunities"
infallibility, indubitability, and incorrigibility. 11
Again, Otto Neurath in an essay, "Protocol Statements" (Ayer 1959),
that is often taken to attack the notion of a thought-reality comparison
(Davidson, for example, so takes it in 1990, 302), in fact says nothing
that is explicitly on that point. Instead the whole burden of his argument
is that "protocol statements" (i. e. , reports of observation) cannot be
taken to be incorrigible, or to "stand in no need of verification", cannot
be regarded as acceptable just by virtue of the fact that they transcribe
what has been given in immediate experience. And if one looks at F. H.
Bradley's diatribes against a correspondence theory of truth (1914,
chap. 7), they consist almost entirely of arguments that judgments of
perception and memory are all fallible. Moreover, Schlick, on the other
side of the debate, seems to go along with the assumption that a compar
ison of judgment and fact requires points in our experience where we
apprehend facts in such a way that we cannot be mistaken, or at least in
such a way that nothing could show that we are mistaken. At least, he
assigns that epistemic status to the beliefs that record perceptions he
supposes to give him the requisite access to the facts.
11. I term these 'epistemic immunities' because they constitute immunity to one or another
epistemically undesirable condition-mistake, doubt, and being refuted. For an extended treat
ment of all three see my "Self-Warrant: A Neglected Form of Privileged Access" in Alston 1989.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
If all the scientists in the world told me that under certain experimen
tal conditions I must see three black spots, and if under those condi
tions I saw only one spot, no power in the universe could induce me
to think that the statement "there is now only one black spot in the
field of vision" is false. (Macdonald 1954, 237)
The view that a correspondence theory of truth requires an assump
tion of infallibility, indubitability, and/or incorrigibility, is intimately
connected with the view we have seen to be basic to the argument under
discussion, the view that the correspondence theory requires a cognitive
access to the world of fact beyond our thought and language that in
volves a "pure givenness" of fact, unmediated by any conceptualization,
judgment, or "taking" on our part. The connection can be seen as fol
lows. It is easy to suppose that such epistemic immunities are available
only where some fact is directly presented to our awareness, in such a
way that there are no mediating judgments, preconceptions, or back
ground beliefs to introduce the possibility of error. If we simply passively
receive the fact itself, what could go wrong? And so if we can show that
there is no such "immaculate reception" of external fact, we have
thereby shown that none of our cognitions enjoy these immunities from
error, correction, or doubt.
I see no more merit in supposing that we can compare fact and propo
sition only if our cognition of the fact enjoys these epistemic immunities,
than I do in the closely linked requirement of direct, unmediated appre
hension of fact. Why should we suppose that we can get external facts
into our cognitive sights in such a way as to appeal to them in determin
ing the truth value of judgments, only if our cognition of those facts is
so direct as to be infallible, incorrigible, and indubitable? Why should a
fact have to be presented to us in a foolproof way in order for us to
ascertain that the fact obtains? All that is required for us to "have" the
fact that sugar is sweet (have it before the mind, have it as something we
can examine) is that we know in some way or other that the fact obtains,
that sugar is sweet. 12 To be sure, here as elsewhere, it would be a good
12. Some may feel that the requirement of knowledge is too stringent. Why wouldn't justified
belief that p be sufficient to give us the fact that p to scrutinize in the way my opponents are
declaring to be impossible? That wouldn't suffice to do the job just because it is possible for
justified belief to be false. And if I have a false justified belief that p there is no fact that p as a
possible object of my scrutiny. We could, of course, consider the idea that true justified belief
would give us what we need. But then it would seem that the considerations that have led Gettier
and others to deny that this sufficient for knowledge would also tell against the idea that it is
sufficient to do the job we are discussing. Think of a Gettier case like that of Smith, who believes
falsely but justifiably that Jones will get the job and that Jones has ten coins in his pocket, and
then infers validly that whoever will get the job has ten coins in his pocket. This latter belief is
AN EPISTEMOLOGICAL OBJECTION TO ALETHIC REALISM
thing to know what we know in a way that is minimally, if at all, subject
to mistake by reason of distortion from a medium of transmission. But
if we take this to be a requirement for all knowledge, we fall back into
the "quest for certainty", into exaggerated requirements for knowledge
of a Cartesian or Platonic sort that we are supposed to have gotten be
yond by now. Using commonly accepted, workaday standards for knowl
edge, it is only an extreme skeptic who doubts that we know many things
that go beyond our speech acts, beliefs, and their propositional con
tents. And that being the case, we are well supplied with facts that we
can examine to determine whether: any of them render this or that prop
ositional attitude or assertion true. It doesn't matter how we came by
this knowledge, or what credentials it exhibits, provided its credentials
qualify it as genuine knowledge. We may have attained the knowledge
by some relatively direct route, such as introspection or perception, or
by some more indirect route, like induction, argument to the best expla
nation, or taking Y ( a reliable sign of Z) to indicate that Z obtains. It
doesn't matter. So long as we know that Z obtains, that is enough to give
us a sufficient condition for the truth of Z, on a realist conception of
truth. No doubt, we do not have as much knowledge of objective fact as
we would like. But we are not as bereft of it as the likes of Blanshard
would have us believe.
Once we appreciate the point that any knowledge of fact will serve the
realist's purposes, we can see that there is no need to place such empha
sis on relatively direct sources of knowledge like perception and intro
spection in considering whether facts can be appealed to in determining
the truth value of judgments. Since any knowledge of objective fact will
serve the correspondence theorist's, or other realist's, turn, the discus
sion may as well be directed on high-level scientific theories as on sight
ings of cardinals. If we really do know that nothing can move faster than
the speed of light, then that suffices for grounding a judgment that the
proposition that nothing car move faster than the speed of light is true,
as surely as my perceptual knowledge that there is a lamp on my desk
grounds the judgment that the proposition that there is a lamp on my
true and justified, even though Jones will not get the job, because Smith, unbeknownst to him
self, will get the job and also has ten coins in his pocket. Here I think the right thing to do is to
deny that Smith is in a position to "scrutinize" the fact that whoever will get the job has ten
coins in his pocket, even if we agree that his belief in this is true and justified. Since what justifies
his belief lacks the right kind of connection with the fact that makes the belief true, we should,
I think, deny that Jones has cognitive access to that fact. But I am not confident about this. In
any event, working with the stronger requirement of knowledge will be sufficient to make the
point I am concerned to make, viz. , that no particular kind of knowledge, and, more specifically,
no ideally direct infallible cognition, is required to enable us to determine whether a realist
sufficient condition of truth is satisfied.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
desk is true. It is only the misguided supposition that direct, unmediated
knowledge is required to make the realist's project go that leads to an
undue preoccupation with perception and introspection.
The above discussion also enables us to see that it is only an extreme
epistemological skepticism that will get Blanshard & Co. the desired
conclusion. If any knowledge whatever will put the realist into a position
to look at a fact and thereby determine whether a given judgment is true
or false, it is only if no such knowledge is forthcoming that his project is
doomed. So long as we have some knowledge of facts about which we
make judgments, the realist way of determining truth value is viable.
Thus, once we see the arbitrariness of the demand for unmediated ap
prehension, we see that Blanshard would have to embrace an extreme
and unpalatable skepticism in order to support his strictures on a realist
conception of truth. 18
13. In Chapter 7, where I discuss and criticize at length an epistemic conception of truth, I
compare the prospects of determining truth values on that conception with the prospects on a
realist conception. The palm is awarded to the latter.
CHAPTER 4
Dummett's Verificationist Alternative
to Alethic Realism
i Forms of Verificationism
At least since the early years of this century verificationism has been
prominent in debates over realism. Verificationism is always concerned
with linguistic meaning. Verificationist semantic doctrines differ along
several dimensions. First and most fundamentally, there is the distinc
tion between a verificationist criterion of meaningfulness, according to
which a necessary condition for the (cognitive, factual) meaningfulness
of a sentence is that there be some way of verifying or falsifying it, and a
verificationist theory of meaning, according to which the meaning of a
sentence consists of the "method of its verification (falsification)" or,
alternatively, consists in the conditions under which the sentence would
be verified or falsified. 1 Crosscutting this distinction is the distinction
between conclusive verification (falsification), on the one hand, and
some degree of confirmation (disconfirmation) on the other. My examples
of a criterion and of a theory were stated in terms of verification (falsifi
cation), but they could be reformulated in terms of confirmation (dis
confirmation). There are other important distinctions as well. Some
verificationists claim to be depicting the ordinary, or at least some exist
ing, conception of meaningfulness or meaning; while others put the
position forward as a proposal for how these notions should be construed.
In this chapter I will be thinking of verificationist theses in the former
way. Again, there are different ways of explicating the notions of cognitive
or factual meaning for which the criterion or theory is claimed to hold.
For present purposes we can think of "factual" meaning as the kind of
1. Each of the forms of verificationism I am distinguishing is itself susceptible of various
formulations. Except for the forms I will be discussing in detail I will give, in each case, only a
representative formulation.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
meaning a sentence must have to be usable to make statements that
have truth values.
Before proceeding further I will clean up, in a certain respect, the
usual way of talking about verificationism, of which the previous para
graph is a sample. As a thesis about meaning, verificationism is con
cerned with sentences, the linguistic bearers of meaning on which it
concentrates. But it follows from the reasons I gave in Chapter 1 for
denying that sentences are bearers of truth value that sentences are not
subjects to verification or falsification, confirmation or disconfirmation. For
to verify (falsify) X is to show that X is true (false). And to confirm (dis
confirm) X is to show that X is probably true (false). Hence we cannot
really hold, as the usual formulations of verificationism seem to suppose,
that it is the same entities that are capable of possessing a certain kind of
meaning and are subject to verification (falsification) and confirmation
(disconfirmation). So what are we to do? Fortunately, a simple solution
is ready to hand. When speaking of verification, etc. , we can replace the
sentence in question with a statement that an utterance of that sentence
(in a certain context, where that qualification is needed) would be used
to make if used correctly. Thus a sanitized formulation of the verifica
tionist criterion of factual meaningfulness would go like this.
(I) A sentence has a factual meaning if and only if a statement made by
a correct utterance of it can be verified or falsified (confirmed or
disconfirmed).
With this understanding of how to build a bridge from sentence talk to
statement talk, I will freely oscillate between them in the sequel.
Though 'verification' ranges over any way of determining the truth
value of a statement, the concern of most verificationists in this century
has been with empirical verification, which we can think of as verification
by observation or by observational data. (This restriction is often not
made explicit. ) However this chapter will focus on a verificationist posi
tion that is not so restricted-that of Michael Dummett, who comes to
his version from the philosophy of mathematics. Thus we will be think
ing of verificationism in a wider way than is customary.
In terms of the first distinction, my focus will be on verificationist
theories of meaning. There is not even a prima facie case for the incom
patibility of a verificationist criterion of factual meaning and a realist con
ception of truth. Why should we suppose that the restriction of
statemental-truth bearers to those that are susceptible of verification
(confirmation) runs into any conflict with the T-schema? Couldn't
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
gold's being malleable be the necessary and sufficient condition for the
truth of the statement that gold is malleable, even if that statement
wouldn't be a candidate for a truth value unless it were susceptible of
verification (falsification) or confirmation (disconfirmation)? I can
think of no argument for incompatibility here that is even remotely
plausible. Therefore I shall confine my attention to the thesis that a
verificationist theory of factual meaning is incompatible with a realist con
ception of truth.
ii Dummett's Verificationist Semantics
This chapter will be almost entirely devoted to the most prominent
avowedly antirealist verificationist on the contemporary scene-Michael
Dummett. Dummett is not the easiest philosopher to interpret, and I
will unavoidably be enmeshed to some extent in exegetical questions. It
is not my aim, however, to deal with the whole of Dummett's philosophy
or even the whole of his semantic theory. I am concerned only with
those aspects of it that might seem to have a bearing on alethic realism.
And that does simplify life somewhat.
I will begin with a summary statement, and then get into the some
times prickly details. Dummett's view, in a word, is that the meaning of
sentences is given, not by truth conditions as often (realistically) under
stood, but by verification conditions. "According to a theory of meaning
in terms of verification, the content of an assertion is that the statement
asserted has been, or is capable of being, verified" (1976, 117). This is
in terms of the "content of an assertion"; and we have seen in Chapter
1 that sentence meaning does not, in general, suffice to determine that.
Dummett, however, glosses over this point in presenting his views; he
simply announces that he will neglect the frequent need for contextual
support to turn the utterance of a sentence with a certain meaning into
a definite assertion capable of truth value (1991, 30). Since this neglect
has no bearing on the issues with which I am concerned here, I shall go
along with him in this fiction.
Dummett begins with the idea that the truth conditions of sentences
are crucial for their meaning, an idea found in different forms in various
thinkers. Dummett pays most attention to Frege and Davidson, espe
cially the former. He pays passing attention to the question of what to
do about interrogatives, imperatives, and other sentences not standardly
usable for making assertions that have truth values (1976, 73; 1991,
114-21), but he could hardly be thought to have dealt satisfactorily with
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
the problem. Again I will pass this by and take his account to deal only
with assertoric sentences. The simplest form of a truth-conditional se
mantics would be this: The meaning of a sentence is given by the conditions
that are necessary and sufficient for its truth.
Dummett then lays down certain constraints on a theory of meaning,
constraints that he takes to rule out an unqualified identification of
meaning with truth conditions. (A) The theory must show how the un
derstanding of a sentence is built up from the understanding of its
meaningful parts (1976, 69; 1991, chap. 10). (B) The theory cannot be
completely holistic (1975, 121, 127ff. ; 1991, chap. 10). That is, it must
not turn out that the meaning of every sentence presupposes the whole
language. These two constraints will play no role in this discussion. I will
be concentrating on what follows.
(C) The theory must explain in what the understanding of the lan
guage consists (1973, 92; 1975, 99-101; 1991, 108). If we are working
with truth conditions, we must not only lay down those conditions but
also show how one determines whether those conditions hold (1975,
118; 1991, 306-17). Thus truth conditions that constitute the meaning
of some sentence we can understand must not be beyond human powers
to grasp (1975, 133ff. ). Dummett takes this to imply that a specification
of what manifests the knowledge of truth conditions is essential (1991,
149, 313-14). Not all knowledge of the truth conditions of a sentence
can consist in the ability to formulate those conditions, or else we are
faced with an infinite regress in which the sentences used to formulate
the truth conditions of a given sentence require yet other sentences to
be used to formulate their truth conditions, .. . (1991, 150, 315). In at
least some cases, the knowledge of the truth conditions of a sentence
must consist in a practical ability-the ability to recognize that those
conditions hold if and when they do.
Because of this third constraint we cannot rest content with an ac
count of sentence meaning in terms of truth conditions that are inde
pendent of our means of ascertaining whether they hold (1973, 468,
470, 586; 1975, 101). To understand what it is for a sentence to be true
(and hence to understand what it means) is to understand what it would
be to recognize it as true.
On this account, an understanding of a sentence consists in a capacity
to recognize whatever is counted as verifying it, i. e. , as conclusively
establishing it as true. (1976, 110-111)
A verificationist theory represents an understanding of a sentence as
consisting in a knowledge of what counts as conclusive evidence for
its truth. (1976, 132; see also 1976, 136; 1978, 155; 1991, 317)
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
And since, to spell out the the third constraint a bit further, an account
of what it is to understand a sentence tells us what it is for a sentence to
have a certain meaning, the meaning of a sentence is given by "verifica
tion conditions", conditions such that we can determine the truth of
the sentence by ascertaining that those conditions hold, rather than by
"realist"-truth conditions, that is, truth conditions that are specified
without any attention as to how, if at all, we can tell whether they hold.
[T]he sense of a sentence is thought of as being fixed by determining,
not the conditions under which it is to be true, as Frege thought, but
the conditions under which we are able to recognize it as true. (1973,
586)
[T]he sense which we confer on the sentences of our language can be
related only to the means of recognition of truth-value which we actu
ally possess. (1973, 467)
In arguing from the conditions of understanding a sentence to conclu
sions about what it is for a sentence to have a certain meaning, Dummett
assumes that understanding is the clue to meaning. And this is highly
plausible. After all, to understand a sentence is to grasp its meaning.
Moreover, it is crucial that the meaning(s) of a sentence is something
that is accessible to speakers of the language. Sentence meaning, and
more generally semantic and linguistic facts of all kinds, are not the sort
of thing that might be totally unknowable by human beings with our
present limitations. It is in this way unlike, say, the presence or absence
of life elsewhere in the universe, which might conceivably remain for
ever unknown to us. For language is something that exists only by virtue
of the use we make of it for communication and for the articulation of
thought. And that use requires a grasp of the meanings of linguistic
units. A sentence the meaning of which speakers of a language could
not possibly grasp would be a sentence that is unusable for thought and
discourse, and hence could not figure as part of a language. Hence it is
an eminently reasonable constraint on theories of meaning that they
must depict meaning in such a way that it is possible for human beings
to grasp those meanings, that is, to understand and use the linguistic
items whose meanings they are.
Controversy enters when Dummett takes the further, verificationist
2. We have to qualify this argument to allow for sentences that are too complex for humans
to grasp. If sentencehood is defined recursively, there is, in principle, no limit to the length and
complexity of sentences in the language. Let the above argument be restricted to those sen
tences of the language that are simple enough to be usable by human beings.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
step of maintaining that one can understand (know) what the truth con
ditions are for a sentence are only if one is able, in practice, to deter
mine whether those conditions are satisfied. To understand a sentence
is to be able to recognize what verifies it. What is the rationale for this
further step? So far as I am aware, Dummett's reasons are two. (1) One
could learn the meaning of a sentence only by learning how to tell
whether it is true (1973, 467-68, 515). This could happen either by
learning how to formulate truth conditions in sentences one already
understands (and hence that are such that one already knows how to
tell whether they are true), or by acquiring an unformulated, practical
ability to recognize verifying conditions when and if they occur. But if I
am just presented with a statement of truth conditions for a sentence, S,
and I lack any capacity to determine whether those conditions hold,
how does that help to me to understand S, to use it to communicate my
thoughts to others, or to understand what someone is communicating
to me by uttering S? All I have learned to do is to associate different
forms of words; and that does not amount to understanding what any of
them mean. (2) One could manifest one's understanding of a sentence
only by showing that one recognized a verifying or falsifying condition,
or by showing in some other way that one has the capacity to do so
(1973, 467; 1976, 117; 1991, 149).
I will cast doubt on the capacity of these arguments to establish Dum
mett's position when I get to the critical portion of my remarks. For now
I am trying to set out Dummett's position as clearly and completely as
possible. The next point is that the verification (falsification) of which
Dummett speaks has to be conclusive. (In addition to the last set of
references, see 1975, 123; 1976, 132. ) Dummett does not explain how
he thinks of conclusiveness. He leaves it unclear whether he means to
be presupposing very high standards such that we have not conclusively
verified a statement unless we have presented grounds (evidence,
reasons. .. ) that are incompatible with its falsity, or unless we have
presented grounds strong enough to exclude any reasonable doubt, or
unless we have established it beyond any possibility of its being refuted
or (reasonably) abandoned, or. .. .. Perhaps he is thinking in terms of
more modest, everyday standards of conclusive verification, in which I
can claim to have conclusively established that the water on the floor of
my basement came from the hot water heater, even though my grounds
for claiming this do not come up to any of the standards just mentioned.
In any event, Dummett does place a great deal of emphasis on the dis
tinction between conclusive and "defeasible" verification (confirma
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM 109
tion, justification. .. ), and roundly asserts that an ability to recognize
the former is required for understanding a sentence.
This urgently raises the question of the status of sentences that fail this
test. Let's say that theoretical principles in science, large scale historical
accounts of the origin and nature of past social forms such as feudalism,
and religious affirmations are not susceptible of conclusive verification.
No one has the ability to recognize something as a conclusive verifica
tion of any such statement. Are we to say that no one understands them?
Surely they are not meaningless gobbledygook, like "Rah-nem-zbk-ash".
Perhaps they have some kind of meaning other than "factual meaning",
a kind that will have to be delineated in some other way. The closest
thing I have found to an answer to this question in Dummett is that a
verificationist theory of meaning for such statements has to be given in
terms of grounds that fall short of conclusiveness. Here is a passage from
the preface to Truth and Other Enigmas (1978).
As Putnam has recently pointed out [see "Realism and Reason" in
Putnam (1978)], it is misleading to concentrate too heavily, as I have
usually done, on a form of antirealist theory of meaning in which the
meaning of a statement is given in terms of what conclusively verifies
it; often such conclusive verification is not to be had. In "Realism"
[an essay in Dummett (1978)] it is acknowledged that there may be
no such thing as a conclusive verification, and that, in such a case, an
anti-realist theory of meaning must be given in terms of grounds of
assertion that fall short of being conclusive. (xxxviii)
In the essay "Realism" Dummett writes: "For him [the anti-realist] the
meaning of a statement is intrinsically connected with that which we
count as evidence for or against the statement; and there is nothing to
prevent a statement's being so used that we do not treat anything as
conclusively verifying it" (1978, 162).
Thus in the development of his thought Dummett recapitulates the
movement of the Vienna Circle from requiring conclusive verifiability
for factual meaningfulness to requiring merely "confirmability", that is,
the possibility of finding considerations that count for or against the
statement in question. 3 Dummett has not, to my knowledge, done any
thing to develop a verificationist semantics for non-conclusively verifi
able sentences. Indeed, as indicated by the fact that he has little to say
3. Although Dummett thus feels that the difference between conclusively verifiable and
non-conclusively verifiable sentences is of no great significance for the development of a verifi
cationist theory of meaning, he does very definitely think, as we shall see, that this difference is
crucial for truth-value attributions.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
about how he conceives of conclusive verification, he has done little to
develop verificationist semantics of any sort. He seems not to be inter
ested in working out the details, with all the attention to epistemological
issues that this would require. He is much more occupied with logical
issues. In more than one passage Dummett frankly admits that he has
not properly worked out the theory of meaning that he advocates.
Whether a plausible theory of meaning in terms of verification can be
constructed, I do not know; there are many problems which there is
no space in this general discussion to investigate. (1976, 116)
To replace a realistic theory of meaning by a verificationist one is to
take a first step towards meeting the requirement that we incorporate
into our theory of sense an account of the basis on which we judge
the truth values of our sentences, since it does explain meanings in
terms of actual human capacities for the recognition of truth. I have,
however, already pointed out that this step does not, in itself, take us
all the way towards meeting this requirement, and I have no clear idea
how it may be met. (1976, 36-37)1
iii Critique of Verificationism
Before examining the bearing this semantics is claimed by Dummett
to have, and the bearing it does have, on alethic realism, I will make
some critical remarks on the semantics itself. I won't go into the matter
as thoroughly as I would if I agreed with Dummett about its relevance
to realism (see section v), but I do want to indicate why I think that
his verificationism is neither adequate to the purpose, nor sufficiently
motivated. But first a mild protest against Dummett's parochial concen
tration on a truth-conditions theory of sentence meaning as a starting
point. When he says that "the most popular candidate" for a central
role in the theory of meaning "is the notion of truth" (1973, 457; see
also 1976, 67, 77), he is speaking from a severely limited perspective. A
survey of all the accounts of linguistic meaning over the centuries would
reveal that those featuring truth as the (a) central notion are in a tiny
minority. Even in the twentieth century, this is by no means so common
as a preoccupation with Frege, Carnap, and Davidson would lead one
4. In two essays, "Anti-realist Semantics: The Role of Criteria" and "Second Thoughts
About Criteria", reprinted in Wright 1993, Crispin Wright explores the use of the Wittgenstei
nian notion of a criterion to give an account of sentence meaning in terms of defeasible asserti
bility conditions. The upshot of the second essay is that the notion will not do the job. Wright
ends with a suggestion of an alternative approach but does not develop it.
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
to believe. There is also Grice and his progeny (Schiffer, Bennett) and
illocutionary-act-based theories (Searle, Alston), not to mention a large
variety of behavioristically oriented accounts. It is still more startling to
hear Dummett say that "Philosophical theories of truth have usually
been intended as contributions to delineating the outlines of some the
ory of meaning in which either the notions of truth and falsity them
selves, or some closely related notion such as verification (establishing a
statement as true) or acceptance (acknowledging a statement as true),
have been taken as central" (1973, 457). It is a comparatively recent
phenomenon that theories of truth have been oriented in this way.
To get back to the central issue, verificationist semantics has been
criticized in many ways over the last few decades. Here I will confine
myself to one basic difficulty, which I take to be fatal. Dummett thinks
in terms of assigning meanings, one by one, to sentences in terms of
what would (conclusively or inconclusively) verify the sentence. But with
the possible exception of sentences usable for making observational or
introspective reports (and even these are controversial), no empirical
sentence can be empirically verified or confirmed unless we assume the
truth of various other sentences. The reason for this is simple. Unless a
sentence is wholly couched in observational terms, we cannot derive any
observational statement from it alone. We require additional premises
to make the derivation, without which no empirical test is possible. Take
a simple example like "Jim is insecure". We would ordinarily try to de
cide the truth value of this by observing Jim's behavior and demeanor
in a variety of situations. But the observable states of affairs that we ordi
narily take to tell in favor of the statement, for example, nervously twist
ing his handkerchief before being called upon to speak, do not follow
from "Jim is insecure" alone. We need further premises linking insecu
rity to such behavioral manifestations. We have to embed our target
statement in a "minitheory of insecurity" before there is any possibility
of our putting the statement to an empirical test. And there is a multi
plicity of minitheories, some of which are incompatible with others, that
can be used for this purpose. Thus what counts as an empirical verifica
tion (confirmation) of "Jim is insecure" does not depend on that sen
tence alone with its meaning. 5 It also depends on the further theoretical
context in which it is embedded. Therefore the identification of verify
5. To be sure, a verificationist can claim that nonobservational sentences like this come with
a specification of what counts as empirical evidence for and against it as part of its meaning.
This was the position of Operationalism. But it is generally agreed by now that this claim radi
cally distorts the way in which nonobservational sentences function in science. Their meaning
is much more loosely connected with observable indicators.
HII
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
ing (confirming) conditions is not a function of the meaning alone, or
vice versa. Hence the meaning of the sentence cannot be identified with
any such set of conditions. And if the verificationist were to respond by
saying that the meaning of 'Jim is insecure' consists of the contribution
that sentence makes to verification conditions for various complexes in
which it figures, he would have to give a much more complicated ac
count of the meaning of the sentence than simply saying that the mean
ing is given by the conditions under which that sentence could be
verified. 6
The basic premise of this argument is generally credited nowadays to
Quine:
The notion lingers that to each statement, or each synthetic state
ment, there is associated a unique range of possible sensory events
such that the occurrence of any of them would add to the likelihood
of truth of the statement, and that there is associated also another
unique range of possible sensory events whose occurrence would de
tract from that likelihood. .. . My counter suggestion
statements about the external world face the tribunal of sense experi
ence not individually but only as a corporate body. (1953, 40-41)
is that our
Actually the point goes back at least to Duhem, as Quine was quick to
acknowledge. In any event, this thesis-that a nonobservational state
ment does not carry with it its distinctive set of confirmatory and discon
firmatory conditions-though it is one of the most often repeated
platitudes in recent philosophy--is still persistently ignored by verifica
tionists. Dummett makes a perfunctory acknowledgement of the
Duhem-Quine point (1976, 111), but I can't see that he really takes
account of it in working out his position. To do so would require him to
say something much more complicated than he does. In Dummett's
(1991, chap. 10) The Logical Basis of Metaphysics there is a chapter enti
tled "Holism", but the holism mostly criticized there is an extreme ver
sion according to which one cannot understand a given sentence
without knowing the whole language.
By following out certain implications of the Duhem-Quine point we
6. It has been suggested to me by Alvin Plantinga that the verificationist might, so to say,
complicate the view from another direction by taking the meaning of a single sentence to in
clude all the verifying conditions for the additional statements that would be involved in provid
ing empirical evidence for it. But this would render the specification of the meaning of any
particular sentence unmanageably complex, since there is an indefinitely large plurality of ways
of imbedding a given statement in a theoretical matrix for purposes of testing. It seems as clear
as anything can be that when we grasp the meaning of a sentence we do not grasp anything
nearly that complex.
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
can see not only that the meaning of a (nonobservational) sentence
cannot be given in the way Dummett suggests, but that it is clear that we
have the capacity to grasp the meaning (truth conditions if that is what is
involved) of nonobservational sentences without being able to recognize
verification conditions for them. Consider the status of speculative sug
gestions prior to the time at which someone figures out a way of empiri
cal testing them, for example, the first glimmer of atomism in ancient
Greece. When the idea first occurred to one that matter is composed of
tiny, invisible, and indivisible particles with much empty space in be
tween, no one had any idea of how to put the suggestion to the test
because no one had developed ways of embedding this suggestion in
a context that made possible the derivation of observationally testable
consequences. In subsequent millenia, many such connections were hy
pothesized, of ever-increasing sophistication and complexity, and this
brought the thesis within the range of empirical inquiry. But even at the
beginning the sentence, 'All matter is composed of invisible, indivisible
particles' had a meaning that was grasped by some people. It must have;
otherwise those who worked on ways to connect it up with other supposi
tions so as to put it to the test would have had nothing to work on. It
had a meaning and was understood before there were any "verification
conditions" associated with it.
These same considerations show verificationist semantics to be poorly
motivated. Consider Dummett's learning argument mentioned in the
previous section-one can learn the meaning of a sentence only by learning
verification conditions. But we don't acquire the "use" of sentences one
by one in this way, attaching verification and falsification conditions sep
arately to each one. Instead, once we have a leg up on the language, we
use what we have already mastered to construct and understand indefi
nitely many new sentences, without having to appeal to anything outside
the language to do so, whether "verification conditions" or otherwise.
Thus, going back to atomism, having earlier mastered the use of terms
like "particle', 'composed of', 'visible', 'divisible', 'space', etc. , along
with negation and certain grammatical forms, we are able to understand
and use 'All of matter is composed of invisible, indivisible particles with
a lot of empty space in between', without learning any verification and
falsification conditions for that particular sentence. Having acquired an
initial stock of terms, sentence forms, etc. , we can generate indefinitely
many new sentences by various combinations of the stock we already
have in hand. As another example, consider how we can use and extend
terms like 'power', 'knowledge', 'create', 'person', 'body, 'finite', along,
again, with negation and various grammatical forms, to generate an in
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
definitely large number of sentences about an infinite all-powerful and
all-knowing personal creator of all other beings, again without having
the foggiest idea of what the verification conditions for this statement
might be. It does small credit to human powers of cognition to suppose
that we can acquire the understanding and use of sentences only by
associating something like "verification conditions" with them one by
one. 7
Indeed, Dummett himself recognizes the points I have just been mak
ing. He recognizes that once we have mastered a basic set of sentences
we can exploit that knowledge to understand indefinitely many other
sentences.
The compositional principle demands that, for any given [subsenten
tial] expression, we should distinguish between two kinds of sentence
containing it. An understanding of the expression will consist in the
ability to understand representative sentences of the first kind and
does not, therefore, precede the understanding of sentences of that
kind. By contrast, an antecedent understanding of the expression will
combine with an understanding of the other constituent expressions
to yield an understanding of a sentence of the second kind, which
demands an understanding of the expression but is not demanded by
it. (1991, 224; see also 1973, 515; 1975, 137)
This is clearly subversive of the claim that the understanding of every
sentence consists in a grasp of what would verify or confirm that sen
tence. For what Dummett says here indicates that for many (most? ) sen
tences, such as those I cited above in my minicritique of verificationist
semantics, we have ways of understanding them other than grasping
their verification conditions, namely, understanding the constituent ex
pressions and grasping how they are combined in the sentence. My con
tentions and the views expressed in the above quotation are compatible,
at most, with the claim that the understanding of (base) sentences, those
that Dummett calls the "first kind", consists in a grasp of what would
verify or falsify them. And this (much) more restricted verificationism is
flatly inconsistent with Dummett's repeated assertions of an across-the
board verificationist semantics, as well as being subversive of his learning
argument for this position.
7. In Dummett 1991, 341-48, he considers three realist replies to his verificationism, but
the position adumbrated above is not among them. The closest is the third reply, in which the
so-called realist claims that we can understand sentences we are not capable of showing to be
true or false by an analogical conception of a subject that does have such a capacity. But this
"realist" has already given the game away by conceding "the absurdity of supposing that a state
ment of any kind could be true if it was in principle impossible to know that it was true" (345).
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
The "manifestation argument" can be dismissed on the same
grounds. Since our understanding of sentences is not, in general, a mat
ter of knowing their verification conditions, we cannot expect a "mani
festation" of that understanding to amount, in general, to showing that
we know under what conditions they are verified or falsified. Just what
does manifest linguistic understanding is a further, and complicated
problem into which I cannot go in this book. But I will say this. Dummett
seeks to support his semantics by contending that our linguistic under
standing must show itself in how we use the language. I couldn't agree
more. But Dummett, in effect, restricts "use" to our activity of accepting
or rejecting statements as certain conditions are or are not satisfied; and
that I cannot accept. This is only one bit of what is involved in our use
of language. A more comprehensive view would lead to what I call an
"illocutionary-act-potential" theory of sentence meaning, but that is a
very long story-one for another occasion. 8
Having seen that Dummett accepts a compositionality principle that
has the effect of restricting his verificationist semantics to a basic stratum
of language, we can further note that his learning and manifestation
arguments are often stated in such a way as to support only this limited
position. He more than once, in speaking of manifestations of under
standing, points out that where we have formulations of truth conditions
in antecedently understood terms our grasp of those conditions can
consist in understanding those formulations, rather than in a practical
capacity to recognize verification conditions (1976, 79-80, 97-98). And
the claim that we learn to grasp sentences by learning verification condi
tions for them is sometimes explicitly restricted to a "fragment" of lan
guage (1973, 515). A further critical evaluation of Dummett's
verificationist semantics would go into the question whether it is the
right story even for a semantically basic stratum of language.
iv Verificationist Semantics and the Concept of Truth
So much for the claims of verificationist semantics. Now for the ques
tion of what bearing this has on realism-alethic and otherwise, but with
special attention to the former.
Dummett certainly takes his semantics to have implications for how to
think about truth. Indeed, he gives the impression of having entered
onto the whole semantic project for the sake of these implications, to
8. See Alston 1994 and my forthcoming book, Illocutionary Acts and Sentence Meaning.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
gether with further implications as to how to understand the realism
issue generally.
[T]he notion of truth, when it is introduced, must be explained, in
some manner, in terms of our capacity to recognize statements as true,
and not in terms of a condition which transcends human capacities.
(1976, 116)
The anti-realist opposes to this [realism] the view that statements of
the disputed class are to be understood only by reference to the sort
of thing which we count as evidence for a statement of that class. .. .
The anti-realist insists. .. that the meanings of these statements are
tied directly to what we count as evidence for them, in such a way that
a statement of the disputed class, if true at all, can be true only in
virtue of something of which we could know and which we should
count as evidence of its truth. (1978, 146)
Here Dummett purports to derive from his verificationist semantics a
view about the concept of truth. But precisely how is this concept to be
understood? The first quotation is quite unspecific. The second can
hardly be credited with giving us a verificationist analysis of truth. What
it presents as that in virtue of which a statement is true itself employs the (a)
concept of truth ("something of which we could know and which we
should count as evidence of its truth"). However, we should not make
too much of this apparent circularity. Dummett tells us that "the central
notions of a theory of meaning must. .. be those of verification and
falsification rather than those of truth and falsity" (1973, 467). This
dictum should not, of course, be read as a proposal to dispense with the
terms 'true' and 'false' altogether, a project radically at variance with
Dummett's practice. Rather it expresses an intention to explain 'true'
and 'false' in terms of verification and falsification. Thus we should take
the second quotation as telling us that, on a verificationist conception,
a statement is true if and only if there are "verifying conditions" for it,
that is, conditions cognitively accessible to us and such that if we were aware of
them we would be in a position to verify the statement. (Cf. "[T]he truth of
the statement can consist only in the existence of the evidence", [1978,
155]; also, "On a verificationist account. .. our notions of truth and
falsity, as applied to such a sentence, consist merely in the conception
of a situation's occurring which would thus conclusively determine its
truth-value" [1973, 514]. )
9. To be sure, this avoids the circularity only if 'verify' is conceptually independent of truth,
and this is doubtful, to say the least. Doesn't 'verify' mean show to be true? For more on this see
the end of section v.
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
Before we are home free, we must disambiguate such formulations in
an important respect. Look at the last quotation. A situation that would
conclusively determine a statement's truth value could be understood
in terms of our italicized formula, as a situation that involves verifying
conditions that we could use to verify the statement. But it could also be
construed as a situation in which an actual verification is carried out.
This last understanding would appear, on the surface, to be dominant
in the following passage: "The truth of such a sentence can consist only
in the occurrence of the sort of situation in which we have learned to
recognize it as true, and its falsity in the occurrence of the sort of situa
tion in which we have learned to recognize it as false" (1973, p. 468).
For it is natural to think of the kind of situation described as one in
which we have carried out a verification or falsification (a recognition of
the sentence as true or false). Thus if we are to arrive at a single unam
biguous Dummettian verificationist concept of truth, we must decide
whether (a) it consists in the existence of a verifying condition (one that
we could use to verify the statement, whether we have actually done so
or not), or (b) it consists in the actual carrying out of a verification.
So far as I can see the weight of the textual evidence definitely favors
(a). I have cited several passages that seem to be unambiguously on that
side; and the last quote is the only one I know that is naturally read in
terms of (b). But what I take to be a more decisive point is that (b)
would make nonsense out of much of Dummett's discussion of truth.
For one thing, although he wants to restrict the application of truth
values much more than realists do (see the discussion below of his de
nial of bivalence), there is no hint that he has an idea of restricting
truth-value bearers to statements that have actually been verified or falsi
fied by some human being. And indeed the attempt to do so would short
circuit a large part of our employment of 'true' and 'false'. We could
not wonder, or look into, whether a hitherto uninvestigated hypothesis
is true or false; instead we would have to set out trying to make it true or
false. We could not issue generalizations involving 'true' and 'false', like
"In a valid argument it is impossible for all the premises to be true and
the conclusion false", that range over statements that have as yet been
neither verified nor falsified. An explicit statement of Dummett's that
bears on this matter, and that we shall be exploring shortly is that each
"decidable" statement is either true or false. (See below for an explana
tion of 'decidable'. ) But it is obvious that not all such statements have
been, or ever will be, verified or falsified. Hence, of the two alternatives
(a) is the one we must adopt.
Another feature of the account concerns the distinction between de
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
cidable and undecidable statements, to which I now turn. This distinction
has only a tangential relevance to my concerns here, but since it plays a
large role in Dummett's presentation of his position, it will be necessary
for me to relate it to my discussion. It will be useful to examine the
following passage in some detail.
From this point of view [verificationism] what we learn when we learn
to use. .. sentences is not what it is for them to be true or false, but,
rather, what counts for us as conclusively establishing them as true or
as false: the central notions of a theory of meaning must, therefore,
be those of verification and falsification rather than those of truth and
falsity. In the case of a sentence for which we have no effective means
of deciding its truth-value, the state of affairs which has, in general, to
obtain for it to be true is, by hypothesis, one which we are not capable
of recognizing as obtaining whenever it obtains. .. . [W]hen we are
concerned with sentences of this kind, we should regard an under
standing of them as consisting in an ability to do just what we actually
learn to do when we learn to use them, that is, in certain circum
stances to recognize them as having been verified and in others as
having been falsified. The truth- and falsity-conditions for any sen
tence hence should instead be taken as ones which we are capable of
recognizing effectively whenever they obtain: it is in just this that the
difference resides between the realist conception of truth and falsity
and the alternative conception of verification and falsification. An un
decidable sentence is simply one whose sense is such that, though in
certain effectively recognizable situations we acknowledge it as true,
in others we acknowledge it as false, and in yet others no decision is
possible, we possess no effective means for bringing about a situation
which is one or other of the first two kinds. .. . The actual fact of our
linguistic practice is that the only notions of truth and falsity which we
have for such a sentence are ones which do not entitle us to regard
the sentence as determinately true or false independently of our
knowledge. The truth of such a sentence can consist only in the occur
rence of the sort of situation in which we have learned to recognize it
as true, and its falsity in the occurrence of the sort of situation in
which we have learned to recognize it as false; since we have no guar
antee either that a situation of one or other kind will occur, or that we
can bring about such a situation at will, only a misleading picture of
what we learned when we learned to use sentences of that form can
give us the impression that we possess a notion of truth for that sen
tence relative to which it is determinately either true or false. (1973,
467-68)
As examples of undecidable sentences Dummett mentions open-ended
universal generalizations, subjunctive conditionals and sentences con
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM 119
taining components that are explained in terms of such conditionals,
and statements about the past.
This passage may give the impression that Dummett thinks that the
verificationist concept of truth applies only to undecidable sentences,
but such is not his view. Consider the following passage.
The conditions under which a sentence is recognized as true or as
false. .. are conditions of quite another kind [from realist-truth condi
tions]; they have, by the nature of the case, to be conditions which we
can recognize as obtaining when they obtain. Only in the very simplest
of cases, perhaps such a statement as 'I have a toothache', does it
hold even for one individual that either that condition in which the
sentence is recognized as true obtains, or that condition obtains in
which it is recognized as false. The most that we can normally hope
for is that we have some effective method of bringing about a situation
in which, relative to a given sentence, one or other of these two condi
tions must obtain: when such an effective method exists, the sentence
is effectively decidable. (1973, 586)
This passage, and many others, should be read as indicating that decid
able and undecidable sentences differ not in what constitutes truth for
them, but in the kind or degree of access we have to that. In both cases,
a sentence is true if and only if a "verifying condition" obtains. For
decidable sentences we have the capacity to get ourselves, whenever we
choose, into a situation in which we ascertain either a verifying or falsify
ing condition. For undecidable sentences we lack such a capacity,
though for such a sentence, it may happen that we do encounter a verify
ing or falsifying condition.
One implication Dummett draws from his account of truth is this: "If
a statement is true, it must be in principle possible to know that it is
true" (1976, 99). Interestingly enough, he maintains that this is (must
be) acceptable even to a realist, in a sense. Speaking of the principle
just formulated he says:
[I]ts application depends heavily on the way in which 'in principle
possible' is construed. One who adopts a realistic view of any problem
atic class of statements will have to interpret 'in principle possible' in
a fairly generous way. He will not hold that, whenever a statement is
true, it must be possible, even in principle, for us to know that it is
true, that is, for beings with our particular restricted observational and
intellectual faculties and spatiotemporal viewpoint. .. . But even the
most thoroughgoing realist must grant that we could hardly be said to
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
grasp what it is for a statement to be true if we had no conception
whatever of how it might be known to be true; there would, in such a
case, be no substance to our conception of its truth condition. More
over, he would further grant that it would be useless to specify in a
purely trivial manner the additional powers which a hypothetical
being would have to have if he were to be capable of observing directly
the truth or falsity of statements of some given class. We could not, for
example, explain that a being who had a direct insight into counter
factual reality would be able to determine by direct observation the
truth or falsity of any counterfactual conditional, because the expres
sion 'a direct insight into counterfactual reality' provides no picture
of what these powers consist in. Even the realist will concede that the
picture of the required superhuman powers must always bear a recog
nizable relation to the powers which we in fact possess; they must be
analogous to, or an extension of, our actual powers. (1976, 100)
I fear that Dummett has concocted a "thoroughgoing realist" for his
own philosophical purposes. The thoroughgoing realist writing these
lines, for one, does not fit his picture. In the explication of the concept
of truth I gave in Chapter 1 I said nothing at any point about what it
would be to know a statement to be true. Hence I flatly deny that "we
could hardly grasp what it is for a statement to be true if we had no
conception whatever of how it might be known to be true". Even if we
have such a conception, it is not at all necessary for this to figure in our
understanding of what it is for a statement to be true, as I fancy I showed
in Chapter 1. Moreover, even though I have no hesitation in recognizing
that an omniscient being would know the truth of every true proposi
tion, I am not at all disposed to think that I have any insight into how
such a being would know (much of) what it knows. Hence I feel under
no pressure to suppose that its superhuman powers "bear a recogniz
able relation to powers which we in fact possess". To be sure, Dummett
might point out that he meant the "must grant" in "even the most
thoroughgoing realist must grant that. .. " to be normative rather than
descriptive, and if I, for example, do not grant these points, I am thereby
failing to conform to norms of rationality. That may be, but I would like
to see a convincing argument for it.
This is the place at which to look at Dummett's notorious denial of
the Principle of Bivalence for undecidable sentences. Dummett lays it
down more than once that, on the verificationist account of truth, unde
cidable sentences cannot be depended on to have a determinate truth
value. Thus in the long passage quoted above from Frege: The Philosophy
of Language (1973), he writes:
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
[T]he only notions of truth and falsity which we have for such a sen
tence are ones which do not entitle us to regard the sentence as deter
minately true or false independently of our knowledge. The truth of
such a sentence can consist only in the occurrence of the sort of situa
tion in which we have learned to recognize it as true, and its falsity in
the occurrence of the sort of situation in which we have learned to
recognize it as false; since we have no guarantee either that a situation
of one or other kind will occur, or that we can bring about such a
situation at will, only a misleading picture of what we learned when
we learned to use sentences of that form can give us the impression
that we possess a notion of truth for that sentence relative to which it
is determinately either true or false. (1973, 468)
And again:
On a verificationist account, an understanding of such a sentence, a
grasp of its sense, consists merely in the capacity to recognize whatever
would decide conclusively in favour of the truth or of the falsity of the
sentence; and our notions of truth and falsity, as applied to such a
sentence, consist merely in the conception of a situation's occurring
which would thus conclusively determine its truth-value. From such a
viewpoint, there would be no justification in saying, of such an unde
cidable sentence, that it must be either true or false, in advance of
anything's occurring to enable us to recognize it as one or the other,
or at least of information's becoming available which would provide
us with what we previously lacked, an effective means of bringing
about such a determining situation. (1973, 514; see also 1973,
586-87; 1976, 103, 105, 116)
The first of these passages, and others of the same ilk, might give the
impression that Dummett is flatly denying truth value to undecidable
sentences. But the second passage and others correct that misapprehen
sion. The claim, rather, is that we cannot take any undecidable sentence
to have a definite truth value, prior to showing that it does by encounter
ing a verifying or falsifying situation. What is denied is that every unde
cidable assertoric sentence, just by virtue of being a meaningful
assertoric sentence, must be true or false. Thus the position is often put
as a denial of the Principle of Bivalence, the principle that every assert
oric sentence must be either true or false.
Note that the denial of bivalence for undecidable sentences presup
poses that there is no problem about their satisfying verificationist con
ditions of meaningfulness. If these sentences were not even meaningful,
no question of their capacity for truth and falsity could arise. Then the
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
position would be-not that they could not all be guaranteed to have a
definite truth value, but rather that none of them could have a truth
value. Going back again to the long quotation (1973), we see there that
Dummett makes it quite explicit just how undecidable sentences con
form to verificationist requirements for having a meaning: "[W]e
should regard an understanding of them as consisting in an ability to
do just what we actually learn to do when we learn to use them, that is,
in certain circumstances to recognize them as having been verified and
in others as having been falsified. " A look back at Dummett's formula
tions of a verificationist account of sentence meaning will confirm that
the undecidable sentences have what it takes. If we have a grasp of what
would constitute a verifying (falsifying) condition for a sentence, then it
has a verificationally approved meaning for us. And Dummett is at pains
to underline this point from time to time. For example:
On this account, an understanding of a statement consists in a capac
ity to recognize whatever is counted as verifying it, i. e. , as conclusively
establishing it as true. It is not necessary that we should have any
means of deciding the truth or falsity of the statement, only that we
be capable of recognizing when its truth has been established. (1976,
110-111; see also 1973, 514)
One might well wonder whether the sentences that Dummett regards
as undecidable really are susceptible of conclusive verification. He holds,
you will recall, that these sentences are such that there are circum
stances in which we can apprehend verifying (falsifying) conditions, but
that we lack an effective capacity to realize such circumstances at will.
But are there such circumstances for, for example, open-ended univer
sal generalizations and subjunctive conditionals? What would constitute
a conclusively verifying condition, one that we are capable of recogniz
ing on inspection, for an open-ended universal generalization? Is it
within human powers to verify conclusively the generalization that all
life, everywhere-past, present, and future-involves DNA? It is certainly
conceivable that we should identify a falsifying condition. Would that
satisfy the requirement? And how about counterfactual conditionals?
What would conclusively verify or falsify the statement that if Britain
and France had militarily opposed Hitler's military occupation of the
Rhineland, his government would have collapsed? Until we hear more
from Dummett on this, one may be pardoned for suggesting that much
of what Dummett includes in the undecidable subclass of the conclu
sively verifiable should be ranked rather with, at best, the inconclusively
verifiable.
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM 123
v Compatibility of Verificationist Semantics and Realist Truth
I now want to suggest that, despite Dummett's asseverations, his veri
ficationist account of sentence meaning by no means requires the aban
donment of a realist conception of truth, at least the realist conception
I have been advocating. Let's focus on a particular set of verification
conditions. Consider the sentence, 'The orchestra is playing Beetho
ven's Fifth Symphony'. The verification condition for this, let's say, is
that the performance follows fairly closely an authentic score of that
symphony. Now according to Dummett's semantics the content of my
statement that the orchestra is playing Beethoven's Fifth Symphony is
just that the verification condition obtains. But then in satisfying the
Dummettian truth condition that the verification condition obtains, we
have simultaneously and ipso facto satisfied the realist truth condition that
what is being asserted is the case. In other words, if what we assert is
always that a verification condition for the assertion obtains, then that
condition's obtaining necessarily amounts to what the assertion asserts to
be the case. No wedge can be driven between them. In other words,
Dummett's verificationist semantics for sentences amounts to taking the
propositional content of what is asserted by uttering a sentence to be
the satisfaction of a verification condition. This is just a particular form
of a reductionist theory of propositional content in this case a verifica
tionist reduction. And like all reductions it is perfectly compatible with
an account of truth according to which the statement that p is true if
and only if p. It is just that we have a verificationist view of what p is in
each case. 10
To be sure, in the essay, "Realism", Dummett says that "anti-realism
need not take the form of reductionism" (1978, 157). Be that as it may,
his verificationism obviously does take this form. Not only does he ex
plicitly state, as we have seen, that the content of an assertion is that the
statement asserted can be verified. There is also this clinching consider
ation. Consider the statement of a verifying condition for the statement
that p. The statement of that must, on Dummett's semantics, have the
same content as the statement that p. Surely a verifying condition suf
fices to verify the statement that that very condition obtains. And so if
the verifying condition for p is C, the statement that C obtains has the
same verifying condition as the statement that p, and thereby has the
10. In Dummett 1991, 327-28 he acknowledges that reductionism is compatible with real
ism, but his reasons for this are very different from mine.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
same propositional content. Thus the statement that p is the same state
ment as the statement that C obtains. Q. E. D. 11
Look at the matter in still another way. We can abstractly imagine two
ways in which a verificationist semantics might try to distinguish itself
from a realist semantics, for a range of assertoric sentences. On the one
hand, it might take a verificationist line on the propositional content of
these statements. On the other hand, it might leave the propositional
content alone and take a verificationist tack on what it is for a statement
to be true. But it need not do both. Either move will give it a distinctively
verificationist cast. What we have seen is that although Dummett says
that his view is distinctively verificationist in the second way, he has al
ready made it verificationist in the first way. That being the case, he
is unwarranted in claiming that the verificationism requires the second
way-adopting a different understanding of truth. The reductionist the
ory of content cuts the ground from under the demand for a nonrealist
theory of truth.
Note too that it is only the first way of being verificationist that gives
us a verificationist theory of sentence meaning. For the second way, which
confines its verificationism to reshaping the concept of truth, "leaves
the propositional content alone". It does not carry with it a verification
ist interpretation of sentence meaning. Thus Dummett cannot take the
second way instead of the first way without abandoning the verificationist
account of sentence meaning, thus rendering his position unrecogniz
able. But he maintains the verificationist semantics at the price of ren
dering his concept of truth gratuitous. I do not deny that he could hold
the verificationist account of truth, consistently with his verificationist
semantics. I do not claim that the two views are incompatible. My point
is only that the verificationist semantics does not provide a basis for the
verificationist account of truth. Thus he needs a rationale for his ac
count of truth other than the one he suggests.
In fairness, I should point out that Dummett's characterization of a
realist conception of truth is by no means identical with mine.
Realism I characterize as the belief that statements of the disputed
class possess an objective truth-value, independently of our means of
11. We have to be careful how we formulate the idea that the statement that p is the statement
that C. If the latter refers to the statement that p (if, for example, it is the statement that C is a
verifying condition for the statement that p), then we are in the self-defeating position of taking
the statement that p to be a statement about the statement that p, in which case we will never be
able to say what the statement that p is. (It is a statement about a statement that is about a
statement that is about. .. .) Hence the statement that C, in order to be identical to the state
ment that p, must be construed as a formulation of the verifying condition, not a statement that
this is a verifying condition for the statement that p. See Chapter 7 for a similar puzzle posed for
any explicitly epistemic analysis of truth.
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM 125
knowing it; they are true or false in virtue of a reality existing indepen
dently of us. .. [] that is, the realist holds that the meanings of
statements of the disputed class are not directly tied to the kind of
evidence for them that we have, but consist in the manner of their
determination as true or false by states of affairs whose existence is not
dependent on our possession of evidence for them. (1978, 146)
[F]or the realist, the statement can be true even though we have no
means of recognizing it as true. (1978, 147)
The phrase "true or false in virtue of a reality existing independently
of us" in the first quotation would seem to be a slip, as a way of charac
terizing what distinguishes the realist from the antirealist (verification
ist). For as Dummett points out on the next page: "It is not, of course,
simply a matter of whether or not the truth of a statement of the dis
puted class is something objective. The realist and the anti-realist may
agree that it is an objective matter whether, in the case of any given
statement of the class, the criteria we use for judging such a statement
to be true are satisfied. "
At least it was a slip if we can equate "existing independently of us"
with "objective". The phrase "determination as true or false by states of
affairs whose existence is not dependent on our possession of evidence
for them" would seem to be a much better way of expressing Dummett's
idea. The heart of the contrast, as Dummett sees it, is that for the realist
a statement may have a determinate truth value whatever our position
vis-à-vis verifying (falsifying) or evidential states of affairs, whereas for
the antirealist, truth value is essentially tied to our access to what shows
the statement to be true or false. By those lights it may well seem that
verificationist semantics really does imply a nonrealist account of truth.
But not so fast. The verificationist reduction of content does imply that
whenever a statement is true on (my kind of) a realist conception of
truth, there is a verifying condition accessible to us. But it does not fol
low from this that the accessibility is required by the concept of truth. It
could still be that the truth of the statement that p only (conceptually)
requires that it be the case that p; it would, then, be a further point that
all the ps are such that whenever that condition is satisfied there is a
verifying condition that we have the capacity to recognize.
One more point on the relation of verificationism and (my version
of) realist truth. Doesn't the notion of verification presuppose a notion
of truth, one that is independent of verifiability, independent in the
sense of not being definable by verifiability, since verifiability, on the
contrary has to be defined (partly) by truth? Looking back at Dummett's
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
formulations of a verificationist conception of truth we have quoted, we
see that he usually couches them in terms of the existence of conditions
sufficient to establish the truth of the statement in question. And once
we move out from the territory of conclusively verifiable statements and
take in statements for which we can only pile up evidence that renders
them more or less probable, isn't it still more undeniable that a concept
of truth is presupposed? For if we say that the most we can do with
respect to, for example, a theoretical statement in science is to adduce
evidence that makes it more or less probable but cannot exhibit conclu
sively verifying evidence, by virtue of what do we make the judgment
that the evidence available to us is insufficient to strictly verify? We must
have some grasp of what is being asserted by the statement that goes
beyond any possible evidence we can compile. And if, as Dummett as
sumes, such understanding consists in a grasp of either (realist) truth
conditions or verification conditions, and since, ex hypothesi the latter
are not available here, then what is presupposed here is a grasp of realist
truth conditions for the statement. 12 It does not strictly follow from these
considerations that it is a realist notion of truth (in my version) that
is being presupposed, but that seems overwhelmingly the most likely
supposition.
The idea just broached-that verification presupposes an indepen
dent notion of truth-may not be wholly repugnant to Dummett. He is
not at all disposed to get rid of a realist concept of truth. On the con
trary, he affirms that it is needed for certain purposes, for example to
explicate the notion of validity of inferences (1976, 115). Moreover, it
is no part of his program to give a reductive (verificationist) definition
of the ordinary concept of truth, and thereby turn it into something
else. On the contrary, his programme is to introduce a verificationist
conception of truth, contrast it with the realist conception, and give it
pride of place.
vi No Meaningful Sentences Are Only Defeasibly Verifiable
The discussion up to this point has been almost entirely restricted to
conclusively verifiable sentences. But, as I've already noted, Dummett is
well aware that not everything we succeed in asserting is subject to con
clusive verification or falsification. He does not say much about this, and
I am not aware of a passage in which he gives examples of such sen
12. See Vision 1988, chap. 7 for a detailed presentation of this argument.
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
tences. Let's fill in for him and take theoretical statements in science,
lawlike open-ended universal generalizations, and subjunctive condi
tionals to have this status. 13 It is clear that his position implies that such
statements lack a truth value. Since there is no (conclusively) verifying
condition the statement is not true, and since there is no (conclusively)
falsifying condition the statement is not false. Whatever reason he has
for denying bivalence to those conclusively verifiable sentences that are
not "decidable" will apply in spades to those that can, at best, only re
ceive defeasible evidence. It is not just that there is no guarantee that
they have a truth value. There would seem to be a guarantee that they
do not. And yet he displays no tendency to deny that they are under
standable. He even suggests that an antirealist theory of meaning could
be "given in terms of grounds of assertion that fall short of being conclu
sive" (1978, xxxviii). Presumably, if this project were carried out, we
would take the understanding of a defeasibly confirmable sentence to
consist of the ability to recognize defeasibly confirming conditions and
defeasibly disconfirming conditions, on the model of his account of the
understanding of undecidable conclusively verifiable sentences. And,
presumably, this would give rise an account of the meaning of such
sentences as consisting in the confirming and disconfirming conditions
in each case.
But if we think this position through, we get the very surprising con
clusion that there can be no merely inconclusively verifiable meaningful
sentences. For the basic principle of his semantics is that the meaning
of a (conclusively verified) sentence is given by the verifying conditions.
Transfer that to sentences that are putatively at most non-conclusively
verifiable, and, as just pointed out, we get the result that the meaning
of one of those sentences is given by its (allegedly nonconclusive) con
firmation conditions. But these verifying or confirming conditions are,
by hypothesis, such that we can, at least in favorable circumstances, rec
ognize them to obtain when they do; they are, by their nature, the sort
of things that are cognitively accessible to us. But then the statement
of a set of confirming conditions, C, for a putatively non-conclusively
verifiable sentence, S, is itself conclusively verifiable. But by the terms of
verificationist semantics the statement of C is synonymous with S, since
C is what specifies S's meaning. Therefore S is conclusively verifiable
after all. Hence there can be no merely defeasibly verifiable meaningful
sentences on this semantics. Q. E. D.
13. Dummett takes the latter two classes as examples of the undecidable subclass of conclu
sively verifiable sentences. But I have already expressed doubt about this.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
vii Dummett on Realism
That completes my examination of the relation of Dummett's verifi
cationism to alethic realism. I could take my leave at this point. But
since Dummett makes such a point of claiming that realism-antirealism
controversies are to be construed in terms of whether to adopt a realist
or a verificationist conception of truth-along with the (allegedly) asso
ciated issue of whether the Principle of Bivalence holds for all state
ments it will not be an intolerable digression to take a brief look at
these claims.
In his essay, "Realism" (reprinted in 1978) Dummett points out dif
ferences in the way disputes between realists and antirealists about a
given subject matter are presented. Sometimes it is a question whether
entities of a certain type exist, or whether they are among the "ultimate
constituents of reality". Linguistically construed, these would be ques
tions about whether terms belonging to a certain range have a reference
and about whether statements of a certain type can be reduced to state
ments of another type. He then presents his preferred way of construing
the contrast. "Realism I characterize as the belief that statements of the
disputed class possess an objective truth-value, independently of our
means of knowing it; they are true or false in virtue of a reality existing
independently of us" (1978, 146; see also 1973, 466; 1976, 101; 1978,
XXX, 155).
Note that once more Dummett closely associates possessing a truth
value independently of our means of knowing it and possessing a truth
value in virtue of a reality existing independently of us. He seems not to
notice that one of these conditions might hold and not the other. In
particular, why couldn't our statements (mostly) be true or false in vir
tue of facts that are what they are independently of us, even though
truth value also requires that we have cognitive access to that indepen
dently existing truth-value determiner? This is not Dummett's concep
tion of how the first condition is satisfied; his conception of this is tied
to verificationist semantics. But it is a (putative) possibility that should
be considered.
Dummett goes on to characterize the antirealist foil to this position.
The anti-realist opposes to this the view that statements of the dis
puted class are to be understood only by reference to the sort of thing
which we count as evidence for a statement of that class. .. . The anti
realist insists. .. that the meanings of these statements are tied directly
to what we count as evidence for them, in such a way that a statement
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
of the disputed class, if true at all, can be true only in virtue of some
thing of which we could know and which we should count as evidence
for its truth. The dispute thus concerns the notion of truth appro
priate for statements of the disputed class; and this means that it is a
dispute concerning the kind of meaning which these statements have.
(1978, 146)
Here again we have the claim that a verificationist account of the mean
ing of a statement carries with it a different conception of truth. (I have
already done what I can to shoot down this view. ) Hence Dummett also
characterizes the dispute as one about the kind of meaning possessed
by the sentences in question. "The conflict between realism and anti
realism is a conflict about the kind of meaning possessed by statements
of the disputed class" (1978, 155). And since Dummett holds that the
verificationist notion of truth is such that the Principle of Bivalence ap
plies to none but decidable sentences, he is equally disposed to charac
terize realism as a commitment to bivalence for all statements. "We may,
in fact, characterize realism concerning a given class of statements as
the assumption that each statement of that class is determinately either
true or false" (1976, 93; see also 1973, 466; 1976, 93, 101; 1978, xxix
xxxi).
Thus Dummett gives us three characterizations of the realist
antirealist controversy concerning a given class of sentences: (1) the
kind of meaning these sentence have, (2) the notion of truth that is
applicable, and (3) whether the Principle of Bivalence holds across the
board. Since he takes these to be tightly connected, he feels comfortable
in freely oscillating between them. But since I have what I take to be
good and sufficient reason for denying these connections, the character
izations do not seem to me to be anywhere nearly equivalent. Be that as
it may, I want to look briefly at the extent to which any of these formula
tions captures what is at issue in what are termed realist-antirealist dis
putes. I will concentrate on the formulation in terms of truth, since that
is the one most intimately connected to the topic of this book, but with
side glances at the others.
Before doing that, I should note a couple of things that Dummett says
by way of explaining why he proceeds as he does. First, he is concerned
with the apparent heterogeneity of so-called realist-antirealist contro
versies, and he thinks that his formulation enables us to see a unifying
thread. Second, there is a general skepticism about traditional meta
physics. He thinks that metaphysical talk about something's "existing
independently of us", and the contrasting talk of being "constructed by
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
us" and the like, are simply expressions of "pictures"; and a "picture
preference" is not a theoretical position that can be argued. "[T]he
content of each picture lies in the conception of meaning that prompts
it" (1978, xxviii-xxix). Thus behind Dummett's way of viewing realism
is a familiar theme in twentieth-century philosophy-a substitution of
linguistic issues for metaphysical issues. "[T]he whole point of my ap
proach to these problems has been to show that the theory of meaning
underlies metaphysics. If I have made any worthwhile contribution to
philosophy, I think it must lie in having raised this issue in these terms"
(1978, xl).
Let's turn now to the question of how fully Dummett's characteriza
tion (s) of realist-antirealist disputes covers the waterfront. I take the
coverage to be very inadequate. Indeed, Dummett is careful to disclaim
any complete coverage.
I did not suppose that, by making acceptance of the principle of biva
lence the touchstone of a realist view, I was uncovering what underlay
all traditional applications of the term 'realism'. I thought, rather, that
the traditional use of the term covered a confusion between two quite
different types of issue-whether statements of one kind could in any
sense be reduced to statements of another kind, and whether state
ments of the one kind could be held to be determinately either true
or false; and I thought that no progress could be made in discussing
these problems until those issues were sharply distinguished. How,
having clearly distinguished them, one then prefers to use the term
'realism' is a matter of secondary importance. (1978, xxxii)
So disputes over claimed reductions of, for example, physical-object
statements to phenomenal statements are explicitly set to one side. 14
But there plenty of other counterexamples lurking in the underbrush.
Consider the "flat denial of the existence of Xs" form of antirealism
discussed in Chapter 2. Various thinkers have denied the real existence
of all sorts of abstract entities-properties, propositions, classes, num
bers of temporal succession, space, material substance, and so on. If
we think of a dispute between one who holds that propositions exist and
one who denies this, it is difficult, if not impossible, to see that they
differ over the kind of meaning possessed by "proposition sentences",
or about the concept of truth applicable, or about the Principle of Biva
lence. These issues can be involved. A verificationist could deny the exis
14. See Chapter 2 for a list of some other reductionist claims that are prominent in the
literature.
DUMMETT'S VERIFICATIONIST ALTERNATIVE TO ALETHIC REALISM
tence of propositions because sentences putatively about propositions
do not have the kind of meaning that would satisfy verificationist scru
ples. But that is only one among many reasons for denying the real exis
tence of propositions. There is no excuse for thinking that Dummett's
picture of what is at stake in realist-antirealist disputes captures what is
always, or even usually or typically, involved in such controversies, even
after controversies over reductionism have been set aside.
This is not to say that his proposals cover nothing. Most obviously,
when someone takes what could naturally be regarded as an antirealist
stance toward some subject matter on verificationist grounds, at least
one of Dummett's characterizations will apply. And if an opposition to,
say, moral realism takes the form of an expressivist account of moral
discourse, then the dispute may well involve all of Dummett's touch
stones-what kind of meaning the sentences in question have, what con
cept of truth, if any, is applicable to them, and whether each sentence
in the domain in question is either true or false. But admitting that the
characterization does have application is a far cry from agreeing that it
makes explicit what is most deeply at issue in a large stretch of the field.
Perhaps it is the "linguistic turn" in the initial formulation of what a
realist-antirealist issue is about, that is responsible for the relative lack
of coverage of Dummett's proposal. "I shall take as my preferred charac
terization of a dispute between realists and antirealists one which repre
sents it as relating, not to a class of entities or a class of terms, but to a
class of statements" (1978, 146). (This could be more accurately put in
terms of a class of sentences. ) If what one may be realist or antirealist
about is some domain of sentences-something linguistic, then the expla
nation in these terms of what differentiates the realist from the antireal
ist is bound to leave to one side disputes as to what exists, what is more
or less ultimate in the scheme of things, or what the ultimate nature of
a given class of entities is. 15
15. See Devitt 1984 for a spirited argument along this line. See especially pt. 2 and chap. 12.
CHAPTER 5
Putnam's Model-Theoretic Argument
i The Argument
Hilary Putnam, who earlier had been a prominent defender of real
ism, underwent a major change of heart in the midseventies, and has
since been among the most prominent critic of what many of us regard
as realism. Putnam, sensibly enough, does not accept the idea that there
is a unique position properly called 'realism'. He attacks what he calls
"metaphysical realism" and defends what he, at one point, called "inter
nal realism". Though Putnam's thought does not present the formida
ble difficulties of exegesis one finds in Dummett, it is certainly not clear
sailing. One thing that makes for problems is Putnam's penchant for
giving brief presentations of a position or argument on a number of
occasions, rather than a more extended exposition. Another is that his
thought is in more or less continuous flux, so that today he does not
fully accept what he wrote in the late seventies and early eighties, the
period at which he was espousing and arguing for the nonrealist views I
will be criticizing. And even if we stick to that period it is by no means
easy to determine just what his "internal realism" comes to. However,
just as with Dummett, I will not aspire here to give a comprehensive
treatment of Putnam's thought. My aim is only to consider his argu
ments that can be construed as directed against alethic realism, and to
criticize his form of an epistemic conception of truth. But to do this
properly I will have to look at the wider context in which these aspects
of his thought are set.
Putnam's break with his earlier realism comes in his 1976 presidential
address to the Eastern Division of the American Philosophical Associa
tion, "Realism and Reason" (reprinted in Putnam 1978), and, a year
later, in his presidential address to the Association for Symbolic Logic,
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
"Models and Reality" (reprinted in Putnam 1983). Essentially the same
argument against "metaphysical realism" is presented in both ad
dresses. But the target is not very fully described in either. For that we
must go to Reason, Truth, and History (Putnam 1981), where he explicitly
contrasts metaphysical realism and what he there calls the "internalist
perspective" (elsewhere "internal realism").
One of these perspectives is the perspective of metaphysical realism.
On this perspective, the world consists of some fixed totality of mind
independent objects. There is exactly one true and complete descrip
tion of the way the world is'. Truth involves some sort of correspon
dence relation between words or thought-signs and external things
and sets of things. I shall call this perspective the externalist perspec
tive, because its favorite point of view is a God's Eye point of view.
The perspective I shall defend has no unambiguous name. .. I shall
refer to it as the internalist perspective, because it is characteristic of
this view to hold that what objects does the world consist of? is a question
that it only makes sense to ask within a theory or description. Many
'internalist' philosophers, though not all, hold further that there is
more than one 'true' theory or description of the world. Truth', in
an internalist view, is some sort of (idealized) rational acceptability
some sort of ideal coherence of our beliefs with each other and with
our experiences as those experiences are themselves represented in our belief
system and not correspondence with mind-independent or discourse
independent 'states of affairs'. There is no God's Eye point of view
that we can know or usefully imagine; there are only the various points
of view of actual persons reflecting various interests and purposes that
their descriptions and theories subserve. (49-50)
This contrast between the "perspectives" impinges most directly on
alethic realism in their differing views on truth. To be sure, the external
ist is depicted as taking truth to consist in "some sort of correspondence
relation", whereas I have argued that we can have a distinctively realist
conception of truth without getting into that. But the internalist concep
tion of truth as "some sort of (idealized) rational acceptability" is clearly
incompatible with even a minimalist form of the realist conception, as
will come out more fully in Chapter 7. And since Putnam's arguments
against the externalist conception take the form of a defense of the in
ternalist conception, and are not aimed solely at the notion of corre
spondence, one can easily see them as directed against any realist,
nonepistemic conception of truth.
What about the more clearly metaphysical constituents of "metaphysi
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
cal realism"? First, the doctrine that "the world consists of some fixed
totality of mind-independent objects". I argued in Chapter 2 that many
idealist denials of this are compatible with the acceptance of a realist
conception of truth. It is just that the idealist has a different interpreta
tion of the content of truth-value bearers. Nevertheless, Putnam's way of
denying this, as we shall see, makes what exists relative to our conceptual
or theoretical schemes for dealing with the world; and the relation of
this to alethic realism will be discussed in the next chapter. Second, what
about "There is exactly one true and complete description of 'the way
the world is' "? That depends on our criteria for individuating descrip
tions. The most hard-nosed realist can allow some variation in true de
scriptions of a given state of affairs. We can report a temperature on
either the Fahrenheit or the Celsius scale. Putnam presumably means
this second doctrine of metaphysical realism to rule out the kind of
conceptual relativity he advocates, which recognizes the possibility of
different descriptions that look clearly incompatible being, all of them,
true and rationally acceptable ways of saying what there is. This notion
will be taken up in the next chapter. Putnam thinks that the various
components of each of these "perspectives" are tightly interconnected,
but I have already hinted at reasons for doubting this, reasons that will,
again, be explored in the next chapter.
What I want to focus on in this chapter is Putnam's arguments against
a realist conception of truth and in support of an epistemic conception.
The argument that is most explicitly so directed is the one that occupies
center stage in "Realism and Reason". It is specifically directed against
what Putnam calls "the most important consequence of metaphysical
realism", namely, that "truth is supposed to be radically nonepistemic",
that "the theory that is 'ideal' from the point of view of operational
utility, inner beauty, and elegance, 'plausibility', simplicity, 'conserva
tism', etc. , might be false. 'Verified' (in any operational sense) does not
imply 'true', on the metaphysical realist picture, even in the ideal limit. "
Putnam says, "[I]t is this feature that I shall attack! " (1978, 125). His
argument is designed to show that where a theory is epistemically ideal
1. This formulation obviously requires qualification if it is to be taken seriously. For no
"metaphysical realist" who recognizes minds-their states, activities, and contents-is going to
think that the world consists solely of mind-independent objects. The qualification could be in
terms of the kind of independence-independence of being an object of cognition, something
that could apply to the mental as well as the nonmental. Or it could consist of exempting the
mental from the scope of the thesis. The world, in addition to minds and their states, etc. ,
consists of some fixed totality of mind-independent objects.
2. We must take care not to confuse this APA presidential address with the third volume of
Putnam's Philosophical Papers (1983), which bears the same title.
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
it is not the case that it might false, that is, that it is impossible that it
should not be true.
So let T, be an ideal theory, by our lights. Lifting restrictions on our
actual all-too-finite powers, we can imagine T, to have every property
except objective truth which is left open-that we like. E. g. , T, can be
imagined complete, consistent, to predict correctly all observation
sentences (as far as we can tell), to meet whatever 'operational con
straints' there are. .. to be 'beautiful', 'simple', 'plausible', etc. The
supposition under consideration is that T, might be all this and still be
(in reality) false.
I assume THE WORLD has (or can be broken into) infinitely many
pieces. I also assume T, says there are infinitely many things (so in this
respect T1 is 'objectively right' about THE WORLD). Now T, is consistent
(by hypothesis) and has (only) infinite models. So by the complete
ness theorem (in its model-theoretic form), T1 has a model of every
infinite cardinality. Pick a model M of the same cardinality as THE
WORLD. Map the individuals of M one-to-one into the pieces of THE
WORLD, then use the mapping to define relations of M directly in THE
WORLD. The result is a satisfaction relation SAT-a 'correspondence'
between the terms of L [the language in which the theory is stated]
and sets of pieces of THE WORLD-such that the theory T1 comes out
true true of THE WORLD-provided we just interpret 'true' as TRUE
(SAT). So what becomes of the claim that even the ideal theory T1
might really be false? (1978, 125-26)
That is, there will be a way of assigning singular terms of T1 to individ
uals, and general terms of T1 to sets of individuals, such that every sen
tence of T1 comes out true. So much, says Putnam, is guaranteed by
model theory.
Whether this is true depends, inter alia, on just how the "constraints"
are construed. Putnam doesn't say much about the operational con
straints in this essay, but he is more forthcoming in "Models and Re
ality".
To describe our operational constraints we shall need three things.
First, we shall have to fix a sufficiently large 'observational vocabulary';
call it the set of 'O-terms'. .. . Second, we shall assume that there
exists (whether we can define it or not) a set of S which can be taken
to be the set of macroscopically observable things and events. .. The
third thing we shall assume given is a valuation (call it, once again
'OP') which assigns the correct truth value to each n-place O-term. ..
on each n-tuple of elements of S on which it is defined. .. . Thus OP
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
is a partial valuation in a double sense; it is defined on only a subset of
the predicates of the language, namely the O-terms, and even on these
it only fixes a part of the extension, namely the extension of T/S (the
restriction of T to S) for each O-term T. (1983, 11-12)
Presumably the "operational constraint" puts constraints on the
meaning of O-terms (the only ones with whose meaning it is in any way
concerned) only to the extent of specifying which attributions of a given
term to an observable object is true and which are false. This underde
termines meaning to the extent that we can have terms with different
meanings that are coextensive over the range of observable objects.
How plausible is it that there will be an admissible interpretation of
T1 such that on that interpretation all sentences of T1 come out true?
In other words, how plausible is it that the operational and theoretical
constraints can be guaranteed to leave room for such an interpretation?
Though Putnam, so far as I know, does not specifically consider this
question, I believe the answer would have to go something like this. All
that is required is that the interpretation assign individuals to singular
terms of the theory, and sets to the general terms, in such a way as to
make all statements of the theory come out true. And the constraints give
us a free hand in this. The operational constraint provides truth values for
all observation sentences. The theoretical constraint presumably in
cludes the requirement that the theory implies all the true observation
sentences but none of the false ones. Does this prevent an assignment
of truth for all the theoretical sentences? One doesn't see how it could.
It doesn't mandate such an assignment, nor does Putnam suppose it
does. The thesis of the underdetermination of theory by empirical evi
dence would prevent an entailment of the claims of the theory by the
true observation reports. But surely if the theory entails all and only true
observation statements, we can find some assignment of referents to the
terms so that the theoretical statements all come out true.
ii Initial Difficulties with the Argument
What should we say about the model-theoretic (MT) argument?
There have been a number of criticisms in the literature, and I find
some of the critical points to be cogent. My main reactions to the argu
ment, however, are rather different from anything I have found in the
literature, and hence this section will not simply repeat what one can
read elsewhere.
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
The first point to note is that the argument employs a realist concep
tion of truth. This occurs at two places. First in the premises, most obvi
ously in the "operational constraints", one of which is a "valuation"
that "assigns the correct truth value to each n-place O-term. .. on each
n-tuple of elements of S on which it is defined". We have to construe
this as "realist correctness" for two reasons. First, this is an ad hominem
argument directed against the realist. It is designed to show that even on
his own terms he cannot hold that an ideal theory might be false. Hence
the premises must embody a realist way of looking at things. And, sec
ond, if Putnam were to think of the "correct truth value" for observa
tion statements in epistemic terms, he would have to tell us much more
about the epistemology of observation statements than he does, namely
nothing.
But the fact that the premises of the argument make use of a realist
notion of truth is nothing against it. That simply reflects the fact that
it is an ad hominem argument. A more serious problem concerns the
conclusion. The conclusion is that since there is an acceptable model
theoretic satisfaction relation that makes all the sentences of the theory
come out true, it is not the case that the theory might be false. Leaving
aside, for the moment, the question whether the latter really does follow
from the former, the present point is that the kind of truth Putnam
claims to show that the theory cannot lack is the kind that is involved in
the realist apparatus in terms of which the ad hominem argument is set
up-namely, realist truth. And so at most the argument shows that an
ideal theory cannot lack realist truth. Thus the argument, even on its
most favorable valuation, does nothing to support the replacement of a
realist conception of truth with the epistemic conception Putnam advo
cates. 3
But this is all preliminary skirmishing. A more crucial defect of the
argument is that the conclusion-it is not the case that an ideal theory might
be false, that is an ideal theory must be true-simply doesn't follow from the
model-theoretic result-that the operational and theoretic constraints allow
an interpretation in which all of its sentences come out true. There are two ways
of seeing this.
(1) Although Putnam does not emphasize the point, there will also
be many admissible interpretations on which the theory is false. If this
weren't the case, the truth of the theory would follow logically from the
constraints, and Putnam obviously does not suppose (nor would it be at
3. As we shall see in Chapter 7, he later moderates his claims for an epistemic conception
of truth.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
all plausible to suppose) that the constraints have that power. And so if
the existence of an admissible interpretation that makes the theory true
shows that it must be true, by the same token the existence of an admissi
ble interpretation that makes the theory false shows that it must be false.
So the argument shows both that the theory must be true and that it
must be false! As this result indicates, the argument, unless it is even
more defective than I take it to be, establishes neither truth nor falsity.
It only shows that it is logically possible (logically consistent with the con
straints satisfaction of which make the theory ideal) that the theory be
true (false). That is, the existence of an interpretation allowed by the
constraints that render it true (false) merely shows that the constraints
leave open the possibility of truth (falsity). And metaphysical realism, as
depicted by Putnam, provides no motivation whatever for denying that.
Still less would my alethic realism be moved to deny it. Why should a
realist of any stripe deny that it is possible for an ideal theory to be true?
(2) If the argument were sound, wouldn't it be possible to show that
any consistent theory is true? For if the operational and theoretical con
straints on an ideal theory leave room for interpretations that make the
theory true, why shouldn't an unideal theory, as unideal as you like,
enjoy the same benefit? To be sure, if the theory entailed false observa
tion statements, there would be no acceptable model in which all of its
sentences are true. If all true observation statements are included in
the theory, as Putnam supposes (1978, 126), then the theory would be
inconsistent including both a true observation statement and its con
tradictory, and the above claim is restricted to consistent unideal theo
ries. And even if we don't include true observation statements in the
theory, some of the theoretical premises used in the entailment of a
false observation statement would have to be false. So to illustrate the
present point, let's take nonideal theories to be defective in the theoreti
cal constraints-simplicity, plausibility, etc. In moving to an unideal the
ory we make it complicated rather than simple and implausible rather
than plausible. It seems clear that if an ideal theory has at least one
interpretation that makes it true, a diminution of ideality in the ways
just specified would not change the picture. How would the fact that
the theory is complicated or implausible rule out the possibility of an
assignment of designata and extensions that make all the sentences of
the theory come out true? But then the argument has no special ten
dency to show that an ideal theory can't be false. It shows, if it shows
anything, that no consistent theory that doesn't have any false entail
ments can be false. And if that's the way the wind blows, the argument
does nothing to support an identification of truth with rational accept
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
ability. It will be just as much a support for a "rational unacceptability"
theory of truth. We can apply the results of the first point to illuminate
this situation. Since the argument only shows, at most, that it is possible
for an ideal theory to be true, it comes as no great surprise that it can
also show that it is possible for a variety of unideal theories to be true.
Here is another indication that something is amiss with the MT argu
ment. We don't have to delve far below the surface to see that this is a
kind of indeterminacy of reference argument. Unlike an argument I will
be considering later in the chapter, this one doesn't have indeterminacy
of reference as its conclusion, but it does depend on its being the case
that the constraints Putnam recognizes leave open a wide variety of in
terpretations. That is why it is possible to find an interpretation that
renders the theory true. But if that is so, then we don't yet have anything
on our hands that is capable of either truth or falsity. Before we can
sensibly raise the question of truth value we must have a truth bearer
that is more definite than this, one that expresses a proposition that is
determinate enough to have a unique truth value. If the best we can say
is that on a number of possible interpretations the theory is true and on
a number of other possible interpretations the theory is false, we are still
a long way from showing either that the "theory" is true or that it is
false. We must go back to the drawing board and make the "theory"
more definite before any such question can be significantly raised. This
indeterminacy at the heart of the argument is responsible for my first
criticism that if the argument establishes truth it also establishes falsity.
In other words, it establishes neither but only the possibility of either,
depending on how the "theory" is further firmed up.
Putnam might respond that his "operational and theoretical con
straints" make the theory as definite as it is possible for humans to make
it. I don't accept that at all, as will become clear shortly. But if that were
the case, then I think the reasonable conclusion would be not that we
must adopt an epistemic conception of truth, but that we should aban
don any attempt to evaluate theories for truth or falsity.
iii Another Reading of the Argument
In "Realism and Reason", after concluding the MT argument with
"So what becomes of the claim that even the ideal theory T, might really
be false? ", Putnam continues.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
Well, it might be claimed that SAT is not the intended correspon
dence between L and THE WORLD. What does 'intended' come to
here?
T, has the property of meeting all operational constraints. .. . But
the interpretation of 'reference' as SAT certainly meets all theoretical
constraints on reference-it makes the ideal theory, T, come out true.
So what further constraints on reference are there that could single
out some other interpretation as (uniquely) 'intended', and SAT as
an 'unintended' interpretation (in the model-theoretic sense of 'inter
pretation')? The supposition that even an 'ideal' theory (from a prag
matic point of view) might really be false appears to collapse into
unintelligibility. (1978, 126)
This passage suggests a different interpretation of the argument. I
have been criticizing the argument for not showing the impossibility of
the ideal theory's being false. But perhaps, rather than trying to prove
that the ideal theory must be true, Putnam is simply throwing down a
challenge to the metaphysical realist. "You say that it is possible for the
ideal theory to be false. But show me that it is so intended (i. e. , that an
interpretation is so intended) as to make this a possibility. I can show
you an interpretation (or show you that there is an interpretation) al
lowed by the operational and theoretical constraints on which it is true.
What can you do to show me that this is not the intended interpretation,
and that the intended interpretation instead is one on which there is a
possibility of falsity? The interpretation that makes it true satisfies all
operational and theoretical constraints (1978, 126). What other devices
do you have to pick out a model that would leave open the possibility of
falsity? "
We must recognize that on this understanding of the argument it
doesn't do what Putnam said he was setting out to do: refute the supposi
tion that an ideal theory might be false. Just posing a challenge to the
realist to show that an interpretation is intended on which it might be
false falls far short of showing that it is not the case that it might be false.
But I will evaluate the argument on this weaker construal nonetheless.
Before considering various possible responses to the challenge, we
had better look at the following complication. Suppose that an interpre
tation that makes the theory true is "intended". Does that show that the
theory might not (could not) be false? Doesn't it show only that it is true,
not that it must be true? But we have to be sensitive here to various
orders of modality. Of course, showing that on the intended interpreta
tion a theory is true doesn't show that it is logically impossible for it to
be false. But it does show that falsity is impossible, consistent with that
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
interpretation; the interpretation logically entails truth. And so the chal
lenge to the realist is to show that an interpretation is intended that
leaves open the possibility of falsity.
Let's be clear about the difference between this construal of the argu
ment and the one I have been criticizing. Putnam, of course, does not
purport to show that an interpretation on which the theory is true is
the intended interpretation (by whom? ). That would be to revert to the
original construal, as an attempt to show that the theory must be true.
No, on this reading, he is challenging the metaphysical realist to show
that no interpretation that makes all the sentences of the theory come
out true is intended. And if we ask, "Intended by whom? ", that turns
out to be irrelevant. For Putnam aspires to show that no one can intend
an interpretation on which the possibility of falsity (consistent with that
interpretation) is left open. His argument is that we lack resources for
doing so, that doing so is not a human possibility.
Continuing with this version of the argument, Putnam imagines vari
ous ways in which the realist might seek to meet the challenge. She
might appeal to a causal theory of reference to reduce, or wholly elimi
nate, the indeterminacy of reference left by the constraints with which
Putnam is working. 5 If the referents of singular terms and the extensions
of general terms are fixed by causal relations between things in the
world and the speaker, then it would be an open question, to be deter
mined by what the world is like, whether the theory containing terms
with those referents is true or not. But Putnam responds:
"Notice that a 'causal' theory of reference is not (would not be) of
any help here: for how 'causes' can uniquely refer is as much of a puzzle
as how 'cat' can, on the metaphysical realist picture" (1978, 126).
Unfortunately, for Putnam, this response rests on a conflation of fix
ing reference with showing that reference has been fixed, or at least specifying
how reference has been fixed. The most that Putnam's remark (or an expan
sion of it into a full-blown argument) could show is that the attempt to
specify or show how reference is fixed raises problems about the refer
ence of terms used to do that, problems that parallel the problems about
reference raised by the use of any other terms. But that by no means
4. As will appear in due course, this implies that the resources Putnam allows us-the "oper
ational and theoretical constraints"-leave the theory indeterminate to a considerable extent.
5. Putnam follows what is, in my judgment, the very bad, albeit widespread, practice of
(mis) using the term 'refer' both for the relation of a singular term to what it designates and for
the relation of a general predicate to the set of things of which it can be truly asserted (what
used to be called its "extension"). The term 'refer' is (most) properly used to indicate what a
speaker does when she specifies something as what she is talking about. Despite my disapproval
I will from time to time go along with the more general practice.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
shows that causal relations do not, in fact, determine reference. To be
sure, it hasn't been shown that causal relations do determine reference
either. But that is not to the point. Putnam is seeking to show that the
realist cannot intend an interpretation on which the ideal theory might
be false. And even if he could show that the realist cannot show that he
can have such an intention, that by no means amounts to showing that
the realist cannot have such an intention. We can, and do, have all sorts
of abilities that we cannot prove we have.
In various places Putnam considers, and dismisses, various other possi
ble realist responses to the challenge, such as a "direct (and mysterious)
grasp of Forms" (1978, 127) or a "magical" theory of reference [it just
happens! ] (1981, 3). The question of what it is by virtue of which singu
lar terms refer to what they do and general terms have the extensions
they have is a fundamental, deep, and enormously difficult question. I
have views on the subject, but this is not the place to go into them. The
present point is that what Putnam needs for his project of disposing of
metaphysical realism (so far as this construal of his argument is con
cerned) is a demonstration that there is no way in which a realist could
"intend an interpretation" of the ideal theory that leaves open the possi
bility of its falsity. And he is a very long way from having done that.
iv What Is an "Interpretation"?
Although I am convinced that the last two sections conclusively show
that Putnam's argument fails to do what he expects of it, on either inter
pretation of that expectation, I fear that we have only been gliding over
the surface of the issues involved. We will have to dig deeper if we are to
see the most fundamental problems with Putnam's way of approaching
the matter, and to see our way clear to a more adequate grasp of the
situation.
The deep reason for the failure of the MT argument has to do with
the extensional model of "interpretation" that is involved. In this argu
ment and elsewhere (e. g. , the indeterminacy of reference argument in
chapter 2 of Reason, Truth, and History) Putnam is following a massive
tradition in twentieth century logic, and in philosophy influenced by
that logic, in talking as if we "interpret" sentences, a body of discourse,
or a whole language extensionally by assigning designata to singular
terms and extensions to general terms. The use of "models" to give an
6. For an elaboration of this point see Lewis 1984 and Heller 1988.
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
interpretation of a "theory" is along these lines. We have given a defi
nite interpretation of a theory if and only if we have carried out such
assignments for every nonlogical term of the theory. (We also presup
pose grammatical structure, of course. ) Indeed, Putnam saddles the
metaphysical realist with a commitment to such an approach. 7
The predicament [for the metaphysical realist] only is a predica
ment because we did two things: first, we gave an account of under
standing the language in terms of programs and procedures for using
the language (what else? ); and then, secondly, we asked what the pos
sible 'models' for the language were, thinking of the models as exist
ing out there' independent of any description. At this point, something
really weird had already happened, had we stopped to notice. On any
view, the understanding of the language must determine the refer
ence of the terms, or, rather, must determine the reference given the
context of use. If the use, even in a fixed context, doesn't determine
reference, then use isn't understanding. The language, on the per
spective we talked ourselves into, has a full program of use; but it still
lacks an interpretation.
This is the fatal step. To adopt a theory of meaning according to
which a language whose whole use is specific still lacks something
namely its 'interpretation'-is to accept a problem which can only
have crazy solutions. To speak as if this were my problem, 'I know how
to use my language, but, now, how shall I single out an interpretation? '
is to speak nonsense. Either the use already fixes the 'interpretation',
or nothing can. (1983, 23-24)
Well, suppose we agree with Putnam that the metaphysical realist has
no way of specifying a unique intended extensional interpretation of the
terms in the theory, where that would involve hooking up the terms to
things and sets of things in an independently existing, real world. And
suppose we further agree that this shows that the realist cannot satisfy
the demand to show that the intended (extensional) interpretation of
the ideal theory leaves open the possibility of falsity? How discomfited
should the realist feel about this?
Let's grant Putnam that on the terms he has set, the realist is in a highly
unfavorable position. But why should we suppose that these terms are
appropriate? Why should we think that the realist must successfully carry
out the herculean task Putnam has assigned her in order to achieve
7. Putnam denies (1978, 124) that he is assuming that the metaphysical realist takes it that
understanding a term amounts to knowing what its designatum or extension is; but I can't see
how the argument is supposed to go without that assumption.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
determinacy of reference? Why should we suppose that the realist must
specify the items in the independently existing world that constitute the
designata or extensions of the terms of the theory in order that the
theory have a definite interpretation? So far from this demand being rooted
in the realist position, it runs directly counter to that position. It is true that
the metaphysical realist holds that most meaningful general terms have
extensions made up (where not empty) of independently existing ob
jects, and usable singular terms designate (where successful) indepen
dently existing objects. But she is far from holding, or holding anything
that implies, that a definite interpretation of a language or a theory
must specify what the designatum of each singular term is and what the
extension of each general term is. On the contrary, it is fundamental to
realism to hold that it is not up to us to determine what is included in
the extension of, for example, 'cat'. It is fundamental to realism to deny
Putnam's oft repeated assertion: "Either the use already fixes the inter
pretation or nothing can". At least it is basic to realism to deny this if we
are thinking of interpretation along the lines of model theory
"interpreting" the language (theory) by listing designata for singular
terms and members of extensions for general terms. Although realism
recognizes that the "interpretation" (understanding, meaning) makes
an important contribution to the determination of its extension, it is
crucial to realism to deny that this is the whole story. It depends not
(just) on our understanding (use) of language but also on how things
are in the world just what is included in the extension of 'cat', that is,
how many cats there are, and which of the individuals in the world have
what it takes to be a cat. Therefore it comes as no shock to the realist
that the "operational and theoretical" constraints laid out by Putnam
do not fix the "reference" of terms in the theory. That is just what the
realist would expect. 8
Let me spell out more explicitly how a sensible realist thinks of this
situation. I start with an unspecific formulation. The extension of a gen
eral term is jointly determined by the meaning of the term and facts of
the world, the latter being nonlinguistic facts except in those special
cases in which the term is a metalinguistic one. The meaning lays down
necessary and sufficient conditions for something's falling in the exten
8. These unrealistic requirements of Putnam's are connected with the extremely widespread
tendency to speak of "use (meaning) determining reference". It may be that many of those who
use this locution are guilty of nothing worse than using a sloppy way of saying that use (mean
ing), together with relevant facts of the world determine reference. But habitual sloppiness is not
without its dangers, as we see by witnessing the lengths to which this kind of talk has carried
Putnam.
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
sion of the term; and the way the (largely nonlinguistic) world is deter
mines what objects satisfy those conditions. This formulation strictly
applies only to terms with perfectly precise meanings. Suitable adjust
ments are required for terms whose meanings are less than completely
precise, but the general outlines of the account are the same.
This is an unspecific formulation because it does not make explicit
what it is for a term to have a certain meaning. There are, of course,
many competing positions on this, and a realist is not restricted to any
particular theory of meaning, though her realism may be incompatible
with some. I agree with Putnam in holding that "use" theories of mean
ing are the only games in town, though I certainly don't claim that this
is implied by realism, and I don't agree with Putnam's restrictions on
what aspects of use determine meaning. I use the term 'use theory of
meaning' for any account that takes linguistic meaning to be superve
nient on aspects of what users of the language do with it in communica
tion and in the articulation of thought. At the time he put forward the
antirealist arguments we are considering Putnam favored a verification
ist kind of use theory, one that is in the same ball park as the account of
Dummett's we discussed in the last chapter. I have already explained
why I regard this account as unacceptable. Other prominent versions of
use theory are the Grice-Schiffer-Bennett account in terms of speaker
intentions to produce effects in addressees, and the illocutionary-act
potential account put forward by Searle and myself. I have no space here
to go into theories of meaning. I will only say that I take it to be a neces
sary condition of adequacy for such a theory that it explain how it is
that, by virtue of having a certain meaning, a general term embodies
(more or less precise) necessary and sufficient conditions for some
thing's falling within its extension.
What I have just said by no means rules out views, like Putnam's in
"The Meaning of 'Meaning'" (in Gunderson 1975), according to
which the meaning of a general term has a certain "indexical" feature.
In that essay Putnam attacked the view that the requirements for mem
bership in the extension of a term are all given by general properties
that make up a concept expressed by the term. "Meanings ain't all in
the head" was Putnam's slogan. Thus the meaning of 'gold' (what it
takes for something to be gold) is not given solely by a set of properties
that people typically have in mind as definitive of gold-yellowness, duc
tility, malleability, etc. Rather, what it takes to be gold is that something
have the same essential nature (chemical composition) as socially ac
9. See, 1978, 127-29 and 1983, 20, for endorsements of Dummett.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
cepted paradigms of gold. Reference to this latter is where the "indexi
cal" element comes in. The most basic component of the meaning of
'gold' is, to be sure, a property (though Putnam does not emphasize
this), but it is an "impure" property, one with a relation to particular
paradigms built into it. This most basic component is something like:
having the same chemical constitution as things in the paradigm. The meaning
(of the ordinary, commonsense term) does not include a specification
of what that chemical constitution is, only a requirement that it meet
this condition. We can also, as Putnam does in this essay, include a "ste
reotype" in the meaning-such standard properties as yellowness, mal
leability, and so on. But these are not necessary conditions for being
gold. The only strictly semantically (conceptually) necessary condition
is the one just given in italics. I go into the view at this length to under
line the point that the condition of adequacy for a theory of meaning I
have laid down (explaining how the meaning of a general term embod
ies conditions for membership in the extension) does not require us to
hold that the meaning is exhaustively given by a set of purely general
properties and does not rule out a view like the one he sets out in
(Gunderson 1975).
This brief discussion has been restricted to general terms, since one
can say something fairly definite about them in a short compass. Singu
lar terms present thornier problems. With "indexical" terms and proper
names, the meaning (what on the best semantic description of the lan
guage counts as the meaning) does not suffice to constitute necessary
and sufficient conditions for being the designatum of the term. Design
ata vary on different occasions of use; the context of use and intentions
of the speaker come into the picture. But these are aspects of "use"
also. So at the most general level the picture is the same. Aspects of the
use of the term determine what it takes for something to be designated
by the term. It is then "up to the way the world is" what, if anything,
satisfies those conditions.
So what the realist wants to say is that we should not understand an
"interpretation" of a theory or a language as an assignment of "refer
ents" to the terms involved. A theory is interpreted when (in addition
to grammatical structure) all meaningful terms are assigned meanings.
That is all that is needed to understand the theory. A grasp of meanings
is all that is needed to equip one to use the sentences of the theory to
make definite statements. It is then in the lap of the gods just what falls
within the extensions of the general terms involved and whether what
one says in uttering a given sentence is true.
Therefore the fact that the metaphysical realist is not in a position to
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
derive a unique intended extensional "interpretation" from his "use" of
the language involved should not be taken as a reproach to the position.
It is, rather a confirmation of that view. Putnam's idea that the metaphys
ical realist is, by virtue of his position, faced with an extra step of hook
ing up each term of the theory with things and sets of things in the
world rests on a radical misunderstanding of the situation. Not only is
there nothing in the realist position that engenders any such require
ment; the most basic facts of language, and our use thereof, make that
requirement thoroughly gratuitous. The acquisition, use, and under
standing of language just doesn't work that way. People do not learn
general terms by having the extension of each laid out for them. If that
were necessary, a first (or any subsequent) language would never be
acquired. It is not within human powers to teach someone the meaning
(use) of 'cat' by enumerating or pointing out all cats-past, present, and
future, throughout the whole universe. Hence our mastery of the term,
our ability to make use of what we learned when we learned the term,
does not involve the employment of any such "interpretation". Supposi
tions to the contrary come from hypnotic fascination with the procedure
of formal logic in describing (not, usually, actually carrying out) the
procedure of setting up formal, artificial "languages" by such an exten
sional "interpretation". If one allows this model to blind one to the
most obvious facts of the human use of actual languages, one may be
led to suppose that something like this is what a realist would have to do
to attach a definite meaning to a language. But once we get the actual
facts of real language use before us, this supposition vanishes like the
morning mist with the noonday sun.
At the risk of overexposure, let me bring out explicitly the bearing
the above considerations have on Putnam's claim that the realist is in
no position to maintain that an "interpretation" on which the ideal
theory comes out true is not the "intended" interpretation. Putnam
supports this by suggesting that the "operational and theoretical con
straints" he mentions are the only things that can enter into what it is
to intend a certain (extensional) interpretation. There are two ways in
which the above discussion bears on this. First, I have pointed out that
there are a number of other "use" theories of meaning according to
which the kinds of constraints Putnam singles out are by no means the
only aspects of use that enter into determining an interpretation (and
hence not the only features an intention to include which could figure
in what makes a certain interpretation "intended"). But second and
more importantly, I have pointed out that, by the terms of the human
condition, none of us can be in a position to intend an extensional inter
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
pretation of the sort envisaged in model theory. Hence the fact that the
realist is unable to show that one such interpretation is not the intended
interpretation has no significance for the merits or demerits of realism.
In being unable to do this the realist is merely sharing in the common
human lot, and that constitutes no reason for rejecting her position.
There is something else behind Putnam's supposition that the MT
argument tells against metaphysical realism. The whole discussion
hinges on an unwarranted picture of the metaphysical realist vainly
struggling to connect his terms with items in a wholly transcendent
realm. If we think of the metaphysical realist as committed to a domain
of "transcendent" entities, out of any contact with our thought, experi
ence, and discourse, then it can look as if he is faced with an extra, and
insuperable, task of relating the terms of our thought and discourse to
that transcendent reality. But this is, at best, constructing an artificial
position in order to have a target for refutation. No living, breathing
realist, to my knowledge, takes any such stand. I certainly do not. I don't
think of realism as implying that one must, by some supreme metaphysi
cal effort, "reach outside" our experience, thought, and discourse, to
make contact with a transcendent realm. On the contrary, the real, inde
pendently existing world, the nature of which makes our statements true
or false, is one with which we are in contact already through our experi
ence, thought, and discourse. The constituents of that world-people,
trees, animals, buildings, oceans, galaxies, God-are things we perceive
or otherwise experience, think about, and talk about. They are not
wholly external to us and our cognitive and linguistic doings, though
they don't depend (for the most part) on those doings for what they
are. No sensible realism supposes or implies that the realist is faced with
the task Putnam takes the position to require.
Let me summarize the most crucial points of this rather complex criti
cism of the MT argument. (1) Even if the argument were wholly success
ful, it would only show the logical possibility of an ideal theory's being
true, and leave open the logical possibility of the theory's being false
something the metaphysical realist is happy to accept. (2) If the argu
ment shows anything, it shows that any theory we can construct is too
indeterminate to be susceptible of truth or falsity. Hence it is far from
showing that we can't deny that the ideal theory is true. (3) If the argu
ment is construed as merely throwing down a challenge to the realist to
show that an "interpretation" on which the ideal theory is true is not
the "intended" interpretation, it suffers from using a purely extensional
sense of "interpretation" (a) that the realist will, in principle, reject,
and (b) which is such that no human being is in a position to "inter
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
pret" her language or theory in this sense. (4) Putnam's idea that the
argument tells against the metaphysical realist is based on a wholly gratu
itous supposition that the former is faced with the task of connecting
terms of a language or theory with a completely transcendent reality.
v Indeterminacy of Reference
I have already noted that a claim of indeterminacy of reference is
involved in the MT argument, although it is not an argument for such
indeterminacy, nor is it directly an argument from indeterminacy to the
denial of metaphysical realism. Nevertheless, Putnam does suggest, espe
cially in "Models and Reality", that the indeterminacy involved tells
against metaphysical realism but not against internal realism.
We need, therefore, a standpoint which links use and reference in just
the way that the metaphysical realist standpoint refuses to do. The
standpoint of 'non-realist semantics' is precisely that standpoint. From
that standpoint, it is trivial to say that a model in which, as it might be,
the set of cats and set of dogs are permuted (i. e. , 'cat' is assigned the
set of dogs as its extension, and 'dog' is assigned the set of cats) is
'unintended' even if corresponding adjustments in the extensions of
all the other predicates make it end up that the operational and theo
retical constraints of total science or total belief are all 'preserved.
Such a model would be unintended because we didn't intend the word
'cat' to refer to dogs. From the metaphysical realist standpoint, this an
swer doesn't work; it just pushes the question back to the metalan
guage. The axiom of the metalanguage, "cat" refers to cats' can't
rule out such an unintended interpretation of the object language,
unless the metalanguage itself already has had its intended interpreta
tion singled out; but we are in the same predicament with respect to
the metalanguage that we are in with respect to the object language,
from that standpoint, so all is in vain. However, from the viewpoint of
'non-realist' semantics, the metalanguage is completely understood,
and so is the object language. So we can say and understand, " "cat"
refers to cats'. Even though the model referred to [in which dogs and
cats are interchanged] satisfies the theory, etc. , it is 'unintended'; and
we recognize that it is unintended from the description through which it is
given. .. . Models are not lost noumenal waifs looking for someone to
name them; they are constructions within our theory itself, and they
have names from birth. (1983, 24-25)
The argument suggested by this passage is clearly different from the
MT argument that we have been discussing, the one that is directed
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
either to showing that the ideal theory cannot be false or to showing that
the metaphysical realist cannot intend some interpretation on which it
might be false. Here the suggestion is rather that the "operational" and
"theoretical" constraints laid out by Putnam leave reference indetermi
nate for the metaphysical realist but not for the internal realist. Let's
call this the MR ("Models and Reality") argument. " It is closely related
to an argument for referential indeterminacy presented in Reason, Truth,
and History (1981). There Putnam works with a much stronger con
straint the fixing of the truth values of all sentences of the theory in
all possible worlds; and he argues that even this will leave indefinitely
many alternatives open for the reference of terms (33-38). Determi
nacy at the sentence level does not trickle down to determinacy at the
term level. The intuitive idea is that we can change any given "refer
ence" if we make enough compensatory changes elsewhere. Call this
the RTH argument. Putnam gives a formal presentation in an appendix,
and I will accept it as valid. " Though the two arguments differ with
respect to the constraints that are said to leave reference indeterminate,
a number of points apply to both, and for the most part I will treat them
together. My discussion falls into two parts. First, I will argue that neither
argument succeeds in showing that the metaphysical realist is faced with
a crippling referential indeterminacy. This is the part that directly bears
on my basic aim in this book-to defend alethic realism. Second, I will
explore Putnam's reasons for thinking that even though the arguments
saddle the metaphysical realist with referential indeterminacy they leave
the internal realist untouched. This discussion is not really germane to
the defense of alethic realism, but it has important implications for the
understanding of Putnam's alternative to metaphysical realism.
Do these arguments really show that reference must be indeterminate
for the metaphysical realist? The reader might well expect me at this
point to recur to the contention of section iv that Putnam is working
with a thoroughly unrealistic conception of what is involved in "inter
preting" a theory or a language, namely, assigning particular designata
to singular terms and enumerating extensions of general terms, à la
model theory. But in both these arguments we have a different approach
to extensions. Look at how Putnam specifies extensions in the above
passage from "Models and Reality": "[T]he set of cats and set of dogs
10. I don't mean this label to imply that this is the only argument to be found in "Models
and Reality". The MT argument is explicitly presented there as well.
11. Though Putnam does not say in so many words that this is an argument against metaphys
ical realism, the subsequent course of the discussion in 1981 seems to indicate that this is the
way he is thinking of it.
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
are permuted (i. e. , 'cat' is assigned the set of dogs as its extension, and
'dog' is assigned the set of cats)". When he gives examples of divergent
extensions for a given term that are all left open by the constraints in
question, he does so, not by enumerating the members of each exten
sion in the spirit of model theory, but by using a general term (the same
or a different one) to do so. 'Cat' might refer to the class of cats or the
class of dogs. Or again, in RTH: "Cow" refers to cows' follows immedi
ately from the definition of 'refers' (136). This is what we might call
an "intensional" rather than an "extensional" way of specifying exten
sions. The extension is specified by using a general term we assume that
we understand well enough for this purpose. This procedure is identical
with the one I said, in section iv, is used by the realist (and anyone else
for that matter) to "get at" extensions. The extension of a general term,
I said, is determined by the meaning of the term, which lays down a
criterion for membership in the extension, plus facts of the world that
determine just what items, if any, satisfy that criterion. When we specify
an extension, as Putnam does in these passages, by using a general term
to do so, this is what we are doing. We suppose that the term in question
embodies a criterion for membership in the extension and thereby, to
gether with the way the world is, uniquely (insofar as the criterion is
precise) determines a class of things to which the term truly applies.
Putnam does not evince awareness of this difference between exten
sional and intensional ways of specifying extensions. But since he has,
however unconsciously, moved from the former to the latter in these
indeterminacy of reference arguments, I cannot criticize them on the
grounds that the enumerative way of determining extensions is not vi
able.
But one critical point made in section iii against the MT argument
does apply here-namely, Putnam's conflation of referring to something
and showing that one has done so or specifying how one has done so. That
conflation appears in the MR argument when Putnam claims that in
order for the metaphysical realist to intend 'cat' to refer to cats, she
must adopt an axiom of the metalanguage that lays this down. But the
term 'cat', as used in this axiom, itself is in need of an intended interpre
tation, and so requires a parallel axiom in a meta-metalanguage. And in
turn. .. . An infinite regress looms, and the poor realist never succeeds
in forming the intention. 12 But the regress gets started only because of
the assumption that the realist cannot intend to refer to cats by 'cat'
12. Later in this section I will consider why Putnam thinks that this regress does not arise for
the internal realist.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
(and so cannot succeed in doing so) unless she can spell out those refer
ential intentions (and perhaps show that they are carried out, or specify
how they are carried out). And this assumption is wholly unjustified,
being a special case of the conflation between doing something and saying
(thinking, proving) that one is doing it, or explaining how one manages to do it.
We do things all the time without being able to specify what we are
doing or explaining how we get them done. Why should referring be an
exception to this generalization? Again, in making this point I don't
mean for a moment to deny that there are interesting and important
questions about reference-what it is by virtue of which one uses a singu
lar term to refer to one individual rather than others, and what it is by
virtue of which one uses a general term with one extension rather than
another or that philosophers are quite properly concerned with such
questions. But the fact remains that it is an egregious error to suppose
that referential success depends on being able to answer such questions,
either in general or in application to particular cases.
Although this point is, I believe, fatal to the specific argument quoted
above from "Models and Reality", there is a more basic defect that at
taches to both referential indeterminacy arguments. The constraints rela
tive to which reference is said to be indeterminate do not exhaust the resources
available to the metaphysical realist for securing determinate reference. Since the
two arguments work with different constraints, we will have to take each
in turn. First the RTH argument. I have already accepted Putnam's
proof that fixing truth values in all possible worlds does not suffice to
determine the references of terms. But why should this bother the meta
physical realist? Why can't she respond by saying that what this shows is
that this approach to semantics fails to cut things finely enough to han
dle the semantics of terms? I noted in Chapter 1 that the identification
of propositions with sets of possible worlds (roughly a proposition is the
set of worlds in which it is true) individuates propositions much too
broadly. All logically equivalent propositions turn out to be identical.
The present point is allied to that one. Putnam's argument shows that
this possible-worlds approach individuates things much too broadly for
the semantics of terms as well. The argument is really directed against a
certain program in semantics and has no bearing on metaphysical real
ism at all. To be sure, Putnam seems to think that the metaphysical real
ist is committed by her position to this kind of truth-based semantics,
but, so far as I can see, that supposition is wholly gratuitous. Even if no
viable alternative semantics were available and in section iv I suggested
that this is not the case-it doesn't follow that the metaphysical realist
13. None of the semantic approaches I suggested for the realist in section iv are based on the
notion of fixing truth values of sentences in all possible worlds.
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
is committed to this one. Even if no good apples are available I am not
required to eat a rotten one.
Now for the MR argument. Putnam points out that "the most com
mon view of how interpretations of our language are fixed by us. .. is
associated with the notions of an operational constraint and a theoreti
cal constraint" (1981, 29). Nevertheless, such constraints are far from
being exhaustive of our resources for attaching meaning to terms and
hence for providing the linguistic contribution to fixing their refer
ences. One additional resource is our capacity to develop new concepts
(word meanings) by analogical extension from concepts we already pos
sess. There is an extensive literature on the role of analogy in the devel
opment of theoretical concepts in science. 14 Because of this there are
features of the meanings of theoretical terms that are not captured by
either operational or theoretical constraints. In my brief criticism of
Dummett's verificationist semantics in Chapter 4, section iii, I gave both
scientific and theological examples of this sort of thing. Hence from the
fact that the "operational and theoretical constraints" of a certain the
ory fail to yield different meanings for 'particle' and 'wave' (to vastly
oversimplify a certain well-known example), it doesn't follow that they
are indistinguishable in meaning and reference. For other contributions
to their meaning, illustrated by the points just made, might render them
semantically distinguishable.
I now turn to what seems to me the most puzzling thing about these
arguments, Putnam's claim that they show the metaphysical realist to be
faced with an indeterminacy of reference while leaving the internal realist
free of any such liability. 15 How can this be? If the constraints in each case
constitute all we have to work with in rendering reference determinate,
how can it be that these constraints don't leave reference as indetermi
nate for the internalist as for the metaphysical realist? 16
Though Putnam's thought on this point is not wholly clear to me, I
take his basic claim to be that the internal realist, but not the metaphysi
cal realist, has resources for determining reference over and above the
14. For a good discussion of this see Hesse 1966.
15. This problem does not arise for the MT argument. Obviously, the internal realist is not
bothered by the conclusion that an ideal theory cannot be false. That is a cornerstone of his
position.
16. As for the RTH argument, I can imagine Putnam saying that the argument doesn't apply
to the internal realist because it employs a metaphysically realist conception of truth. That would
make it an ad hominem argument like the MT argument, one that is designed to reveal difficul
ties implied by the metaphysical realist's own assumptions. But Putnam nowhere says this. Per
haps he doesn't because the argument would not seem to employ anything (with respect to
truth) that goes beyond Tarskian constraints on truth, and Putnam is on record as holding that
the Tarski constraints are acceptable to any theory of truth, including his own.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
constraints laid down in the arguments. Let's recall a bit from the sec
tion of "Models and Reality" quoted at the beginning of this section.
From that standpoint [of 'non-realist semantics'], it is trivial to say that
a model in which, as it might be, the set of cats and set of dogs are
permuted (i. e. , 'cat' is assigned the set of dogs as its extension, and
'dog' is assigned the set of cats) is 'unintended' even if corresponding
adjustments in the extension of all the other predicates make it end
up that the operational and theoretical constraints of total science or
total belief are all 'preserved'. Such a model would be unintended
because we didn't intend the word 'cat' to refer to dogs. .. . Even though the
model referred to [in which dogs and cats are interchanged] satisfies
the theory, etc. , it is 'unintended'; and we recognize that it is unin
tended from the description through which it is given. (1983, 24-25)
This passage raises more questions than it answers. The non-realist is
accorded the ability to intend an interpretation that goes beyond what
is fixed by the operational and theoretical constraints, but the metaphys
ical realist isn't. But why this discrimination? Is it sheerly arbitrary? Is
Putnam revoking the bars against a "magical" theory of reference for
the internalist but not for the metaphysical realist? Here is his attempt
to justify the unequal treatment.
From the metaphysical realist standpoint, this answer doesn't work; it
just pushes the question back to the metalanguage. The axiom of the
metalanguage, " "cat" refers to cats' can't rule out such an unin
tended interpretation of the object language, unless the metalan
guage itself already has had its intended interpretation singled out;
but we are in the same predicament with respect to the metalanguage
that we are in with respect to the object language, from that stand
point, so all is in vain. However, from the viewpoint of 'non-realist'
semantics, the metalanguage is completely understood, and so is the
object language. So we can say and understand, " "cat" refers to cats'.
But again this raises more questions than it answers. Why is it incumbent
on the metaphysical realist to fix the interpretation of terms in the meta
language by still higher level languages in order to escape indetermi
nacy of reference in the object language, while no such liability is
incurred by the internal realist, who has no trouble at all in just saying
and understanding that 'cat' refers to cats? Again, why this preferential
treatment? For light on this we must turn to a discussion in "Realism
and Reason" (1978) and its continuation in Reason, Truth, and History
(1981). In a section of the former entitled "Why All This Doesn't Refute
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT 155
fers'
Internal Realism", Putnam tells us that for the internal realist:
"Cow" refers to cows' follows immediately from the definition of 're
"Cow" refers to cows' is a logical truth" (1978, 136). Of
course, this isn't strictly a logical truth. Logical truths are necessarily
true, whereas it is only contingently true that 'cow' refers to cows. 'Cow'
might have had some quite different meaning, in which case its exten
sion would have been something other than the class of cows. Neverthe
less, Putnam has a point here, which could be put correctly by saying
that when we make a statement by using a term to say what that term
refers to, the meaning of our sentence guarantees that the statement is
true. Such statements are "guaranteed true", as we might say. So the
point is that the internal realist has no problem with indeterminacy of
reference, because he uses 'refer' in such a way that it always turns out
to be true that a given term can be used to specify what that term refers
to. (See also 1981, 52. ) But can't the metaphysical realist take advantage
of the same bonus? Why isn't it the case for him too that " Cow' refers
to cows" is guaranteed to be true? Here is Putnam's response:
Of course the externalist agrees that the extension of 'rabbit' is the
set of rabbits and the extension of 'extraterrestrial' is the set of extra
terrestrials. But he does not regard such statements as telling us what
reference is. For him finding out what reference is, i. e. , what the nature
of the correspondence' between words and things is, is a pressing
problem. .. . For me there is little to say about what reference is within
a conceptual system other than these tautologies. (1981, 52)
That is, for the realist reference is a substantial relation. Something other
than the way we use terms has to obtain in order that one of our words
gets hooked up with an object or a kind in order to be usable to talk
about that rather than something else. But there is no such "transcen
dent" dimension to reference for the internal realist.
I don't find this at all convincing. I can't see that Putnam has distin
guished the metaphysical and the internal realist in the way he supposes.
Both sides of the distinction are misdescribed. Why can't the metaphysi
cal realist recognize that " 'cow' refers to cows" is "guaranteed true" by
the meaning of the sentence? Because he thinks that there is a problem
as to what reference is? But how does that prevent him from recognizing
that, whatever the nature of reference might be, the meaning of 'refer'
is such that " "Cow' refers to cows" is guaranteed to be true? That could
be a feature of the meaning of 'refer', even though there are still impor
tant questions left over as to what reference is, questions as to how a
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
singular term has to be related to an individual in order that the latter
be the designatum of the former, and how a general term has to be
related to a class in order that the latter be the extension of the former.
This is parallel to a fundamental claim of this book, namely, that it is by
virtue of what 'true' means that any statement of the form 'It is true that
p if and only if p' is true, even though that doesn't answer all the impor
tant questions about truth, especially the question of how a statement
has to be related to a fact in order for that fact to make the statement
true.
This same point that the self-guaranteeing character of " "Cow' re
fers to cows" leaves open important questions as to what reference is
shows the other side of the distinction to be misdescribed as well. The
fact that the internal realist takes advantage of that self-guarantee does
not imply that there is no problem for him as to what reference is. The
question as to how a general term has to be related to a class in order
that the latter be the extension of the former arises for anyone who
ascribes extensions to general terms. How could it not? 17
But even if the contrast between the two realisms with respect to
whether there is a substantial problem as to what reference is were
sound, it would not show that or how the internal realist is not faced
with an indeterminacy of reference while the metaphysical realist is.
Suppose that the latter, but not the former, does have a problem as to
what reference is, over and above the point that statements of the form
'T' refers to Ts are guaranteed true. How would that show that they are in
a different position vis-à-vis determinacy of reference? The idea seems
to be that the guaranteed truth of such statements renders, or carries
the possibility of rendering, reference determinate unless there is a fur
ther problem as to what reference is. But how does that additional con
dition neutralize the efficacy of the "guaranteed true" point to ward
off indeterminacy? If determinacy of reference is (at least prima facie)
effected by the fact that any statement of the form 'T' refers to Ts is guar
anteed to be true, how would that be queered by the fact that there is a
17. The move Putnam tries to make here is similar to one he makes at one point in "Realism
and Reason". He argues that there is no indeterminacy of reference for a verificationist seman
tics like that of Dummett. Since the meaning of a sentence is given by verifying and/or falsifying
conditions, "the realist concepts of truth and falsity are not used in this semantics at all". And
that means that "the notion of 'reference' is not used in the semantics" (1978, 128). This leaves
me wondering why indeterminacy of reference isn't still a problem for the verificationist if it is
for the metaphysical realist, even if the notion of reference isn't used in his semantics. Doesn't
the verificationist still have to recognize that the words 'cow' or 'tree' must have one particular
set of objects as their extension rather than any other, if we are to use them to say what we mean
to be saying? And isn't he still faced with the question of what endows them with that determi
nate extension, given that the constraints in question leave them open?
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
further problem as to what reference is? What does that have to do with
it? The only supposed connection I can imagine involves another exam
ple of the conflation between doing it and talking about it. If we think
that someone who is faced with the problem of what reference is can't
secure definite reference until that problem has been solved, and fur
thermore think that it cannot be solved, then we will draw the conclu
sion that such a person cannot secure definite reference. But the first
and crucial premise of this argument is just our old conflation of referring
and showing that or how one refers. Clear that up, and the metaphysical
realist is in no inferior position to anyone else, so far as these considera
tions go.
But perhaps we have been looking in the wrong place for the clue to
Putnam's supposition that the internal realist is not subject to indetermi
nacy of reference, though the metaphysical realist is. Perhaps that con
viction really rests on some form of the picture, exposed and denigrated
in section iv, of the metaphysical realist as struggling with the impossible
task of connecting words with the constituents of a wholly transcendent
reality, completely outside our thought and experience. In a passage
from "Models and Reality" Putnam hints at a rationale along those
lines. "Models are not lost noumenal waifs looking for someone to name
them; they are constructions within our theory itself, and they have
names from birth" (1983, 25).
The hint is further developed in this passage.
For an internalist like myself, the situation is quite different. .. . [A]
sign that is actually employed in a particular way by a particular com
munity of users can correspond to particular objects within the con
ceptual scheme of those users. 'Objects' do not exist independently
of conceptual schemes. We cut up the world into objects when we
introduce one or another scheme of description. Since the objects
and the signs are alike internal to the scheme of description, it is possi
ble to say what matches what. (1981, 52)
This quotation, unlike the other passages we have been discussing,
brings a metaphysical difference between the two realisms to bear on
the issue. For the internalist, objects do not exist independently of con
ceptual schemes. The objects and the language are alike internal to the
scheme. While the metaphysical realist thinks of us as seeking to get the
truth about some antecedently existing and independently determinate
external reality, the internalist thinks of us as creating the lineaments
of reality (or of one reality among others) by working with a certain
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
conceptual/theoretical scheme. To be sure, Putnam not infrequently
disavows the view that we create reality out of whole cloth or that we can
make anything we like to be the case just by choosing to do so. He recog
nizes that we are subject to constraints from outside as to how we can
"set up" a world. 18 Nevertheless, a striking contrast between the "per
spectives" remains. For the metaphysical realist, of an Aristotelian stripe,
rabbits are "out there" as little furry mammals, whatever conceptual or
cognitive operations we or other intelligent subjects engage in. They are
what they are antecedently to all that, and it is up to us to find out what
that is, if we are concerned about the matter, and to conform our beliefs
and statements to that. For the internalist realist, on the other hand,
though we can't make up any world we choose, whether one of our
terms refers to rabbits or to rabbit stages depends on fundamental fea
tures of the conceptual scheme with which we are working. Roughly
speaking, if we use a substance ontology, we are referring to rabbits; if
we use an event ontology, we are referring to something in the neighbor
hood of rabbit stages. The identity of the referent is given, so Putnam
claims, by the structure of our conceptual scheme and not by any rela
tion of items in that scheme to items outside the scheme. Hence the
metaphysical realist is confronted with problems and difficulties about
reference from which the internal realist is spared.
Thus, not surprisingly, in the end the claim that the metaphysical real
ist is in a different position from the internal realist vis-à-vis reference
can be seen to turn on metaphysical differences. The point is that the
metaphysical realist is faced with an extra step of hooking terms up with
designata and extensions, just because he takes the latter to exist inde
pendently of thought, experience, and "conceptual schemes". But no
such step is required of the "internal realist" just because on that view
objects are "internal" to conceptual schemes, not beyond or indepen
dent of them. But so far this is just a picture. In the next chapter I
will explore various readings of, and alternatives to, Putnam's "reality as
internal to conceptual schemes" view. For now I will only make a few
points that are designed to cast doubt on the claim that this metaphysi
cal contrast has the consequences for reference that Putnam supposes
it to have.
First, note that it will help the internalist, at most, only with broad,
ontological aspects of reference. It will, at most, help him with the sort
of issue just mentioned, whether 'rabbit' refers to (substantial) rabbits
or to rabbit stages. But the problem that Putnam posed in Reason, Truth,
18. See, e. g. , Putnam 1981, xi, 54; 1987, 4, 17. These are all quoted in Chapter 6, section v.
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
and History (1981, chap. 2), concerned more radical indeterminacies.
There he argued that, having fixed the truth values of all statements in
all possible worlds, it is still indeterminate whether 'cat' refers to cats or
to robins. And internality to a conceptual scheme is not going to help
with that if the conceptual scheme in question involves both cats and
robins, as our commonsense scheme does.
Second, even if this metaphysical difference does have implications
for reference, it remains to be shown that it implies indeterminacy of refer
ence for the metaphysical realist but not for the internal realist. More
specifically, it remains to be shown that determinacy of reference is not
a real possibility for both. At this point I need to recur to the earlier
contention that the MR and RTH arguments do not saddle the meta
physical realist with indeterminacy of reference just because she is not
confined to the constraints on reference assumed by the arguments. If
the metaphysical realist is not condemned to indeterminacy by those
arguments, the question that remains is whether she is condemned to
this fate by the fact that (most of) the referents of her terms exist inde
pendently of our cognitive doings. And that, in turn, hangs on whether
such referents are cognitively inaccessible to us. Barring some extreme
form of skepticism, I see no reason to suppose that they are. I see no
reason to suppose that we are capable of cognizing only what has been
"parboiled" for our consumption by our own cognitive activity. Nor has
Putnam attempted to provide such a reason. Hence, until such time as
I see a convincing argument to the contrary, I will continue to assume
that we are capable of conceptualizing, referring to, directing illocutio
nary acts and propositional attitudes to, and knowing about a realm that
exists and is what it is independent of that cognitive activity. If this is a
sound assumption, there is no case for the conclusion that the metaphys
ical realist is saddled with indeterminacy of reference.
One final point. If there is any hope of a "conceptual-scheme inter
nalism" helping with a reference problem, there is a question as to how
radical that internalism has to be to do the job. Putnam does not want
a complete idealism in which reality (within a conceptual scheme) is
wholly our work, unconstrained by other influences. But it may be that
Putnam would have to go all the way with Hegel and other absolute
idealists to secure the results he is after. The discussion in Chapter 6 will
be relevant to that issue.
vi Putnam's "Brain in a Vat" Argument
Finally, in this catalogue of Putnam's arguments directed at a realist
conception of truth, we must take a look at the "Brain in a Vat" argu
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
ment, which is set out most fully in chapter 1 of Reason, Truth, and History
(1981). The argument is designed to discredit a standard skeptical sce
nario that runs as follows. "For all I know, I am merely a brain, being
kept alive and functioning by being submerged in a nutrient solution
and artificially fed neural stimulation that produces the kinds of sensory
impressions and thoughts that I would have if I were an ordinary embod
ied human being. If this were my situation, practically all my beliefs
even those I take to be best grounded-would be false. Since I wouldn't
be perceiving the things I think I am perceiving, all my beliefs that de
rive their credibility-directly or indirectly from those perceptual be
liefs would be unjustified. Since I don't know that this is not my
situation, most of what I believe is radically unjustified. " Putnam argues
that this alleged possibility is not really possible. Since a term of mine
refers to Xs only if my use of that term is under the causal control of Xs,
if I am a brain in a vat and I form a belief expressed by the words "I am
seated at a table", I can't be said to mistakenly suppose that I am seated
at a table. For since my use of the word 'table' (or the corresponding
"word" in my language of thought) is not causally connected in the
right way with tables, that word doesn't really refer to tables. And so
what the skeptic claims I am mistaken about I can't even entertain. On
a causal theory, what my word 'table' refers to is either mental images
or neural processes, and perhaps what I say about these things is true.
Since it is not possible that I should be a brain in a vat and still make
mistaken statements about the normal physical environment of real peo
ple, there is no possibility that I should always or usually be mistaken in
my beliefs by reason of being a brain in a vat. For if I were a brain in a
vat, I wouldn't be having the beliefs that I do have.
I don't agree that this argument succeeds in disposing of the brain
in-a-vat version of skepticism. For the argument presupposes that I do
have beliefs of the sort I suppose myself to have. But on Putnam's own
showing, hat presupposition in turn presupposes that I am not in a
brain in a vat; for if I were I couldn't be having beliefs with those con
tents. Hence the argument shows that I couldn't be a brain in a vat only
by virtue of presupposing that I am not a brain in a vat. However, what
I am interested in here is whether the disposal of brain-in-a-vat skepti
cism tells against the realist. In "Realism and Reason" Putnam casually
associates the possibility that we are brains in a vat with the idea that
truth is "radically nonepistemic", and hence that even an ideal theory
might be false (1978, 125). But is this justified? Van Inwagen (1988)
trenchantly points out that it is not. The point is this. (I am putting it
my way. ) The alethic realist is not committed by his position to accept
PUTNAM'S MODEL-THEORETIC ARGUMENT
the possibility that we are all, or any one of us is, a brain in a vat. Suppose
the realist goes along with Putnam's attempt to discredit this alleged
possibility. In that case the realist can agree that the ideal theory could
not be false for this reason. But the brain-in-a-vat (alleged) possibility is
not the only possible reason for the falsity of an epistemically ideal the
ory. One doesn't have to be an extreme skeptic about knowledge to
maintain the possibility of an epistemically ideal theory's being false.
One could, as realist, simply hold that epistemic credentials never entail
truth, and so no matter how strong the epistemic credentials of a theory,
there is still the logical possibility that it is false. To suppose that one
who takes that position is committed to even the logical possibility that
we are all brains in a vat, is to confuse sufficiency with necessity. The
possibility that we are brains in a vat is sufficient to undergird the possibil
ity of an ideal theory's being false, but it is not the only possible under
girding; and hence it is not necessary as a support for the realist
position. The alethic realist can cheerfully toss brain-in-a-vat skepticism
in the wastebasket and still take truth to be "radically nonepistemic".
CHAPTER 6
Putnam on "Conceptual Relativity"
i Putnam's Conceptual Relativity
The other antirealist line of argument in Putnam I want to consider
stems from a position that he usually terms "conceptual relativity". 1 It
would, I think, better be called "ontological relativity", a term Putnam
avoids, I suspect, because he wants to distinguish his position from the
well known view of Quine's that is so labelled. 2 This despite the fact that,
as we shall see, Putnam's position is more properly called "ontological
relativity" than Quine's.
Putnam's position is most directly opposed to the clearly metaphysical
components of what he calls "metaphysical realism", namely, (1) "the
world consists of some fixed totality of mind-independent objects", and
(2) "there is exactly one true and complete description of 'the way the
world is'" (1981, 49). But Putnam, who takes the realist account of
truth to be tightly bound up with these convictions in an indissoluble
package, thinks that his relativity tells against the realist conception of
truth as well. Deciding whether it does will be one of my main concerns
in this chapter.
Putnam's central contention is that there is a plurality of apparently
incompatible ways of dividing the world into objects, and that there is
1. Putnam studiously avoids the term 'conceptual relativism', since he is concerned to insist
that his doctrine is distinct from relativism.
2. The main distinction, so far as I can see, is that Quine's view, unlike Putnam, is based on,
and embodies an indeterminacy of reference doctrine. To be sure, in the last chapter we saw Putnam
presenting arguments that had an indeterminacy of reference as a conclusion. But, let's remem
ber, that argument was supposed to be based on premises taken from the "metaphysical realist",
premises from which Putnam withheld his assent. Indeterminacy of reference was presented as
something that the metaphysical realist was stuck with; the internal realist was deemed to be free
of its clutches. (I presented reasons for denying these claims of Putnam's, but at the moment I
am concerned only to present Putnam's understanding of "conceptual relativity". )
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
nothing in the nature of things, in "the world" or in "the facts", apart
from us and our cognitive activity, that makes one of these the "right
way", or even reduces the field to an easily manageable plurality. These
ways are incompatible if, but only if, they are each taken as "absolute",
as depicting the one unique constitution of reality. But if we give up the
dogma that there is "exactly one true and complete description of the
'the way the world is' ", we can recognize all of these different ontolo
gies as "right" or "correct".
His favorite examples of this are taken from mathematics, pure and
applied, and abstract ontology. In the first category he considers the
difference between taking points as fundamental entities in geometry,
and taking points to be logical constructions out of lines or out of vol
umes (1978, 130-33). He also points out that: "One can construe
space-time points as objects. .. or as properties. One can construe fields
as objects, or do everything with particles acting at a distance (using
retarded potentials)" (1978, 133).
Putnam's favorite ontological example has to do with mereology. In
Representation and Reality (1989, 110), he imagines taking "someone
into a room with a chair, a table on which there are a lamp and a note
book and a ballpoint pen, and nothing else, and I ask, 'How many ob
jects are there in this room? ' My companion answers, let us suppose,
Five'. " But then Putnam asks about mereological sums, entities the
identity conditions for which are given completely by what their constit
uents are. What about the "object" that is the mereological sum of my
nose and the lamp? And so for all possible mereological sums of the
objects originally recognized, for the mereological sums of those com
posite objects, etc. etc. (See also 1987, 18-19; 1992, 120. ) This is sup
posed to illustrate the point that there are alternative ways of counting
objects between which no objectively based choice is possible. Whether
all (or some) mereological sums are "objects" can be settled as we like,
if not in terms of taste or whim then in terms of what is more convenient
or useful for one or another purpose.
It may be thought that such abstract ontological differences are not
significant enough to motivate sweeping metaphysical conclusions.
Sure, we are free either to quantify over mereological sums or not, but
so what? And the mathematical examples may seem to bear only on the
question of how best to systematize specialized branches of mathematics
and mathematical physics and to have no more pervasive metaphysical
consequences. But this is just the tip of the iceberg. There are much
juicier candidates out there for alternative ontologies. Putnam mentions
some of these, too. He points out that there is no unique right way to
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
relate "ordinary objects" and "scientific objects". "We can speak as if
such ordinary objects were identical with scientific objects, or as if they
were distinct from the physical systems which constitute their matter, or
we can say that which physical system a given common sense object is
identical with is to some degree vague" (1992a, 109-10). And there are
many others. One with deep roots in the history of philosophy concerns
the difference between an Aristotelian substance ontology and one or
another version of an event or process ontology (Whitehead, Russell,
Bergson. .. ). Faint echoes of this are heard in Quine's contention that
it is indeterminate whether 'gavagai' (and indeed 'rabbit') refers to rab
bits or to "rabbit stages". It certainly looks as if Aristotle and Whitehead,
to concentrate on these two protagonists, divide up the world into basic
constituents in fundamentally different ways. For the former the basic
individuals are substances that remain identical through change of loca
tion, size, shape, and many other properties, whereas for Whitehead the
basic individuals are momentary events (momentary "acts" of feeling on
his construal). What Aristotle would take to be an enduring substance is
taken by Whitehead to be a "society" of "actual occasions" connected
by spatial, temporal, and causal relations. Add one more player to this
contest-Goodman's earlier nominalistic ontology of "scattered particu
lars". Each such particular would be taken by a realist (in the antinomi
nalist sense of that term) to be the sum of exemplifications of a
property. Thus what would more ordinarily be taken to be the sum total
of blue things, past, present, and future was construed by Goodman as
a "scattered particular" called "Blue".
If there can be no objective rational basis for declaring one of these
ontologies the winner (one out of a much more numerous diversity of
which these three are only representative), this is more grist for Put
nam's mill. He would maintain that there is no objective fact of the
matter as to which ontology is the correct one, no fact as to which one
gives us the true story as to how the world is actually structured. What
counts as objective facts, and hence what counts as true statements, will
differ from one ontology, one "conceptual scheme", to another. There
is no such thing as the "fixed totality of mind-independent objects" of
which the world consists. And it is not just what objects there are that is
relative to the ontology. The properties of objects will differ as well.
Whiteheadian actual occasions (and rabbit stages) just don't have the
same properties as substantial rabbits. Rabbits run, have size and shape
and weight, are furry; none of this is true of momentary rabbity events.
Thus, as Putnam frequently says, what objects there are is relative to a
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
theory or a description, one that has many equally correct alternatives,
and there are no theory-independent "facts of the matter".
[What objects does the world consist of? is a question that it only makes
sense to ask within a theory or description. (1981, 49)
'Objects' do not exist independently of conceptual schemes. (1981,
52)
[W]hat is (by commonsense standards) the same situation can be de
scribed in many different ways. (1989, p. 114)
In my picture, objects are theory-dependent in the sense that theories
with incompatible ontologies can both be right. (1990, 40)
[A]ccording to me, how many objects there are in the world (and
even whether certain objects. .. exist at all as individual 'particulars')
is relative to the choice of a conceptual scheme. (1987, 32)
What we cannot say. .. is what the facts are independent of all concep
tual choices. (1987, 33)
Within the Aristotelian conceptual scheme it is true, it is a fact, that
there are rabbits that are furry, run fast, like to eat lettuce, etc. None of
this is true, or is a fact, in a Whiteheadian or Goodmanian conceptual
scheme, though unfortunately for present purposes it is a much more
complex affair to set out useful examples of what would be true or a fact
in or for those schemes. (This last point is due, no doubt, to the fact
that our language reflects an Aristotelian ontology. )
Someone who is an even more hard-nosed realist than I might doubt
or deny that this "conceptual relativity" makes any sense. How could
what is a fact of the matter be relative to some particular conceptual
scheme? Either it is a fact that the milk is sour or it isn't. What concep
tual frameworks we do or do not use is totally beside the point. Before
dismissing Putnam's claim this easily, such a critic might ponder the
following consideration.
Putnam's ontological relativity is based on his diagnosis of certain clas
sical ontological oppositions. His contention, to repeat it once more, is
that since there is no possibility of any objective rational settlement of
the conflict, the best diagnosis is that the differences between the posi
tions simply amount to differences in the conceptual frameworks used
for representing reality rather than disagreements as to what the one
reality is like. And what Putnam is claiming with respect to these opposi
tions is what everyone, however realist, recognizes with respect to many
surface incompatibilities. There are many familiar cases in which what
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
look on the surface to be incompatible statements reflect differences in
ways of representing the facts rather than differences in the facts them
selves. One observer reports the temperature of the liquid as 39, the
other as 4. Sounds as if they contradict each other. But if the first is
employing a Fahrenheit scale, the second a Celsius scale, their state
ments are quite compatible. They are reporting the same thermal state
of affairs relative to different systems of measurement. Again, I tele
phone two people in Tel Aviv and ask each of them what time it is there.
One says 4: 00 P. M. and the other says 5: 00 P. M. Are they contradicting
each other? Not if one is reporting standard time and the other daylight
saving time. They are giving the "same information" represented in dif
ferent ways.
I drag out these obvious examples to suggest that Putnam can be
viewed as proposing an extension, a rather drastic extension, of some
thing we all accept in some cases. The extension is so drastic as to carry
the claim that everything we say falls under this rubric. Every true state
ment we make reflects a certain mode of representation, a certain
scheme of conceptualization and/or of dividing the domain into ob
jects, one for which there are equally acceptable alternatives as well as
reflecting the nature of that domain itself. And that is quite an exten
sion! By universalizing the phenomenon Putnam blocks any neutral way
of specifying the fact that is being represented in different ways. In our
uncontroversial examples, we could give a basic physical description of
the thermal fact that is reported differently in the Fahrenheit and Cel
sius scales, and we could specify the relative position of the sun and Tel
Aviv that is reported differently by giving standard or daylight saving
time. But if, as Putnam would have it, everything we say reflects some
replaceable mode of representation, we are forever debarred from
reaching a pure, unadulterated specification of the objective fact itself,
uncontaminated by any way of conceptualizing it. Putnam denies that
there is any way of displaying the "dough" that we use our "cookie
cutters" to shape in different ways.
A metaphor which is often employed to explain this is the metaphor
of the cookie cutter. The things independent of all conceptual choices
are the dough; our conceptual contribution is the shape of the cookie
cutter. Unfortunately, this metaphor is of no real assistance in under
standing the phenomenon of conceptual relativity. Take it seriously,
and you are at once forced to answer the question "What are the
various parts of the dough? " (1989, 113-14; see also 1987, 33-36)
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
And to answer this question we have to be working within some particu
lar conceptual scheme, rather than getting at something behind all such
schemes.
What the cookie-cutter metaphor tries to preserve is the naive idea
that at least one Category-the ancient category of Object or Sub
stance-has an absolute interpretation. The alternative to this idea is
not the view that it's all just language. We can and should insist that
some facts are there to be discovered and not legislated by us. But this
is something to be said when one has adopted a way of speaking, a
language, a "conceptual scheme". To talk of "facts" without specify
ing the language to be used is to talk of nothing; the word "fact" no
more has its use fixed by the world itself than does the word "exist"
or the word "object". (1989, 114)
Note too that in this passage Putnam reiterates the point that we are
not free to stipulate any old facts we choose. I can't just decide that my
net assets are five billion dollars or that my house is situated on the
Amalfi coast by manipulating my conceptual scheme in a certain way.
Truth is not just a matter of how my modes of representation work. 3 It
is constrained by the way the world is independently of me, as well as by
how I conceptualize it. But I can't separate out these constraints and
formulate each of them alone. Everything I can say or think is said or
thought from within some conceptual scheme for which there are alter
natives. And when I "discover" a fact, or respond to the way the facts
are-as they impinge on my cognitive apparatus-I do so in terms of
one or another conceptual scheme, between which there are choices.
Putnam takes these claims to oppose the view that "the world consists
of some fixed totality of mind-independent objects" and "there is ex
actly one true and complete description of 'the way the world is' ", the
first two of the three theses of "metaphysical realism" listed in Reason,
Truth, and History (1981, 49). And so they do. His conceptual relativity
takes everything to be mind-dependent (i. e. , dependent on our modes
of conceptualization and theorizing) to a certain extent. And the view
also includes the claim that that there is a plurality of alternative, equally
correct ways of describing what there is. But with respect to the rejection
of the first thesis of metaphysical realism, I must emphasize that Put
nam's espouses mind dependence in a very specific way. He doesn't em
brace a disjunction of Leibnizian panpsychism, Berkeleyan idealism,
and Hegelian absolute idealism. None of these idealists need embrace
3. See, e. g. , 1981, 54; 1989, 114.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
conceptual relativity by virtue of their idealism, and, presumably, none
of them did (though there can be arguments about Hegel's position on
this issue, as on many other issues). Putnam's view features a particular
sort of "mind-dependence"-dependence on the very cognitive-con
ceptual activity that takes the objects (and their properties and rela
tions) as its objects. It is relativity to a way of conceptualizing the world that
is the gist of the position. And so the metaphysical realism it opposes is
one that denies that. As just indicated, that metaphysical realism will
include many varieties of idealism as well-any that are committed to
the objective reality of one unique way the world is and one unique way
of telling the truth about the world. Hence the opponent of Putnam's
conceptual relativity is better termed an "ontological absolutist". I will,
however, slip from time to time into following Putnam's lead and refer
ring to his opponent as "metaphysical realist".
ii Hard-Nosed Absolutist Rejoinders
Now we must see how an ontological absolutist might respond to Put
nam's position. There are several possibilities.
(1) He can deny Putnam's crucial premise to the effect that there is
no rational, objective way of deciding between ontological oppositions
of the sort in question. If there is the possibility, in each case, of showing
one of the contending parties to have it right and the others to have it
wrong, Putnam's argument runs out of gas. All the plausibility of his
position derives from the claim that there is no way of deciding between
the alternatives. How do we decide who is right in this metadebate? How
do we decide whether it is possible to settle the ontological oppositions
to which Putnam appeals?
In support of his position Putnam can cite the fact that on these issues
no one position has ever commanded universal assent for any consider
able time. There have been periods in which a particular position has
been dominant, but this eventually changes. In the later middle ages
Aristotelian metaphysics was the received doctrine, but that quickly
crumbled with the development of modern physics in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. At the present moment it looks as if the opposi
tion between substance and process metaphysics, between realism and
nominalism, between parsimonious and profligate views on mereologi
cal sums, will continue ad indefinitum, with the contenders brandishing
arguments, replies to arguments of their opponents, replies to replies
to. .. etc. , with no one permanently withdrawing from the field. This
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY" 169
is an old charge against philosophy-that nothing ever gets settled. Nor
can we see anything on the horizon that will alter the situation.
But one who maintains that we cannot dismiss the possibility of a ratio
nal settlement of the mereological sums problem, for example, does not
have to deny the above points. She can say: "Yes, there is still plenty of
disagreement; but that doesn't show that conclusive reasons have not
been presented by one side or the other-much less that none will be
in the future. It is unjustified to tie 'settling the matter' that closely to
consensus. No doubt, a massive consensus among those who have con
sidered the matter thoroughly is a good reason for supposing the matter
to have been decided. But it is not a necessary condition, not the only
possible good reason. We have to recognize that an issue can be settled
de jure, but not de facto. Many factors can prevent someone from appre
ciating the strength of an argument. It may be difficult to hold it before
the mind all at once and grasp the way in which the parts fit together.
There may be strong contrary prejudices from group opinion or early
training. Furthermore, philosophical argumentation, especially in meta
physics, is the opposite of cut-and-dried. It takes mature, sensitive judg
ment to appreciate its force. And finally, there may be truths that some
people are simply not capable of seeing. These are some of the factors
that can prevent a general consensus, even if there is a conclusive case
for one of the contending parties.
"And even if no such case exists at present, that does not imply that
one will not be developed at some later date. The future of any intellec
tual endeavor is notoriously impossible to predict. Who in the nine
teenth century could have predicted the astounding developments in
physics in the twentieth? Indeed, predicting fundamental scientific or
other theoretical advances is not merely difficult; the very idea of such
prediction is inconsistent. If one were to succeed in predicting relativity
theory, she would have already developed that theory, and the "predic
tion" would be no prediction but the accomplished fact. Thus it is diffi
cult, if not impossible, to be justified in supposing that there is no real
possibility of a decisive case for one of the contending parties in the onto
logical disputes on which Putnam's argument is based. "
(2) In this way the absolutist can, with some show of reason, contend
that Putnam is unjustified in supposing that there is no real possibility
of showing which of the contending parties has it right about the way
the world is. But there are other responses open to him as well. He can
agree with Putnam about that and still maintain that there is a unique
fact of the matter as to whether, for example, rabbits are enduring sub
stances or societies of Whiteheadian actual occasions. In fact this is the
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
standard hard-nosed realist's response. It is a cardinal tenet of realism
that truth is distinct from epistemic status. And, as opponents like Put
nam and Dummett are fond of pointing out, this implies that there is a
real possibility of truths that we are incapable of recognizing as such,
"evidence transcendent" truths. This being the case, why should a real
ist be moved by even the strongest arguments for ontological relativity1
that are based on the premise that there are questions about whether p
or not-p is true that we are incapable of decisively answering? Why
should a realist be moved by this consideration to deny that the world
really is such that either p or not-p, but not both, is the case? This is just
what the realist is prepared by his position to accept.
So run the most intransigent realist responses to Putnam's ontological
relativity. But though I have considerable sympathy with these re
sponses, I also feel that it is a bit insensitive to dismiss so flatly the case
Putnam makes. It is important to distinguish two ways in which truth
might be evidence transcendent. First there is the possibility of truths
(facts) to which we have no cognitive access whatever, of any sort. We
cannot entertain them; they lie wholly outside our ken. 5 Realism is defi
nitely committed to this possibility. To abandon it would be a betrayal
of its opposition to the "man is the measure of all things" doctrine.
But it is not this sort of evidence transcendence that Putnam takes as
supporting his ontological relativity. He focuses on cases in which we
can envisage the alternatives clearly enough, but in which we are unable
to find sufficient objective grounds for preferring one to the other.
Is realism as firmly committed to the possibility of unique facts of the
matter in these kinds of cases? I cannot see that it is. The crucial differ
ence is this. For the first kind, since we have no capacity even to enter
tain them, we are in no position to take seriously an interpretation
contrary to the realist one. To be sure, we can conceive of the abstract
possibility that there are unthinkable (by us) alternative ways the world
might be such that one of them has as much right to that title as its
alternatives. But since we can't put any flesh on this skeleton, we have
no basis for reading the (possible) situation in a relativist rather than an
absolutist way. But where, as in Putnam's cases, we can spell out what
the alternatives are, and, we are now supposing, recognize our inability
to ever decide between them, we are thereby in a position to consider
an account contrary to absolutism. And it may be that, on sufficient
4. I am deliberately using this term for Putnam's position, despite his disavowal of it, be
cause I find it apt.
5. This possibility is exploited in Chapter 7, section v.
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
reflection, even a committed realist might decide that the ontological
relativist construal is a reasonable one. These considerations motivate
me to look for more concessive realist responses to Putnam's position.
I will mention one other relatively intransi
gent response that looks to be a possibility for at least some of Putnam's
cases. Think back on the mereology example. Is there a mereological
sum of any already recognized objects whatever? Suppose we agree with
Putnam that there is no sufficient rational basis for choosing between
various positions on this issue, ranging from no mereological sums to all
possible sums, but suppose we also maintain that there is no genuine
issue here just because there is no rational bar to accepting the existence
of any of the contending candidates. Why deny that there is a composite
entity consisting of my computer, the Taj Mahal and the number 16?
What harm does it do? It isn't taking up any room that isn't already
occupied. It isn't in competition for scarce resources. It isn't polluting
the atmosphere. More seriously, it looks like overscrupulous nit-picking
to make an issue out of whether there is such an object as that sum
or not. If someone cares to refer to this object, why should we object?
Admittedly, we seldom have occasion to refer to such entities, but if
someone does take it upon himself to single them out for attention,
what is there to be said against it? Let a thousand flowers bloom!
(3) Before coming to that
It may seem that the orientation just sketched is indistinguishable
from taking a position on the ontological issue in question, the one
that acknowledges all possible mereological sums. But the former differs
from the latter by its lack of ontological seriousness. It doesn't hold
either that there really are all these mereological sums or that there
aren't. It refuses to admit that there is any significant issue here. It says,
"If you want to talk in terms of mereological sums, go ahead. If you
don't, that's all right too. Nothing of any moment hangs on the deci
sion. "
This position is not so latitudinarian as to give carte blanche to any
hare-brained metaphysical position anyone puts forward. It does not
take the same attitude toward demons, psychic atmospheres, or the élan
vital. (I don't mean that it necessarily denies such things; only that it
doesn't deny that there is a serious issue in these cases as to whether the
alleged entities exist. ) The position is highly selective in its permissive
ness.
And that is just why this latitudinarian position cannot claim to apply
to the whole range of Putnam's cases. In addition to the mereological
sums issue, it may be plausible for debates over various "abstract ob
jects"-properties, classes, sets, propositions, and the like. These also
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
take up no room, don't interfere with the way we conduct our lives,
etc. Here too it is tempting to think that there can be no objection to
recognizing their "existence", if anyone cares to. But not all prominent
ontological oppositions can be handled in this way. Go back to the con
trast between a substance metaphysics, a process metaphysics, and a
metaphysics of Goodmanian scattered particulars. This debate differs
from the one concerning mereology in a crucial respect. Here it is not
a matter of whether entities are acknowledged that constitute an addi
tion to what all parties to the discussion accept-the latter being left just
as they are whatever the decision on those proposed additions. It is
rather a matter of several different ways of conceptualizing what intu
itively is the same range of fact. It is not as if the Aristotelian recognizes
everything the Whiteheadian posits but only wants to make some addi
tional commitments, or vice versa. Here there can be no question of
welcoming all comers with open arms, trusting them to find some way
to live in harmony in a common world. There can be no coexistence
between Aristotle and Whitehead. Either the rabbit is an enduring sub
stance that retains its self-identity through change, or it is a society of
momentary actual occasions, each of which perishes in the moment of
self-creation. We can't have it both ways. For another example consider
the opposition between phenomenalism and substantial realism about
physical objects. The basic thrust of phenomenalism is to deny the real
ity of what realism about material substances claims to be the fundamen
tal constituents of the physical world and to replace them with
constructions out of sense data or sensory experiences. Here too it is not
a matter of agreement up to a certain point and then an argument over
whether some addition to this should be recognized. It is rather a dis
agreement concerning how to metaphysically construe a large area of
reality.
For that matter, we should not suppose that all metaphysical argu
ments over whether something should be added to an area of metaphysi
cal agreement can be plausibly handled in the latitudinarian way.
Consider the opposition between theism and naturalism. If the theist
should agree with the naturalist on the metaphysics of the natural world
and differ only in whether there is a supernatural reality over and above
6. To be sure, the mereologist and her opponent will handle the same range of facts, e. g. ,
the contents of the room, differently too. And so will the nominalist and realist about universals;
they will represent differently the facts reported by predications. Nevertheless, the crucial differ
ence remains. In these cases there is an area of metaphysical agreement, the controversy being
over whether items of certain sorts should be added to that. With oppositions like that between
substance and event ontologies, however, the disagreement does not concern a possible addition
to a ground level of metaphysical agreement.
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
that, we would still have an obviously serious difference. It cannot be
said that it makes no difference to the conduct of our lives whether what
theism posits exists or not. This indicates that there are two conditions
for the plausibility of a latitudinarian approach. (a) The opposition con
cerns an addition to an area of agreement. (b) It makes no important
difference whether that addition is correct. Since we have seen that
there are metaphysical oppositions that do not satisfy both of these con
ditions, the latitudinarian option is not a serious candidate for an across
the-board response to Putnam.
i More Moderate Absolutist Rejoinders
I have suggested that there is more to be said for Putnam's conceptual
relativity than the above reactions are prepared to admit. Although I
take each of the first two responses to be reasonable ones, I also think
that they are far from being supported by conclusive reasons, and that
something like Putnam's position remains a live option. Thus I take his
conceptual relativity argument to count more heavily against metaphysi
cal realism than any of the other antirealist arguments I have consid
ered. That may be damning with faint praise, since I have judged the
other arguments to possess no significant merit whatsoever-give or
take a jot and tittle. Nevertheless, I do take the ontological-relativity posi
tion seriously, and hence I am motivated to examine positions that re
tain some of the thrust of realism while, at the same time, making
concessions to Putnam in a relativist direction.
(4) The most concessive reaction that retains any significant realist
thrust is this. "It is true that every 'objective fact' is what it is partly
because of our conceptual and theoretical choices. But this doesn't show
that there is no unique and conceptual-scheme-independent way the
world is. It is just that this independent way is more abstract and less
specific than we may have thought. Ontological relativity leaves us able
to affirm that the one real world is such as to accommodate all the con
ceptualizations that we can successfully work with, and is such as to
ground discriminations between true and false statements inside each
conceptual scheme. Nor is this a wholly trivial claim. Not all conceivable
conceptual schemes will work-will fit the world as it is. Construing the
world as wholly consisting of real numbers, paper, ' rodents or caloric
fluid, will not enable us to get around efficiently in our environment,
7. See O. K. Bouwsma, "Descartes' Evil Genius", in 1965.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
not to mention winding up with ideally justified beliefs. Moreover it is
by no means insignificant that within a given useful conceptual scheme,
the world permits us to make distinctions between true and false state
ments using the concepts of that scheme. You might think that whereas
the first feature (the world supports some schemes and not others) is
conceptual scheme independent, the second (there is a difference be
tween true and false statements within a scheme) is not. But that would
be a mistake. Consider this analogy. Animal life requires oxygen in the
actual world, but not in all possible worlds. But life requires oxygen in the
actual world is true in all possible worlds. Similarly, though my desk is
crowded is true in a substance-conceptual scheme but not in an event
scheme (and hence is not a conceptual-scheme-independent fact), still
the fact that the world is such that "my desk is crowded" is true in a substance
scheme, (while the world is not such that "my desk is bare" is true in a substance
scheme, ) is a fact that owes none of its status to any particular conceptual
scheme. No doubt, we have to use some particular set of concepts to
formulate it or think it, but the fact that the world is such that things
work out that way with respect to the substance scheme is not something
that is relative to one or another scheme, the way the fact that my desk is
crowded is. The former is something that any conceptual scheme has to
recognize in one way or another.
Thus one can hold that there are ways the world is independent of
conceptual schemes, while still recognizing that these ways are such that
they require reference to a conceptual scheme being built into the
"first-order" facts of the world. The standard Putnam reply to sugges
tions of this sort is that the independent real world has, on this view,
dissipated into an unknowable Ding an sich. And that is the right reac
tion where the suggestion is merely that behind all our beliefs and theo
ries about the world there is the world, of which it can only be said that it
is what all the aforementioned are "about" or "of", but concerning
which no further, conceptual-scheme-independent information can be
given. But the suggestion of my maximally concessive realist was not of
this ilk. She claimed to be able to formulate indefinitely many concep
tual-scheme-independent truths concerning the real world. She may be
mistaken in this claim, but at least she is not simply gesturing at an
unknowable Ding an sich.
Still, I must confess that it is not completely clear that what this posi
8. If you think that the requirement of oxygen for animal life is a metaphysically necessary
truth, substitute your favorite contingent truth.
9. See, e. g. , Putnam 1978, 132.
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
tion claims to be conceptual-scheme-independent truths really do have
that status. Given that we have to use one rather than another scheme
to articulate them, and given, what the position also admits, that there
will always be alternative schemes between which there is no objective
rational choice, it can always be claimed that even these very abstract,
higher-level truths are each relative to some conceptual scheme as soon
as each is given a definite enough propositional content (in some con
ceptual scheme, naturally) to be a candidate for a truth value. That is, it
may be that in the final analysis this attempt to combine a full recogni
tion of Putnam's claims about alternative conceptual schemes with the
thesis that there are scheme-independent facts will not fly. This moti
vates me to look for other mediating positions in which not so much is
conceded to Putnam.
(5) Consider a position that admits a contribution to every fact from
a conceptual scheme with equally acceptable alternatives, but makes a
distinction within each fact between an aspect that depends on the con
ceptual scheme and one that does not. The choice between conceptual
schemes affects only the most fundamental aspect of a given fact-the
ontology that it exhibits, and leaves the more substantive part un
touched. Consider the fact that my car is now snow covered. That pre
cise fact obtains, let us say, only relative to an ontology that divides the
world up into enduring substances like automobiles and works with a
scheme of properties and activities exhibitable by such substances.
There are equally acceptable ontologies in which no fact that involves
such an entity as an automobile and such a relation as "covered by"
would appear. In a pure event ontology, for example, what it is natural
to regard as "the same state of affairs" would be structured in a quite
different way. But once the ontology within which we are working is
specified, it is in no way a matter of our theoretical or conceptual
choices that the facts assume one specific form rather than another.
Within a substance ontology it is not as if I could bring it about by a
"conceptual choice" that my car is clear of snow. Snow removal is not
that easy! And within an event ontology, the details of the way events
happen will be what they are, whatever my theoretical or other cognitive
activity.
Unlike realist (4) realist (5) does not purport to specify any facts that
obtain absolutely rather than "in" or relative to some conceptual
scheme. She admits that any "complete" fact will exhibit both scheme
relative and non-scheme-relative aspects, and she makes no pretense of
being able to state the latter separately. Hence she is not vulnerable to
the objections lodged against (4)'s attempt to do this. But this talk of
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
"aspects" may well be judged too nebulous, too lacking in determinate
ness to form the basis for a position that unmistakably contrasts with
Putnam in a realist direction. What can realist (5) do to make the posi
tion more definite?
I think her best move is an appeal to patterns of contrast, a familiar
technique from linguistics and other disciplines. The syntactical-cate
gory membership of a word is specified in terms of what other words are
or are not substitutable for that word salve grammaticality. Here too we
might say that the specific, non-conceptual-scheme-relative aspect of the
fact that my car is snow covered can be exhibited by considering the way
this fact contrasts with the (possible) fact that my car is wet, that my car
is free of any encumbrance, that my car is in the garage, that your house
is snow covered, that my house is made of brick, and so on. The ways in
which the original proposition differs from the others within the same
scheme constitutes the substantive, non-conceptual-scheme-relative as
pect of its content. To exhibit the conceptual-scheme-relative aspects we
display contrasts between the way in which the "same" fact is reported
in different conceptual schemes. 10 Imagine yourself in the original situa
tion and using an event scheme or a scattered-particular scheme to re
port what is reported in the Aristotelian scheme by saying "My car is
covered with snow". This set of contrasts exhibits the conceptual
scheme-relative aspect of the original fact.
I have been thinking of our concentrating on the differences between
the statements in each set. That is the way to use the first set (different
statements in the same scheme) to exhibit the more specific aspect and
the second set (reports of the "same fact" in different schemes) to ex
hibit the more ontological, conceptual-scheme-determined aspect. But
we can also look at the commonalities in each set, thereby using each set
to display the opposite aspect. If we focus on what all the statements in
the same scheme have in common, that will display the conceptual
scheme-relative aspect of each statement. Whereas by looking at what
the "same fact" in different schemes have in common, that will, of
course, enable us to see the more specific aspect.
10. One may doubt that this can be done, on the grounds that there is no nonarbitrary way
of saying what state of affairs in the event scheme is the "same one" as, or the unique counter
part of, the original state of affairs in the substance scheme. But doesn't it seem obvious in
what direction to go to begin constructing the Spinozistic or the Whiteheadian correlate of the
attribution of the property of being snow covered to a particular substance? To be sure, it may
be difficult to spell out the details in these other metaphysical systems, but if they are viable it
must be possible in principle. Moreover Putnam is certainly committed to this. If it can't be
done, then talk of there being equally acceptable schemes, each of which can handle everything
there is to be handled, becomes empty.
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
This technique is obviously a particular form of the "It can't be stated;
it can only be shown" position made famous by the early Wittgenstein.
But it is by no means confined to the eccentricities of the Tractatus. As
the example from linguistics illustrates, the procedure is used in various
disciplines. If, as the above suggests, it is applicable here, it succeeds in
bringing out a significant qualification to Putnam's thesis that there is
no escape from conceptual scheme relativity. It concedes that relativity
to the extent of acknowledging that we can't make a definite, complete
statement-can't express a complete proposition-except by the use of
some conceptual scheme that represents a choice from alternatives. But
it brings out a way in which each complete proposition (state of affairs,
fact) can be analyzed into a conceptual-scheme-variable aspect, and an
aspect that is not so variable, the latter being (where the proposition is
true) an absolute feature of the world.
(6) We are now reaching the other end of the continuum of mediat
ing positions, the end at which the concessions to Putnam are minimal.
The final stage in this progression (regression? ) is one that takes realist
(5) one step further. Instead of conceding to Putnam the conceptual
scheme relativity of every complete fact, and then distinguishing aspects
of each fact, depending on whether the aspect is scheme relative or not,
our last position plumps for the status of full facthood for these "as
pects", thus avoiding the concession just mentioned. Remember that
Putnam's position can be viewed as an extension to every fact of the
theory- or conceptual-scheme-relativity that everyone recognizes in some
cases. This suggests that someone who appreciates the force of Putnam's
case for ontological relativity, but is disinclined to depart from absolutist
realism to the extent Putnam does, might grant Putnam some extension
of generally accepted relativities but not a universal one. Here is a possi
bility along those lines. Recognize the theory relativity of ontology (what
the "ultimate furniture of the universe" is, what enjoys the special meta
physical status of being most fundamental) but deny that this affects the
constitution of most facts and the content of most statements. Whatever
the ontological truth as to whether substances or events, lines or points,
physical substances or sense data, are more fundamental, most of our
commonsense and even scientific assertions about the world can remain
the same. Our cognitive and linguistic intentions are such that what we
mean to be saying when we say that the leaves on the tree are red or that
lead melts at 327 degrees is neutral with respect to those ontological
differences. We aren't concerned with ontological issues in most of our
thought and talk about the world. That doesn't just mean that we are
not actively thinking about the ontological issues; it is rather that how
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
these ontological issues are resolved, or what position one takes on
them, has no bearing on the truth or falsity of what we are asserting
most of the time. "1
To spell this out further, even though the form of what I am saying
when I say, in the usual way, that the leaves on the tree are red appears to
carry with it a commitment to a substance-property ontology, I need not
intend it in that way, and it is not usually so intended. In most of what
people say or think, they are only concerned to commit themselves to
the more specific aspects of what is being said or thought-leaving the
choice of one ontological framework rather than another up for grabs.
It is as if we were always asserting a large disjunction containing all the
ways in which the specific empirical content of "the leaves on the tree
are red" can appear in alternative ontologies. We, so to say, represent
that disjunction by explicitly formulating one disjunct, together with the
attitude that we don't care which other disjunct is substituted for it, so
long as the same empirical content is preserved. 12 If something like that
can be carried through, the alethic realist can acknowledge ontological
relativity, but leave the truth conditions of most statements unaffected
by it, and hence free of theory- or conceptual-scheme relativity.
As already indicated, this last way of giving Putnam half a loaf differs
from its immediate predecessor in "dividing up" into separate state
ments the aspects deemed by (5) to attach to every statement. Most of
what we believe, and are concerned to assert, carries no real ontological
commitment; despite appearances it is neutral on ontological issues, in
cluding the ones that, according to Putnam, there is no objective way of
deciding. So realist (6) grants Putnam's "conceptual relativity" only for
a special, rarefied class of statements, those that are ontological in the
strictest sense, thus converting Putnam's relativity into an ontological rela
tivity strictly so called. If, unlike a traditionally minded metaphysician,
one is willing to throw ontology to the relativist, that will enable one
to combine a substantial agreement with Putnam's relativism with an
insistence that virtually all of what we believe and assert is true or false
in an absolute, non-conceptual-scheme-relative way.
11. In a recent writing Putnam takes back the view that conceptual relativity affects all com
mitment to objects. "Certain things are paradigmatically objects, for example tables and chairs,
but other uses of the term, 'object' are, to a greater or a lesser degree, optional. Thus there is
no fact of the matter as to whether numbers, or mereological sums, are objects or not" (Putnam
1992, 367). This statement is definitely in the direction of my mediating position (6).
12. Note the similarity to the Berkeleyan view that a "general idea" is a particular image used
with the intention of representing all similar images.
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
iv Conceptual Relativity and the Nature of Truth
It should be clear to the reader by now that I have no intention of
trying to decide whether Putnam's "conceptual relativity" is warranted,
in whole or in part. My excuse for this cowardly evasion is twofold. First,
I am genuinely undecided as to just what to say about it. Second, since I
am about to argue that even the full-blown Putnamian form (on at least
one reasonable construal) is compatible with adherence to a realist con
ception of truth, and since the defense of that conception is my central
concern in this book, it is not necessary for present purposes to reach a
definitive position on the ontological issue. Instead, I have presented a
variety of (more or less) realist responses, ranging from outright rejec
tion of ontological relativity ((1) and (2)) through almost total accep
tance of Putnam's contentions (4) to mediating positions that yield
quite a bit to Putnam but modify his view, to a greater or lesser extent,
in an absolutist direction ((5) and (6)). I have sought to show that each
of these positions enjoys some rational support, but I have not at
tempted to pick one of them as the most rational choice.
Now for the argument that conceptual relativity is compatible with the
use of a realist conception of truth. I will begin by thinking of the latter
in its most minimal form, in which it amounts simply to embracing the
T-schema-It is true that p if and only if p-taking every instance of it to
be a necessary, conceptual truth, or more explicitly accepting its univer
sal generalization, XIII.
The basic point is this. Putnam's conceptual relativism tells us that
every fact is a fact only "within" or relative to a conceptual scheme to which
there are acceptable alternatives. Facts are scheme relative; they don't hold
independently of one way, among many ways, we have of conceptualiz
ing things and theorizing about them. Because of the necessary relation
ship of truth and fact, this implies that what is true is not independent of
a choice of conceptual-theoretical scheme. Just as it is a fact that the car
is snow covered only relative to a substance scheme, so it is true that the
car is snow covered only relative to such a scheme. But that in itself doesn't
tell us what truth is, how to conceptualize it. And, given the case made
in this book for taking the realist conception to be the reigning concep
tion of propositional truth, why can't that conception be applied here?
To be sure, what truths there are depends, at least in part, on what con
ceptual schemes we work with. That fact that would make a given (possi
ble) statement true obtains only within a certain way of conceptualizing,
and theorizing about, the world. But within a given scheme why can't
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
the truth of a proposition (statement, belief) amount simply to things
being, in or relative to that scheme, as the proposition would have them
to be? Why can't it be the case, within a substance-property conceptual
scheme, that whether it is true that my dining room table is rectangular
depends on whether it is a fact, within that conceptual scheme, that my
dining room table is rectangular? After all, as we have repeatedly had
occasion to note, Putnam often explicitly disavows any supposition that
we can "manufacture" facts at will. Things are as they are, by and large,
independently of our desires, hopes, aspirations, and preferences.
Wishes are not horses. The conceptual relativity comes in not to make
the facts of the matter infinitely malleable within a given scheme, but only
to affirm the multiplicity of acceptable schemes within which whatever
facts there are obtain. Hence this position presents no bar to our recog
nizing that within a scheme what makes a statement true is whether, within
that scheme, what the statement is about is as the statement says it to be.
Conceptual relativity does rule out the claim that the truth of a state
ment consists in a reality that is wholly independent of our conceptual
cognitive activity being as the statement says it to be. But the incompati
bility comes from the metaphysical aspect of this realist position-its
insistence that what makes for truth is the disposition of something (s)
totally independent of our conceptual-cognitive activity. And, as I argued in
Chapter 2, that metaphysical commitment is not implied by a realist
conception of truth. Truth can still hang on whether what we are talking
about is as we say it is, even if what we are talking about does not have
the complete mind independence that Putnam's "metaphysical realist"
supposes it to have.
Now if Putnam's view included a conceptual-scheme relativity of truth
itself, that would be incompatible with a realist account of the concep
tion of truth. For on that conception it is necessarily the case that the
proposition that p is true if and only if p. This implies that there is no
possibility that a proposition should vary its truth value from one con
ceptual scheme to another. On the realist conception the same proposi
tion can't be true in one scheme and false in another. But if truth itself
were scheme relative, that is just what we would have. That is what I
meant by truth itself being scheme relative. If the realist conception of
truth is to be compatible with Putnam's conceptual relativity, as I believe
it to be, then things will have to be set up so that the same propositions
don't change truth value across schemes. The simplest way to ensure
this, and I believe this is wholly in the spirit of Putnam's position, is to
hold that every proposition contains as part of its content an "index"
something like 'in conceptual scheme C1'. This will usually not be
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
needed, since conceptual schemes, as the term implies, are schemes of
concepts. And different conceptual schemes will, at least in part, involve
different sets of concepts. To be sure, all this talk is at a very program
matic stage, and we are far from having a developed way of individuating
conceptual schemes. But suppose that the most plausible mode of indi
viduation will involve some conceptual overlap between schemes, even
if no two schemes contain precisely the same set of concepts. In that
case we would need the indexing of propositions to conceptual scheme
in order to prevent the same proposition occurring in different concep
tual schemes, thereby ensuring that no proposition has different truth
values in different schemes.
I can see no grounds for supposing that Putnam has ever taken truth
to be conceptual-scheme-relative in this way. I have searched the pas
sages known to me in which conceptual relativity is expounded and de
fended, and in none of them does he espouse a relativity of
propositional truth. He does occasionally speak of a sentence's changing
truth value in different schemes, but it is always stipulated that this is
because constituent terms change their meaning or use. 13 In terms of
propositions, this is to say that the sentence expresses different proposi
tions in the different schemes, and this is why the truth value has altered.
Indeed there is at least one passage in which Putnam forthrightly applies
my "minimalist" version of a realist conception of truth in connection
with conceptual relativity.
How we go about answering the question, 'How many objects are
there? '-the method of 'counting', or the notion of what constitutes
an 'object'-depends on ouf choice but the answer does not
thereby become a matter of convention. If I choose Carnap's lan
guage, I must say there are three objects because that is how many
there are. If I choose the Polish logician's language, I must say there
are seven objects, because that is how many objects (in the Polish logi
cian's sense of 'object') there are. There are 'external facts', and we
can say what they are. What we cannot say-because it makes no
sense is what the facts are independent of all conceptual choices.
(1987, 32-33). ..
I could not ask for a more explicit formulation of the thesis that the
realist conception of truth is the one to employ if one is a conceptual
relativist.
It may be suggested that even if conceptual relativity is compatible
13. See 1978, 132; 1990, 41.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
with the T-schema it cannot coexist with a more full-blooded realist con
ception of truth that is formulated in terms of a concorrespondence be
tween propositions (statements, beliefs) and facts. In Putnam's
canonical formulation of metaphysical realism in Reason, Truth, and His
tory, the truth component reads: "Truth involves some sort of correspon
dence relation between words or thought-signs and external things and
sets of things" (p. 49). Can we discern a tension between conceptual
relativism and correspondence theory that we don't find between the
former and the T-schema derived versions of a realist account of truth?
NO. There are, of course, difficulties in many forms of correspon
dence theory that have nothing to do with the issue between relativity
and absolutism. Leave all that aside, and focus on the trouble free ver
sion of correspondence theory I presented in Chapter 1. To say that a
proposition corresponds with a fact is just to say that if the proposition is the
proposition that p, then it is a fact that p. Thus to say that the statement
that water is wet corresponds with a fact (viz. , the fact that water is wet,
naturally! ) is just to say that there is an actual fact with the same content
as that proposition, namely, water is wet. On this sanitized version of cor
respondence, I can see no reason why, if Putnam's conceptual relativity
is otherwise in order, the obtaining of a fact, and so the correspondence
of a proposition with this fact, could not always be relative to a certain
conceptual scheme, rather than something that holds absolutely.
Putnam, of course, does not agree with me that conceptual relativity
is compatible with a realist conception of truth. In his canonical presen
tation of the contrast between metaphysical realism and the "internalist
perspective" (1981) he conjoins "what objects does the world consist of? is a
question that it only makes sense to ask within a theory or description"
(conceptual relativity) with an epistemic conception of truth: "Truth',
in an internalist view, is some sort of (idealized) rational acceptability"
(49), as if it were obvious that they go together. 14 And in his contribution
to an 1982 Eastern Division American Philosophical Association sympo
sium on Reason, Truth, and History (Field and Harman, 1982; Putnam's
response is in Putnam 1990) he maintains with respect to the three
theses of "metaphysical realism" (1981, 49), which include the contrar
ies of both ontological relativity and an epistemic conception of truth,
14. If we ask how Putnam can maintain both that conceptual relativity requires an epistemic
theory, and apply the T-schema while espousing conceptual relativity, as we have just seen him
do, the answer is that he takes an epistemic conception of truth to be compatible with the
T-schema. In taking the T-schema to be definitive of a realist conception of truth, and incompat
ible with an epistemic conception, I have been assuming the opposite. There will be an extended
argument for this in Chapter 7.
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
that "each leans on the others" (1990, 31). This is a constant feature of
his writings of the last fifteen years-to take ontological relativity and an
epistemic conception of (or at least an epistemic constraint on) truth to
be tightly interconnected. Here is a more recent example. In Representa
tion and Reality, after expounding conceptual relativity, he continues:
The suggestion I am making, in short, is that a statement is true of a
situation just in case it would be correct to use the words of which the statement
consists in that way in describing the situation. .. . [W]e can explain what
"correct to use the words of which the statement consists in that way"
means by saying that it means nothing more nor less than that a suffi
ciently well placed speaker who used the words in that way would be
fully warranted in counting the statement as true of that situation.
(1989, 115)
In other words, in setting out conceptual relativity what Putnam was
"suggesting" was an epistemic conception of truth.
But it is difficult to determine what Putnam's reasons are for sup
posing there to be this tight connection. The closest thing I have found
for an argument occurs in Chapter 3 of Reason, Truth, and History in
which he is discussing Kant. There he suggests that Kant's view that the
constitution of the physical world is dependent on our conceptually
structuring our cognitions in a certain way (the physical world is "tran
scendentally ideal" though "empirically real"), commits him to an epi
stemic conception of truth, though Kant himself did not realize this.
On Kant's view, any judgment about external or internal objects (phys
ical things or mental entities) says that the noumenal world as a whole
is such that this is the description that a rational being (one with our
rational nature) given the information available to a being with our
sense organs (a being with our sensible nature) would construct. .. .
What then is a true judgment? . [T]he only answer that one can
extract from Kant's writing is this: a piece of knowledge (i. e. , a 'true
statement' [sic]) is a statement that a rational being would accept on
sufficient experience of the kind that it is actually possible for beings
with our nature to have. 'Truth' in any other sense is inaccessible to us
and inconceivable by us. Truth is ultimate goodness of fit. (1981, 63-64)
Here Putnam is saying, in a backhanded way, that once we recognize
that any reality we can cognize is partly what it is by virtue of our concep
tual activity, there is nothing left for truth to be except idealized rational
acceptability. Having given up the supposition that we can be in effective
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
cognitive touch with a world that is what it is independently of our con
ceptual-cognitive doings, and so having given up the notion of corre
spondence to such an independent reality, there is nothing left but an
epistemic conception of truth. Putnam repeatedly presents us with this
stark alternative.
'Truth', in an internalist view, is. .. some sort of ideal coherence of
our beliefs with each other and with our experiences as those experiences
are themselves represented in our belief system-and not correspondence
with mind-independent or discourse-independent 'states of affairs'.
(1981, 49-50)
If objects are, at least when you get small enough, or large enough, or
theoretical enough, theory-dependent, then the whole idea of truth's
being defined or explained in terms of "correspondence" between
items in a language and items in a fixed theory-independent reality
has to be given up. The picture I propose instead is. .. that truth
comes to no more than idealized rational acceptability. (1990, 41)
If we can't hold that truth is correspondence with theory-independent real
ity, as we can't on the conceptual-relativity view, then the only alternative
is an epistemic conception of truth. But, as I fancy myself to have shown
above, those are not the only alternatives. We can, in the spirit of alethic
realism, continue to take truth to be a matter of what we are talking
about being as we say it is, but recognize that what we are talking about
is not theory independent.
Why doesn't Putnam see this? I'm not sure of the answer, but it may
throw light on the matter to distinguish two readings of conceptual rela
tivism, for both of which there is some support in the corpus, though, I
suggest, not equal support. The construal I have been assuming is what
we may call "relativized Kantianism without noumena". Putnam fre
quently cites Kant with approval, while dissociating himself from nou
mena, including a transcendental self, and while pluralizing Kant's
unique conceptual scheme. On this interpretation there is objective re
ality (or rather there are objective realities) that are what they are inde
pendent of our wishes, fancies, or preferences. We can't just up and
decide what the facts are. We have seen various passages to this effect.
So in that respect this is realism. It differs from "metaphysical realism"
in that no reality is totally independent of our conceptual-cognitive activ
ity. We are always dealing with the world as structured in some concep
tual scheme to which there are acceptable alternatives. But within any
such scheme, Putnam argues, things are one way rather than another
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
independently of our choices or beliefs: "I shall advance a view in which
the mind does not simply 'copy' a world which admits of description by
One True Theory. But my view is not a view in which the mind makes up
the world either. .. . If one must use metaphorical language, then let
the metaphor be this: the mind and the world jointly make up the mind
and the world" (1981, xi). On this construal internal realism has the
familiar features of realism, with the important qualification that we
have realism in each of many different ways of conceptualizing the
world, instead of having realism "all at once" for a unique reality. Within
a given scheme, and as long we don't remind ourselves of the possibility
of alternative schemes, it is just as if we were "metaphysical realists".
Hence, on this construal, it is clear that we can use a realist conception
of truth inside each scheme, though we can't raise the question as to
which scheme is the true one, in the realist sense of 'true' or in any
other.
This "relativized Kantianism without noumena" construal is sup
ported by Putnam's repeated insistence that we don't create the world
ex nihilo by our cognitive-conceptual activity, but that within a conceptual
scheme facts are there to be discovered, not made. "We can and should
insist that some facts are there to be discovered and not legislated by
us" (1989, 114). Putnam strikes a similar note in The Many Faces of Real
ism, where he espouses "commonsense realism".
[0]f course there are tables and chairs, and any philosophy that tell us
that there really aren't--that there are really only sense data, or only
"texts", or whatever, is more than slightly crazy. (1987, 4)
Internal realism is, at bottom, just the insistence that realism is not
incompatible with conceptual relativity. Realism (with a small 'r') has
already been introduced; as was said, it is a view that takes our familiar
commonsense scheme, as well as our scientific and artistic and other
schemes, at face value, without helping itself to the notion of the thing
'in itself'. (1987, 17)
This says as plainly as one could wish that internal realism is simply stan
dard realism except for the claim that what is really there is always rela
tive to one or another conceptual scheme. Again:
Internalism is not a facile relativism that says 'Anything goes'. Denying
that it makes sense to ask whether our concepts 'match' something
totally uncontaminated by conceptualization is one thing; but to hold
that every conceptual system is therefore just as good as every other
would be something else. If anyone really believed that, and if they
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
were foolish enough to pick a conceptual system that told them they
could fly and to act upon it by jumping out of a window, they would,
if they were lucky enough to survive, see the weakness of the latter
view at once. (1981, 54)
If this construal is relativized Kantianism, the alternative could be
thought of as relativized Hegelianism. On this reading "internalism"
takes everything to be internal in the strictest sense to our thought and
discourse. There is nothing in any sense "outside" it. For Hegel and his
absolute idealist followers "reality" is just thought fully realizing itself.
Hence what we are aiming at in thought is not a correspondence, match,
or fit with some reality that is other than thought. We are simply aiming
at the perfect completion of thought--usually construed as a fully com
prehensive and coherent system. 15 On the "relativized Hegelianism" in
terpretation Putnam is saying something similar about each alternative
conceptual scheme.
This version of conceptual relativity really does support, indeed im
plies, some kind of epistemic conception of truth. If the aim of thought
is to satisfy its own internal standards, rather than conform itself to the
character of something other than thought it is about, then we can't
suppose that what determines whether our beliefs are true or false is the
character of what they are about. Reference goes down the drain along
with realistically conceived truth. There is nothing left to determine
truth other than the extent to which our thought realizes its own "inter
nal" standards-coherence, completeness, or whatever. This construal
is supported by Putnam's repeated claim that internal realism requires
an epistemic conception of truth. It is also supported by Putnam's claim
that only "metaphysical realism" is faced with the problems about inde
terminacy of reference, whereas they pose no difficulty for "internal
realism". 16 Finally, it is supported by the statements we have already
noted that "the objects and the signs are alike internal to the scheme of
description" (1981, 52).
Clearly there are tensions in Putnam's thought, or at least in the
whole spread of his writings, on this matter. To put it bluntly, if internal
realism requires an epistemic conception of truth it can't be relativized
Kantianism, whereas if it is relativized Kantianism, it is hospitable to a
realist conception of truth. I suggested above that Putnam's works do
15. See the quotations from Bradley and Blanshard in Chapter 7, section ii. It must be admit
ted that the position I here call "Hegelianism" is more unambiguously propounded by Anglo
American absolute idealists than by Hegel himself.
16. See Chapter 5, section v.
PUTNAM ON "CONCEPTUAL RELATIVITY"
not equally support the two interpretations, and it does seem clear to
me that the texts point most strongly in the direction of the Kantian
alternative. Except for the allegation that internal realism requires an
epistemic conception of truth, the suggestions of the Hegelian reading
are at best ambiguous; they can be taken as simply emphasizing the con
ceptual relativity side of the relativized Kantianism; whereas the pointers
to the Kantian reading are much stronger and more clear cut. The insis
tence that from the standpoint of a particular conceptual scheme, facts
are what they are independent of our modes of thought is clearly incom
patible with the "nothing outside of thought" construal, as is the reas
surance that internalism is still committed to commonsense realism
about familiar objects, but without the "thing in itself". Moreover, the
temporal development of Putnam's thought is in that direction. " The
Kantian motifs grow stronger, and the Hegelian weaker, as we move
from "Realism and Reason" to Representation and Reality. I cannot recon
cile the allegation that internal realism requires an epistemic concep
tion of truth (or even an epistemic constraint on truth) with an espousal
of the Kantian version. Obviously I cannot, since I have been arguing
that that version is fully compatible with a realist conception of truth. I
have to put this view of Putnam's down as a mistake, possibly encour
aged by some ambiguity on his part as between the readings of internal
realism I have distinguished.
The upshot of this chapter is that even if we embrace Putnam's con
ceptual relativity without reservation (and I am certainly not inclined
to go that far), the realist conception of truth would be left standing.
Qualifications would have to made to a full-blooded metaphysical real
ism. But, as I have argued in Chapter 2, alethic realism is almost com
pletely neutral on metaphysical issues, and, as I have just been arguing, it
does not require what Putnam calls "metaphysical realism". Conceptual
relativity and internal realism, on my preferred Kantian reading, leaves
alethic realism unscarred.
17. Note Putnam's statement in "Reply to Ebbs", in 1992, 353, that "the connotations of the
word 'internal' have proved to be unfortunate".
CHAPTER 7
Epistemic Conceptions of Truth
i The Realist Conception of Truth and Its Alternatives
I have been considering the most serious arguments known to me
against the viability of a realist conception of truth. To cast the net as
widely as possible and to minimize the risk of missing anything signifi
cant, I have included some arguments that may not properly fit that
rubric. So be it. Philosophy is not so tidily divided into compartments
that we can prevent discussions from spilling across such barriers as we
erect. In any event, the main point is that I have not found any argu
ments that, in my judgment, shake the strong intuitive plausibility of the
realist conception. Prima facie, it seems overwhelmingly obvious that
the realist conception is the one we express with 'true', when that predi
cate is applied to propositions, statements, and beliefs. And nothing has
turned up to disturb, or even qualify that obviousness. The realist con
ception remains in possession of the field.
But a complete defense of alethic realism will also include a critical
assessment of the alternative conceptions of truth that have been put
forward. To that task I now turn.
ii Varieties of Epistemic Conceptions of Truth
I have already pointed out that the only serious alternatives are episte
mic conceptions, conceptions that identify truth with some favorable
epistemic status of the truth-bearer. 1 But I haven't as yet done much to
1. Remember that I am restricting the field of alternatives to views that set out to explain
what truth is, what that property is, at least to the extent of identifying and delineating the
concept of truth. In Chapter 1, section xi, I explained why I reject deflationist accounts of truth
that hold that sentences containing 'true' are to be understood otherwise than as attributions
of a property to something.
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
display the lineaments of this category or to explore the variations to
which it is subject. I begin by glancing at some important formulations.
The eminent British idealist of the turn of the century, F. H. Bradley,
provides a convenient starting point. Bradley tells us that truth is "that
which satisfies the intellect", "an ideal expression of the Universe, at
once coherent and comprehensive". In like vein Brand Blanshard
holds that a proposition is true if it coheres with an all comprehensive
and fully articulated whole. From the pragmatist's side C. S. Peirce's
well-known view is that "the opinion which is fated to be ultimately
agreed to by all who investigate, is what we mean by the truth", while
William James writes that "true ideas are those that we can assimilate,
validate, corroborate, and verify". 6 John Dewey holds true ideas to be
those that are instrumental to "an active reorganization of the given
environment, a removal of some specific trouble or perplexity". More
recently Hilary Putnam objects to "the most important consequence"
of what he calls "metaphysical realism", namely, "that truth is supposed
to be radically non-epistemic. .. and so the theory that is 'ideal' from the
point of view of operational utility, inner beauty and elegance, 'plausibil
ity', 'simplicity', 'conservatism', etc. might be false". 8 Putnam's alternative
to this is not to identify truth with rational acceptability tout court, but
to hold that "truth is an idealization of rational acceptability. We speak
as if there were such things as epistemically ideal conditions, and we call
a statement 'true' if it would be justified under such conditions". Again,
""Truth', in an internalist view [Putnam's term for his alternative to
"metaphysical realism"], is some sort of (idealized) rational acceptabil
ity-some sort of ideal coherence of our beliefs with each other and
with our experiences as those experiences are themselves represented in our
belief system and not correspondence with mind-independent or dis
course-independent 'states of affairs". "10
Through all these variations there runs a single intuitive idea. The
truth of a truth bearer consists not in its relation to some "transcen
dent" state of affairs, but in the epistemic virtues the former displays
within our thought, experience, and discourse. Truth value is a matter
2. Bradley 1914, 1.
3. Ibid. , 223.
4. Blanshard 1939, 2: 264.
5. "How To Make Our Ideas Clear, " in Peirce 1934, 268.
6. James 1975, 97.
7. Dewey 1920, 156.
8. Putnam 1978, 125.
9. Putnam 1981, 55.
10. Ibid. , 49-50.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
of whether, or the extent to which, a belief is justified, warranted, rational,
well grounded, or the like. To cut corners I will use the term JUSTIFIED to
range over any positive epistemic status that is taken by some thinker
to constitute truth. There are, of course, many theories of epistemic
justification current in epistemology, carrying with them different stan
dards or criteria of justification, and there are many concepts of epistemic
justification as well. When we add other terms of positive epistemic ap
praisal, such as 'warrant' and 'rationality', the scene is even more cha
otic. If I were to go into all that, I would turn this book into an
epistemological treatise. To avoid that I will aim at maximum neutrality,
endeavoring to limit my judgments about justification to what would be
acceptable, on (almost) any theory or concept of justification.
One thing we need to consider is what reasons epistemic theorists
have for preferring their account of truth to a realist view. Actually, apart
from some bald statements that it is implausible to think of truth as
conceptually independent of rational acceptability and the like, those
reasons are confined to reasons for rejecting a realist conception, along
with a tacit assumption that epistemic accounts are the only alternative.
In the last four chapters I have explored at length arguments against
the realist account of truth, and in section xi of this chapter I will return
to that topic.
There are various differences between the ways in which the philoso
phers just cited develop their common intuitive idea. One difference
concerns the choice of truth-value bearer. Our authors variously speak
of truth as attaching to propositions, beliefs, opinions, ideas, statements,
and theories. Taking a true theory to be made up of true statements,
'opinion' and 'belief' to be sufficiently near synonymy for present pur
poses, and 'idea' to be a loose designation for belief, this boils down to
the triad on which the discussion in Chapter 1 was focused-statements,
beliefs, and propositions. Now presumably the primary bearer of episte
mic justification is belief. A statement could derivatively be said to be
justified or unjustified in terms of the epistemic status of the belief ex
pressed by the statement. But what of propositions? The proposition
that life is not confined to the earth would seem to have no epistemic
status in itself. It may be that I am justified in believing this, while you
are not. However, we must remember the point made in Chapter 1 that
when we speak of beliefs or statements (assertions) as true or false, we
are referring not to the psychological state of belief or the act of stating,
but to the contents of those states or acts-what is believed or what is
stated. And this content, this "what" is a proposition. Hence, truth-value
bearers are propositions all the way down. A true belief is a true proposi
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
tion considered as believed, and a true statement is a true proposition
considered as asserted. Hence if the epistemic status of a proposition is
situation relative, exactly the same is true of the epistemic status of beliefs
and statements, in the senses of those terms in which they range over
truth-value bearers. Hence I will swing freely in the ensuing discussion
between speaking of beliefs, statements, and propositions as bearers of
truth value and of epistemic status. The situation relativity of the justifi
cation of beliefs (statements, propositions) is something an epistemic
conception of truth has to deal with. I will discuss that shortly.
Another difference is this. One would expect the details of an episte
mic conception of truth to be dependent on the epistemology of the
thinker forging the conception, so that philosophers with different epis
temologies will differ correspondingly in their versions of an epistemic
conception of truth. Thus we find Bradley and Blanshard construing
truth in terms of ideal conformity to the standards of a coherentist epis
temology, while James's and Dewey's conceptions of the epistemic status
that is to be identified with truth reflect a more pragmatist, empiricist
epistemology. But some of these views are less specific. Putnam says, and
Peirce says in effect, that a true belief or statement is one that satisfies
ideal epistemic standards, or satisfies epistemic standards in an ideal or
final fashion, without making any attempt to spell out what those stan
dards are, or what is required to satisfy them fully. There are obvious
advantages to refraining from tying an epistemic conception of truth to
a particular epistemology. For one thing, it maximizes opportunities for
acquiring converts from differing epistemological orientations. The ver
sion on which I shall eventually fasten, that of Putnam, will be on the
unspecific side of this contrast.
On the other hand, there are disadvantages to unspecific versions. By
sidestepping the task of spelling out in detail just what positive epistemic
status of a belief constitutes truth, the epistemic theorist ties his hands
when it comes to arguing for the view and defending it against objec
tions. It makes a great deal of difference whether we construe an ideal
epistemic situation in externalist or internalist terms, for example,
whether we think of it as one in which a belief was formed in a maximally
reliable way or as one in which the subject has conclusive evidence for
the belief. (See Chapter 8 for a discussion of externalism and internal
ism in epistemology. ) Again, foundationalist and coherence epistemolo
gies have different stories as to what would constitute an ideal epistemic
situation. In the ensuing discussion I will have to go considerably beyond
Putnam in fleshing out the concept of an ideal epistemic situation, so
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
as to have something definite enough to be worth discussing. But the
enrichment will still fall short of what is ideally desirable.
iii Ideal Epistemic Conditions (1)
Rather than undertake the tedious task of examining each of a num
ber of epistemic conceptions of truth, I will focus on the strongest form
of the view. If I can succeed in disposing of this version, I can claim to
have put the quietus on the enterprise generally. I shall work up to this
by first examining simpler forms and considering why they don't work.
When we think about identifying the truth of a belief with something
in the area of justification, the first thing to notice is the impossibility of
supposing that a belief's being justified, as we ordinarily think of this, is
sufficient for, much less identical with, its being true. There is more than
one reason for this. (1) Whether a particular belief is justified for a
particular person depends on that person's epistemic situation. The be
lief that gold is malleable (i. e. , not someone's state of believing this at a
certain time but what is believed when someone believes that) may be
justified for one person, A, at t1 and unjustified for A or another person,
B, at t2. This will be the case if A at t, has relevant evidence or experience
lacking to her or to B at t2. The epistemic status of a belief varies over
different epistemic situations. But truth value does not vary in this way.
A belief (i. e. , a belief content) is true or false once for all; it does not
alter its truth value through time or across the population. If it is true
that gold is malleable, it is true for everyone and at every time. How then
can something immutable, truth, be identified with something situation
relative, epistemic status? These considerations subvert any simple iden
tification of truth and justification.
(2) If we try to identify being true with being justified for someone at some
time, we run into the fact that there are many true propositions (actual
or possible belief contents) that are never believed by any human being.
Consider the set of propositions of this form: "It was raining on this spot
at time t (where t is more than 5, 000 years ago). " Most such proposi
tions are never even entertained by anyone, and many of them are true.
Thus if an epistemic conception of truth is to have any chance of com
plete coverage, it will have to range over possible as well as actual be
liefs.
11. It is interesting that Putnam, whom I take as my paradigm epistemic theorist of truth,
insists on this point.
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
(3) The last difficulty revealed that someone's actually being justified
in believing that p is not necessary for p's being true. Here is a consider
ation that shows it not to be sufficient either. There are innumerable
cases of false propositions that were justified for certain people in cer
tain situations. One can be justified in believing that Sam killed Benny,
even though that belief is false, since Joe was the murderer. There have
been many cases in which the evidence possessed by the police strongly
points to a certain person as the murderer, even though he is innocent.
Newton was justified in believing his theory of gravitation, though we
now realize that it is not strictly true. Many people in the sixteenth cen
tury were justified in believing that Columbus was the first European to
sail to the western hemisphere, though now we know this to be incor
rect. And so on.
In order to work toward an epistemic conception of truth that cannot
be refuted in these ways, let's reflect on why the previous versions were
so vulnerable. We have already indicated that the second difficulty can
be evaded by ranging over belief contents that are not believed by any
one as well as those that are. As for the other two difficulties, we will best
see our way to a solution by concentrating on the last objection-that
some justified beliefs are false. How can that be? Isn't it because a belief
can be justified by ordinary standards even though the epistemic situa
tion of the believer is incomplete or otherwise defective? An epistemic
situation is defective when it doesn't include all the relevant evidence.
If we were proceeding on the basis of all relevant facts, we wouldn't
mistakenly suppose, justifiably, that Sam killed Benny. If Newton knew
what Einstein knew, he would not be justified in supposing his theory of
gravitation to be correct. To take a quite different example, suppose that
I am justified in believing a lamp to be in front of me because my visual
experience is just as it would be if I were being visually presented with a
lamp. But, unbeknownst to me, my visual experience is generated by a
laser image. If I am in no way at fault in my ignorance of this fact, I am
amply justified in the false belief that there is a lamp before me. But if I
knew all the relevant facts, I would not longer be justified in believing
this.
This suggests that if we were to consider what beliefs would be justified
in situations that are ideal in the respects in which the ones we have
been considering fall short, it would no longer be possible for justified
beliefs to be false, and there would be no basis for prying truth and
justification apart; that is, the suggestion is that a belief is true if and
only if it would be justified in ideal epistemic circumstances, where those
are circumstances in which all relevant evidence is available.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
One might think that there should also be conditions on an ideal
epistemic situation from the side of the subject. Shouldn't we require
that the subject be in full possession of normal human cognitive powers,
that she not be too distracted, biased, etc. ? Certainly all this is required
if the subject is to function cognitively in an ideal fashion, if she is to
take full advantage of her opportunities. But remember that we are con
cerned here with a situation of the subject, rather than with the the char
acteristics or the behavior of the subject in that situation. The truth of a
proposition, p, (a possible belief that p) is thought of here in terms of
whether it would be justifiable (not actually justified) in the situation. And
for that it is enough that the situation contains everything that is needed
for complete justification of a belief that p, so that anyone who believed
that p in that situation could believe that p with full justification simply
by appropriating what is there for the taking. Thus we don't need to
build into our specifications for the ideal situation any specification of
the state of the subject. The belief is justifiable in the situation, whether
a given subject takes advantage of this or not.
For ease of future reference, let's put this view in a canonical formula
tion.
Ideal Justifiability Conception (IJC). To say of a belief that it is true is
to say that it would be justifiable in a situation in which all relevant
evidence (reasons, considerations) is readily available.
We can also see that the IJC is not vulnerable to the first difficulty.
The variation in epistemic status of a belief across subjects and times
came from variations in epistemic situations. But if all the subjects in
question were in an ideal epistemic situation, there would be no room
for such variation.
Looking back at the examples of epistemic accounts of truth I pre
sented at the beginning of the chapter, we find some of them to be of
the overly simple sort just criticized. When Dewey says that true ideas
are those that are instrumental to "an active reorganization of the given
environment, a removal of some specific trouble or perplexity", he is
plausibly taken as asserting that any "idea" that has this function in any
situation is thereby true. For the above reasons it would be more charita
ble to suppose that Dewey misspoke himself and had really intended not
to tell us what truth is, but rather to present us with a function of "ideas"
that we should concentrate on, rather than on their truth. As for James's
statement that "true ideas are those that we can assimilate, validate, cor
roborate, and verify", the interpretation depends on how to read the
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
"can". "Can" in what kinds of conditions? If he is thinking of idealized
conditions, the view is of the sort we will be going on to consider. But a
more natural reading, given the context of the remark, is that any
"idea" that can be corroborated, verified, etc. , at any time and under
any circumstances thereby counts as true. And that view falls under the
above strictures.
But all the other thinkers quoted above can be understood as advocat
ing some version of the idealized view. Putnam uses just that terminol
ogy, 12 Peirce, in speaking of what would "be ultimately agreed to by all
who investigate" is naturally taken as supposing that the limit of the
process of inquiry would be an ideal epistemic situation in which all
relevant facts are in. As for Bradley and Blanshard, their language makes
clear that they are thinking of what coheres with what under highly ide
alized circumstances. Thus Bradley speaks of "an ideal expression of the
Universe, at once coherent and comprehensive", and Blanshard of a
proposition's cohering with an all comprehensive and fully articulated whole.
Since I will be focusing on the "justifiability in ideal epistemic condi
tions" version of an epistemic conception of truth, and on one that is
unspecific about epistemic criteria, and since Putnam is a particularly
prominent recent advocate of such a version, I will be thinking of him
as my main opponent. But to do so, I cannot be thinking of the most
recent Putnam. As I will bring out in section vi, Putnam has more re
cently disavowed any attempt to define truth in epistemic terms. Hence
the Putnam I will be criticizing is the one represented in the above quo
tations from works of the late seventies and early eighties.
Before concluding that Putnam's IJC is the strongest version of an
epistemic conception of truth available, I need to say something about
why I prefer it to the kind of coherence version represented by Bradley
and Blanshard. I take their view to be one that identifies truth with being
justified by the standards of a pure coherence theory, one which episte
mically evaluates beliefs (propositions, statements) solely in terms of
their coherence with a maximally coherent, maximally comprehensive
system. The most obvious difficulty with this is that it is dubious at best
that there is a unique maximally coherent and comprehensive system?
It would seem that for any system of beliefs whatever we can construct
an indefinitely large number of other systems that are equally coherent
and comprehensive on any reasonable understanding of coherence. To
12. The reader may wonder why, given that the Putnam passages were already on the table,
took such a roundabout route to the "epistemically ideal situation" version. The answer is
that one can best appreciate the virtues of a philosophical position if one sees it against the
ackground of inferior alternatives.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
argue this would require a long excursus, but here is a brief sketch.
The details of the argument depend on the details of our concept of
coherence. Suppose we take coherence to involve consistency, plus a
rich matrix of inferential, probability conferring, explanatory, and unify
ing relationships. Consider a system of propositions so constituted. It
seems clear that we could modify the observation reports, general princi
ples, predictions, etc. to any given degree and still maintain coherence
by making compensatory modifications elsewhere. Modifications in the
observational base could be compensated for by suitable modifications
in general laws and principles. Modifications in the conditions of accu
rate observations could be compensated for by modifications in proposi
tions concerning the conditions under which observations taken to be
veridical had been carried out. And so on. In the absence of additional
constraints on what can go into the system, any coherent system will
have innumerable equally coherent alternatives. And if this is the case,
we can't possibly identify truth with the satisfaction of coherence de
mands. For if, as follows from the above, for any proposition both it and
its contradictory finds a place in a maximally coherent and comprehen
sive system, we would be faced with the unpalatable consequence that
for any proposition both it and its contradictory are true.
iv Ideal Epistemic Conditions (2)
To construct a serious version of the IJC I need to say more than I
have so far as to what constitutes an "ideal epistemic situation". A full
treatment of the problem would involve deciding all the major issues of
epistemology, and I can't undertake that here. Nevertheless, I must
make the conception more definite in certain respects.
(1) When we speak of a condition where all relevant "evidence" is
available, we must understand 'evidence' in a wide sense. If we were to
restrict evidence for p to other things known, or justifiably believed, that
provide reasons of a propositional sort for or against a belief that p,
that would freeze out direct, immediate justification by experience, self
evidence, and the like. We must include under 'evidence' anything that
has a bearing on the epistemic status of the belief, including "reasons"
(facts known or justifiably believed), experience, or intrinsic features of
the proposition believed such as self-evidence.
(2) Some restrictions must be put on 'relevant evidence', if the con
ception is not to be doomed to triviality. If the belief in question is p,
then one highly relevant bit of evidence (if p and q are both true) would
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
be p and 9. But if we are to allow "evidence" like this, then every true
proposition would automatically be ideally justifiable; for every true
proposition is deducible from some other true proposition. This would
make things much too easy for the epistemic theorist. What is needed is
some way of singling out evidence of which one could be in possession
while one is still trying to decide whether it is true that p. I don't know
how to do this in some general, comprehensive way. I will just assume
that my opponent can take care of this. If he can't, then so much the
better for my criticism. 13
(3) Though one may aim at maximal neutrality between opposing
epistemic perspectives, it is impossible to escape the more radical diver
gencies. For example, most current discussion of the matter in English
speaking philosophy proceeds on the basis of a, broadly speaking, natu
ralistic orientation, in which the only considerations relevant to the epi
stemic assessment of belief are drawn from our acquaintance with, and
what we have learned about, the natural world. One who, like myself,
holds that (at least some) human beings have experiential access to God
will see this as intolerably restrictive. 14 Again, if one thinks that we have
intuitive awareness of (some) necessary truths and/or of moral facts,
this will make a difference to what would be available in an "ideal"
epistemic situation. The point is that one can hardly expect to work out
the details of such a situation without getting into highly controverted
issues.
(4) The Peircean formulation seems to envisage a single epistemic
situation that would be ideal for any belief (statement) whatever. But
there are troubles with that. For one thing, what beliefs is this situation
supposed to cover? Any belief that any human being could hold or envis
age? That is an enormous, perhaps nonfinite, class, and the possession
of all the information relevant to the epistemic assessment of every such
belief is not a real possibility for the likes of us. Putnam explicitly dis
avows any such aspiration and opts for tailoring ideal situations to the
particular proposition in question. 15 Instead of thinking in terms of a
single ideal epistemic situation he supposes there to be such a situation
for any given belief. That is a somewhat more manageable idea, and I
will be thinking in those terms.
13. I am indebted to Doris Olin for this point.
14. See Alston 1991.
15. To say that a statement is true of a certain situation "means nothing more nor less than
that a sufficiently well placed speaker who used the words in that way would be fully warranted
in counting the statement as true of that situation. What is 'a sufficiently well placed speaker'?
That depends on the statement one is dealing with" (1989, 115).
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
(5) We can no longer suppose that there is a unique, context-free
answer to the question of what is relevant evidence for settling a given
question. It is recognized on all hands that this is relative to certain
background assumptions. Given the theory of general relativity, what is
relevant to determining the age of the universe is radically different
from what is relevant to that issue, given Newtonian physics. From a
psychoanalytic perspective what is relevant for deciding on the etiology
of Jim's obsession is quite different from what is relevant from a behav
ioristic perspective. Thus there is no unique set of relevant considera
tions for a given statement. It all depends on the assumptions with which
we are working. And how are those assumptions to be chosen for "ideal
epistemic conditions"? They would have to be the assumptions that we
are most justified in accepting. But most justified relative to what further
background assumptions? An infinite regress looms. You might suppose
this Gordian knot could be cut by stipulating that in epistemically ideal
conditions all facts would be available to us. We wouldn't have to worry
about which facts are relevant to deciding what issues. But this move
retreats to thinking in terms of a single condition that is ideal for the
epistemic assessment of all possible beliefs. And we have already seen
reason not to work with such a global notion as that.
So what can we do to rescue the notion of an ideal epistemic situation
from this fatal relativity to background assumptions? Since we have just
seen that the attempt to neutralize the relativity by choosing the best
justified background assumptions in each case gives rise to a viciously
infinite regress, I see no alternative to an appeal to coherence. Instead
of trying to pick a unique set of background assumptions case by case,
we consider what total set of assumptions would yield the most coherent
system.
It is crucial, however, that we appeal to coherence only as an auxiliary
device, rather than depending on it to do the whole job, as we would if
we were to define an ideal epistemic situation as one in which our system
of beliefs is maximally coherent (and comprehensive? ), à la Bradley and
Blanshard. For, as we have just seen, that move is subject to the fatal
objection that there is no unique maximally coherent and comprehen
sive system. Hence a pure coherence theory will not provide us with a
unique set of background assumptions. But provided there are enough
other constraints on the situation, coherence can play a significant sup
porting role. To wit, let's take observational, memory, and introspective
beliefs, as well as the intuitively self-evident, to be at least prima facie
justified apart from high-level background assumptions, to be justifiable
by the experiences that give rise to them, though defeasible, in princi
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
ple, by various considerations. This will give us a base of prima facie
justified beliefs as an anchor for whatever larger system is constructed.
We can then envisage that larger system as the one the members of
which best cohere with each other and with the base just specified, or
with as much of the base as survives defeaters. One can reasonably hope
that a unique system is thereby determined from which the approved
background beliefs can be drawn for assessing the justificatory status of
any particular belief.
It is obvious that the above does not constitute anything like a proof
that a unique system of belief, yielding a unique set of background as
sumptions, can be constructed along these lines. In addition to the fact
that I have provided no more than hints at the lineaments of the view, I
have done little or nothing to support the idea that anything close to
uniqueness can be attained. If I were making use of the notion of an
ideal epistemic situation for the development of my own views, this
would be a serious liability. But in fact I am critical of the notion. My
main contention will be that we cannot define truth in terms of justifi
ability in an ideal epistemic situation. And one part of my case for that
is that there are serious difficulties in working out a satisfactory concept
of such a situation. Hence if the approach I am suggesting for solving
the "relativity to background assumptions" problem doesn't work, then
again, so much the better for my side of the argument. I only maintain
that the approach I have briefly adumbrated is the most promising one
for surmounting this particular obstacle. Whether in the end it would
be successful I do not know. That being the case, I will concede to the
epistemic theorist that this problem can be solved, whether in this way
or some other, and pass on to what I consider to be three serious diffi
culties for the IJC. I will put them in order of apparent conclusiveness.
It is the third that I consider to be most obviously fatal. But the other
two, especially the second, also point to weaknesses in the program.
v Are There Counterexamples to the Ideal Justifiability Conception?
If there are propositions (beliefs, statements) that are true but not
ideally justifiable, or ideally justifiable but not true, there are counterex
amples to the IJC, which claims these classes to be coextensive. I will
concentrate here on considering whether there are true propositions
that are not ideally justifiable. To be sure, there are various difficulties
in exhibiting specific counterexamples. For one thing, we are all so far
from an ideal epistemic situation, and the specifications for such a situa
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
tion are so schematic, that it is difficult to be sure what beliefs would or
would not be justified under ideal conditions, unless we just assume that
true propositions would and false propositions would not, which would
amount to conceding the issue to my opponent, at least on an exten
sional level. Moreover, even if I were in an ideal situation I could hardly
suppose that a belief is true unless I supposed that I was justified in
believing it. Hence I must proceed more indirectly. I must consider how
plausible it is to suppose that there are true propositions that would not
be justifiable in an ideal epistemic situation.
The most extreme candidates would be propositions such that noth
ing that tells for or against their truth is cognitively accessible to human
beings, even in principle. Even in an epistemically ideal situation we
would have no basis, however weak, for asserting one of these proposi
tions rather than its negation. To make a case for this I need not restrict
myself to propositions we are able to envisage. I might have considerable
difficulty in rendering it plausible, with respect to any proposition I can
formulate, that we are incapable in principle of uncovering any consid
erations that tell for or against its truth, but that is not the only possibil
ity. Might there not be states of affairs, or even entire realms or aspects
of reality, that are totally inaccessible to human cognition? If so, proposi
tions to the effect that such states of affairs obtain will be true, even
though no beliefs or statements bearing those propositions as their con
tent would be justifiable in an epistemically ideal situation.
To this one might reply that even if there are such propositions, it
doesn't follow that they would not be justifiable for human beings in
ideal situations. From the fact that we can't envisage the proposition it
doesn't follow that we could not acquire evidence or reasons that bear
on its truth and that we could use to support belief in it if, per impossi
ble, we should come to entertain it. I agree that this doesn't follow. And
yet the situation envisaged by the objection seems thoroughly outland
ish. Any body of evidence that would tend to show one of these proposi
tions to be true would have, at least in part, some conceptual connection
with it-inhabit the same conceptual field. But then if the proposition is
closed to our discernment, confirmatory and disconfirmatory evidence
would have the same status. Turning it around, if we were capable of
cognitively possessing the evidence in question, why should it be impos
sible for us to entertain the proposition for which this is evidence? To
go into this a bit more finely, it might be that some observational evi
dence open to us could count as evidence for or against the obtaining
of some unenvisageable state of affairs. But what is not possible is that
we should entertain the "bridging principles" that connect this evi
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
dence with the proposition in question because to entertain such princi
ples we would have to use the concepts involved in the proposition. Thus
I judge it to be at least extremely plausible that for any state of affairs
that is in principle closed to our consideration, we would likewise be
barred from acquiring anything that provides decisive complete evidence
for or against that state of affairs' obtaining.
But how plausible is it that there are realms or aspects of reality that
are in principle inaccessible to human cognition? There are general
considerations that render it quite plausible. Think of the limitations of
our cognitive powers-limitations on our storage and retrieval capacity,
on the amount of data we can process simultaneously, on the considera
tions we can hold together in our minds at one moment, on the com
plexity of propositions we are capable of grasping. Isn't it highly likely
that there are facts that will forever lie beyond us just because of these
limitations? And it is not just our finitude; there is also what we might
call our "particularity". The cognitive design of human beings repre
sents only one out of a large multitude of possible designs for cognitive
subjects, even for embodied cognitive subjects as finite as we, leaving out
of account angels and God. It seems clear that there could be corporeal
cognitive subjects with forms of sensory receptivity different from ours
sensitivity to different forms of physical energy. There could be subjects
with different innate cognitive tendencies, propensities, and hardwired
beliefs and concepts. There could be subjects who reason in patterns
different from those we employ. These sorts may or may not be instanti
ated elsewhere in the universe. Given all this, shouldn't we take seriously
the possibility that, even if there is something wrong with the idea of
facts that are in principle inaccessible to any cognitive subjects whatever
(and I don't see any fatal flaw in this idea), it could still be that there
are many facts accessible to cognizers with radically different hardware
and software but totally inaccessible to us. Those who airily endorse
some version of the "man is the measure of all things" doctrine should
take considerations like this much more seriously than they do.
If I am correct about this, there is a considerable case against the
thesis that truth can be defined as justifiability for human beings in the
most ideal situation possible for us. There will be innumerable true
propositions that do not satisfy that condition. One possible response to
this would be to make the thesis under discussion range over cognitive
subjects generally. Truth would then be identified with justifiability for
some cognitive subjects or others in situations that are the most ideal
for those subjects. And if there are still true propositions unenvisageable
by any actual subjects, we could make the conception range over possi
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
ble subjects as well. The above reasoning does nothing to show that
there are true propositions that would not be ideally justifiable for some
possible cognitive subject. Note that in considering whether the IJC
could be construed in this more extended way, we are raising a further
question as to how an ideal epistemic situation should be construed.
Should we think, anthropocentrically, of a situation that is maximally
favorable for human beings finding out the truth, or should we think of
it less specifically as a situation that is ideal in this way for whatever kind
of cognitive subject we are considering? Since Putnam is the focus of my
discussion, it is worth noting that Putnam makes it abundantly clear that
he chooses the former alternative. "[A] true statement is a statement
that a rational being would accept on sufficient experience of the kind
that is actually possible for beings with our nature to have (1981, 64, my
emphasis). " "Truth', in an internalist view is some sort of idealized ratio
nal acceptability-some sort of ideal coherence of our beliefs with each
other and with our experiences as those experiences are themselves rep
resented in our belief system" (1981, 50).
But whatever is the case with Putnam, one could try out the less an
thropocentric version. This would certainly take the sting out of the
above objection. But it would also take much of the sting out of the IJC.
If we survey the reasons that have been given for an epistemic definition
of truth, we will see that they depend heavily on anthropocentrism.
Dummet's arguments for a verificationist conception of truth, for exam
ple, depend on considering what sorts of truth conditions are such that
we could learn to attach them to sentences. James and Dewey are preoc
cupied with the way in which we judge beliefs to be true or false and
with the functions beliefs we call true play for us in our lives. And, in any
event, we would have to restrict consideration to finite cognitive sub
jects. If an omniscient deity were brought into the picture, the position
would lack the antirealist bite it is designed to have. 16 Realism should
have no hesitation in recognizing that a necessary condition of the truth
of a proposition is that it would be known (accepted, believed. .. ) by
an omniscient cognitive subject. And with the restriction to finite sub
jects in place we still have to take seriously the idea that there are aspects
of reality that are inaccessible in principle to any such subjects-actual
or possible. The essence of God has been a popular theological candi
date.
Moreover, if there are serious problems, as I have urged, for working
out in a satisfactory way a conception of an epistemic situation that is
16. See Plantinga 1982.
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
ideal for human beings, we would get those problems in spades if we
tried to specify what would be a maximally ideal epistemic situation for
possible cognitive subjects of which we have had no experience at all.
This move, to say the least, does not look promising.
We should also consider less extreme counterexamples that involve
propositions we can envisage and for which evidence is in principle ac
cessible to us, but which are such that even in the most ideal possible
epistemic situation there would be no basis for preferring such a propo
sition to its negation. We can think of this as an extrapolation from the
claim that scientific theories are underdetermined by empirical evi
dence. It is often pointed out that for any theory that is supported by a
good deal of empirical evidence, there will be an indefinitely large num
ber of alternative theories that are equally well supported by that evi
dence. Those who make such claims often go on to say that it is
reasonable to choose between the alternatives on grounds of simplicity,
coherence with background knowledge, naturalness (given our cogni
tive predilections), intuitive plausibility, and the like. But isn't it possible
that even in ideal circumstances there will sometimes be alternatives that
score equally well on all those dimensions? Assuming that some of the
alternatives are true, they would be true propositions such that even
in an epistemically ideal situation there would be no rational basis for
believing them.
Let me elaborate this last suggestion a bit. We are thinking of an ideal
epistemic situation, vis-à-vis a given proposition, as one in which all rele
vant considerations are available. It follows right away that no true obser
vational beliefs, or true beliefs rendered sufficiently probable by
observations, and/or by propositions that satisfy this last condition,
would fail to pass the ideal justifiability test. For in a situation in which
everything relevant is readily available there would be experiences, evi
dence, or reasons that would justify any such belief. A counterexample
of the present sort would have to be a true proposition that is so shel
tered from evidence and experience that no augmentation of our pres
ent epistemic situation would provide any rational basis for preferring it
to one or more contraries. The strongest candidates for this would be
highly theoretical propositions the links of which to observational data
(and what is more effectively supported by them) are extremely weak,
tortuous, or dependent on equally recondite background assumptions.
But though I think that I have exhibited considerable plausibility for
the supposition that there are true propositions that are not ideally justi
fiable, I do not wish to rest much weight on this extensional argument.
For I do not know how to prove that there are such propositions. Hence
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
I would ask the reader to evaluate my criticism primarily on the basis of
the other two arguments, and especially the third one.
vi The Concept of an Ideal Epistemic Situation Presupposes the
Concept of Truth
The second main criticism is this. If the notion of an epistemically
ideal condition cannot be defined without using the notion of truth
(unless it is rendered defective in other ways), then the definition can
not go in the other direction. Is the IJC entangled in this circularity? I
believe that there are several points at which we find ourselves driven to
use the notion of truth in explaining the notion of an epistemically ideal
situation. Recall the formulation of the IJC.
Ideal Justifiability Conception (IJC). To say of a belief that it is true is
to say that it would be justifiable in a situation in which all relevant
evidence (reasons, considerations) is readily available.
First, there is the question of how to explain the notion of justifiability
involved. Here I must refer you to the discussion in Chapter 8, sections
iv-viii, where I distinguish between conceptions of epistemic justifica
tion that do and do not involve the notion of truth. I argue that the
former are superior to the latter in three respects. (1) They specify a
basic aim of cognition by reference to which the epistemic point of view
can be defined and epistemic justification distinguished from other
kinds. (2) They bring out why justification is desirable in the pursuit
of knowledge. (3) They provide criteria for evaluating candidates for
conditions of justification. This discussion is designed to show that a
conceptual connection with truth is required for an adequate construal
of epistemic justification. The allied point that is of special interest here
is that if it is to be at all plausible that justifiability in ideal conditions
is identical with truth, then the justification involved must be "truth
conducive", that is, such that it is part of the concept of justification that
one is justified in believing that p only if one's situation is such that it
renders one's belief likely to be true. Thinking of justifiability in terms
of adequate grounds for the belief, as I have been doing in spelling out
the IJC, satisfies this condition. And where this condition is satisfied, the
concept of truth enters into the concept of justification, since the latter
involves, inter alia, a guarantee of the likelihood of truth for the belief
to which it applies. To see that a conceptual tie of justification with truth
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
conducivity is necessary as well as sufficient for any plausibility of the
IJC, consider a way of thinking of justification that does not exhibit truth
conducivity. The most prominent example is a "deontological" concep
tion, according to which a belief's being justified amounts to one's satis
fying, or not violating, one's intellectual obligations in holding the
belief. It seems clear that one could be maximally justified, in this sense,
in believing that p without its being true that p. Suppose one is deficient,
psychologically or culturally, so that even if one does everything, cogni
tively, that could reasonably be required of one, one still often winds up
in a poor position to get the truth, and so often forms false beliefs. In
that case, one would often be fully, amply justified in a false belief. To
obviate this possibility, or at least to minimize it, we would have to build
truth conducivity into the concept of epistemic justification. And this
would give rise to a circularity in trying to analyze truth in terms of the
IJC.
Second, there is the notion of the "availability" of all evidence rele
vant to a given belief. Can we explain this notion without covertly mak
ing use of the concept of truth? Now to say that the evidence is
"available, " in the sense intended here, is to say that one could come
into possession of it readily or easily. So the crucial notion here is posses
sion of the evidence. The evidence will presumably consist of facts. What
is it for the subject to possess those facts so as to make use of them in
justifying a belief. The most obvious answer is that he or she comes to
know them. But the notion of knowledge involves the notion of truth.
(Knowledge is true belief that satisfies certain further conditions. ) To
avoid this we would have to construe the possession in terms of belief,
without mentioning knowledge. But then we will have to require the
beliefs to be true. Otherwise S is not in possession of genuine evidence,
but only mistakenly supposes himself to be so. At this point the hard
pressed epistemic theoriest might suggest that the possession of evi
dence consists in having justified beliefs. But this involves a different cir
cle. The justification involved here obviously can't be justification by
everyday standards. For, as we saw earlier, by those standards a belief can
be justified in one situation and not in another, which means that there
is no unique answer to what the relevant evidence is for a given target
belief. Hence, if we are going to take possession of the relevant evidence
to consist of justified beliefs, it will have to be beliefs that would be
justified in ideal epistemic circumstances. But then we are in an even smaller
circle. We define 'ideal justifiability' in terms of an ideal epistemic situa
tion; but then we have to define such a situation in terms of what beliefs
would be ideally justified in such a situation!
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
Third, there is the notion of "relevance". The epistemic situation that
is ideal vis-à-vis a given belief involves the availability of all evidence that
is relevant to the epistemic assessment of that belief. And what makes a
bit of evidence relevant? Presumably it is that the evidence will increase
or decrease the probability of the belief (in some appropriate sense of
probability). That is, it has a bearing on the probability of the belief's
being true. Once more truth enters in. This could be avoided only by
using a truth-free notion of relevance. If we were to construe relevance
in terms of a priori principles of evidential support that are not subject
to a truth-conducivity constraint (are not deemed unacceptable if strong
evidential support does not guarantee probability of truth), then once
more the plausibility of identifying truth with ideal justification would
evaporate.
These problems arise only for the way of construing an ideal epistemic
situation that I developed out of Putnam's remarks. I think it is by far
the most attractive way, but one might try other alternatives. Indeed,
there are as many ways of specifying what makes an epistemic situation
ideal as there are conceptions of justification, warrant, rational accept
ability, or other positive epistemic status the idealization of which consti
tutes the type of situation in question. I couldn't possibly survey all the
possibilities here, but I will look at a few in order to give an idea of
how I take the land to lie, still focusing on the term 'justified' as my
representative of positive epistemic statuses.
The construal I have been working with is based on the idea that a
belief is justified if and only if it is based on adequate grounds, reasons,
or evidence. Idealizing that gives us the notion of a situation in which
all relevant grounds, reasons, or evidence are available. If we start with a
different understanding of justification, we get a different construal of
epistemic ideality. Consider a "deontological" notion of justification,
according to which one is justified in believing that p if and only if one's
believing that p does not violate any intellectual obligations (or in a less
voluntaristic version, if and only if one's belief that p does not stem from
any violations of intellectual obligations). The notion of an epistemically
ideal situation this engenders would be something like a spotless record in
fulfilling intellectual obligations (at least those that are relevant to believing
or abstaining from believing the proposition in question). But, as I
pointed out above, being ideally justified in this deontological sense is
obviously not identical with truth. For if one suffers from disabilities of
one or another sort, one might have a perfect record in doing every
thing that could be expected of one in the conduct of one's cognitive
affairs and still believe falsely.
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
If, on the other hand, we think in terms of other "truth-conducivity"
conceptions of justification, we will run into the same circularity, at least
with respect to the notion of justification involved. On a reliabilist con
ception of justification one is justified in believing that p if and only if
that belief was acquired and/or sustained by a sufficiently reliable belief
forming (-preserving) mechanism. An idealization of this would involve
a perfectly reliable mechanism. But 'reliable' means fitted to produce
true beliefs. Again the notion of truth rears its head. As a final example,
take Alvin Plantinga's recent proposal, in Warrant and Proper Function
(1993), that what he calls "warrant" (that enough of which turns true
belief into knowledge) is to be understood in terms of the "proper func
tioning" of one's cognitive faculties. The rough idea is that a belief is
warranted if it is formed by such functioning. An idealization of this
would presumably involve as "proper" (i. e. , as efficient) a use of the
faculties involved as possible. But in the course of refining his account
Plantinga finds it necessary to add the qualification that the proper func
tioning be a carrying out of that part of one's "design plan" that is
aimed at truth, rather than, for example, comfort. Thus once more the
notion of truth makes an appearance in an attempt to say what epistemic
ideality amounts to.
Coherence theory would seem to extricate us from this circularity. If
we construe the ideal situation as one in which we have an ideally coher
ent system of beliefs, we need not invoke any conception of truth in
delineating the ideal. A particular belief would then possess the kind of
(ideal) justifiability needed for truth provided it was a member of a per
fectly coherent system of belief. But this returns us to the pure coher
ence theory of Bradley and Blanshard, which we saw to be subject to the
fatal flaw of being unable to provide sufficient constraints to determine
a unique maximally coherent system.
Interestingly enough, the more contemporary Putnam acknowledges
the circularity we have been considering.
In Reason, Truth, and History I explained the idea thus: "truth is ideal
ized rational acceptability". This formulation was taken by many as
meaning that "rational acceptability" (and the notion of "better and
worse epistemic situation", which I also employed) is supposed (by
me) to be more basic than "truth"; that I was offering a reduction of
truth to epistemic notions. Nothing was farther from my intention.
The suggestion is simply that truth and rational acceptability are inter
dependent notions. Unfortunately, in Reason, Truth and History I gave
examples of only one side of the interdependence: examples of the
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
way truth depends on rational acceptability. But it seems clear to me
that the dependence goes both ways: whether an epistemic situation
is any good or not typically depends on whether many different state
ments are true. (1988, 115; see also Putnam 1992b, 357-58, 365)
So Putnam now agrees that we cannot spell out what makes an epistemic
situation ideal without employing the notion of truth to do so. But, as
he notes, this still leaves the possibility of some conceptual dependence
of truth on "rational acceptability", as well as vice versa. Unfortunately,
Putnam does not spell out, here or elsewhere to the best of my knowl
edge, just what kind of conceptual interdependence he has in mind.
Perhaps his thought is that possessing the concept of epistemic justifica
tion is a prerequisite for possessing the concept of truth and vice versa,
and in such a way that the correct application of neither concept is a
sufficient or necessary condition for the correct application of the
other. 17 If that is the way the wind blows, the current Putnam drops out
as a target for my arguments in this chapter. For here I am only opposing
the view that some kind of epistemic status is a conceptually necessary
and sufficient condition for truth.
vii An Intensional Argument against the Claim
What I am calling an "intensional argument" against the IJC is one
that adduces reasons for denying that ideal justifiability makes up any
part of the meaning of 'true' (the concept of truth). Such an argument
is to be contrasted both with the extensional argument of section v that
there are cases of truth that are not cases of ideal justifiability, and the
circularity argument of section vi.
The most direct attack on the intensional front would be an intuitive
claim that by carefully reflecting on what we mean when we say of a
proposition, statement, or belief that it is true, we find nothing about
justifiability, ideal or otherwise, in that meaning. I am strongly inclined
to make this claim. I do think that, just by virtue of being a fluent
speaker of English and by being sufficiently reflective, I can ascertain
that it is no part of what I mean by saying 'It is true that gold is mallea
ble' that a belief that gold is malleable would be justifiable under some
conditions or other, however ideal. But in the face of widespread con
temporary philosophical skepticism about meaning, and about reflec
17. Putnam has informed me that he does not now regard justifiability in an ideal situation
as a necessary condition of truth.
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
tive judgments as to what a term or utterance does or doesn't mean, it
would be desirable to have an argument that does not depend on intu
itive semantic judgments. Such an argument is not difficult to find.
The basic point is this. On a realist conception of truth the fact that
sugar is sweet is both necessary and sufficient for its being true that sugar
is sweet. It is true that pif and only if p. Moreover, any such biconditional
is necessarily, conceptually true; it is rendered true by the concept of
truth. Since the fact that p is (necessarily) both necessary and sufficient
for its being true that p, that leaves no room for an epistemic necessary
or sufficient condition for truth. Nothing more is required for its being
true that p than just the fact that p; and nothing less will suffice. How
then can some epistemic status of the proposition (belief, statement)
that p be necessary and sufficient for the truth of p? It seems clear that
the imposition of an epistemic necessary and sufficient condition for
truth runs into conflict with the T-schema.
Note that this conflict arises with respect to the minimalist version of
the realist conception. As just pointed out, the T-schema itself, or its
generalization, XIII-the heart of the minimalist version is sufficient
to imply that the fact that p is necessary and sufficient for its being true
that p. And that is what is incompatible with the imposition of any episte
mic condition for truth. We do not have to get into further develop
ments that involve the delineation of some sort of correspondence between
propositions and facts in order to generate the incompatibility.
The idea that epistemic conceptions of truth are incompatible with
the T-schema runs into contradiction with the widely held view that this
schema and its near relations are neutral as between various theories of
truth-including epistemic theories. Here is a sample of statements to
this effect.
We could keep formal semantics (including 'Tarski-type' truth
definitions); even keep classical logic; and yet shift our notion of
'truth' over to something approximating 'warranted assertibility', 18
I have argued that the formal logic of true and refers is captured by
Tarskian semantics, but the concepts of truth and reference are unde
termined by their formal logic. .. it is only by examining our theory of
the world, and specifically by examining the connections between
truth and various kinds of provability or warranted assertibility as they
are drawn within that theory itself, that one can determine whether
the notions of truth and reference we employ are realist or idealist,
'classical' or 'intuitionist'. 19
18. Putnam 1978, 29.
19. Ibid. , 46.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
It is not now very controversial that the neutral core of Tarski's work
leaves us with reference, satisfaction, and truth in a tight little circle,
nor that it would be acceptable to philosophers of any bent: realist,
anti-realist, correspondence, coherence, dismissive neutralist, or what
- 20
ever.
However, the result, that truth and warranted assertibility, while nor
matively coincident, are potentially extensionally divergent, is of
course equally mplicit in any conception of truth which is prepared
to endorse the DS [the "Disquotational Schema: 'P' is true if and only
if P] as incorporating something conceptually correct about the na
ture of truth. .. . Since anything that aspires to be a competitive ac
count of truth will presumably respect the DS, our finding has a claim
to generality. 21
To be sure, many of these thinkers are talking about Tarski's "Conven
tion T", which, as noted earlier, differs from my T-schema both in taking
sentences as truth-value bearers and in being (or rather yielding) only
extensional biconditionals, whereas the T-schema yields conceptually,
hence necessarily, true biconditionals. An extensional biconditional says
only that the two sides of the "if and only if" have, in fact, the same
truth value. This is not claimed to be necessarily the case. Hence it could
be extensionally true that 'Snow is white' is true if and only if snow is
white, even though some kind of epistemic justifiability is a necessary
and/or sufficient condition for the truth of the left hand side. 'I live in
New York State' is extensionally equivalent to 'I am a philosopher' (they
are both true), even though there are various necessary conditions for
the truth of each of these propositions that are quite different from what
appears in this biconditional. For example, a necessary condition of my
living in New York State is my living in the United States. So the claim
of neutrality for Tarski's Convention T is thoroughly innocuous. But
some of the above authors regard a necessarily true T-schema as also
being compatible with various more substantive theories of truth, in
cluding epistemic theories. For example, Wright goes on to make similar
claims for "the analogue of the DS for propositional contents, the
'Equivalence Schema': 'It is true that P if and only if P' ". 22 And that is
by no means innocuous. More generally, I find a widespread acceptance
of the view that any version of the T-schema-whether extensional or
intensional, whether concerned with sentences, propositions, state
20. Blackburn 1984, 273. See also Davidson 1990, pt. 1.
21. Wright 1992, 22-23.
22. Wright 1992, 24ff.
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH 211
ments, or beliefs as truth bearers-is equally compatible with any serious
contender for an account of the nature of truth.
I suspect that the popularity of this view is explained in part by the
fact that those who hold it have simply not thought through the implica
tions of combining the T-schema with an epistemic conception of truth,
in particular the issues that have been and will be raised in this discus
sion. But another part of the explanation is, no doubt, that if an episte
mic account has to reject the T-schema, that is a serious, even fatal, flaw.
Surely the T-schema makes explicit something that is as fundamental to
our concept of propositional truth as anything can be. Any account of
truth that contradicts it is thereby unacceptable. Hence the anxiety of
epistemic theorists to insist that their views are compatible with that
schema.
viii Replies to the Intensional Argument
So far I have presented only a prima facie case for the incompatibility
of the T-schema with an epistemic conception of truth. And there are
ways in which the epistemic theorist might try to rebut this case. For one
thing, she might claim that even though sugar's being sweet is necessary
and sufficient for the truth of the statement that sugar is sweet, some
epistemic condition is also necessary and sufficient just because it is nec
essary and sufficient for sugar's being sweet, the realist condition. That
is, it could be claimed that though only the realist condition is proxi
mately or directly necessary and sufficient for truth, some epistemic con
dition is indirectly or derivatively necessary and sufficient for truth
through being necessary and sufficient for the more fundamental realist
condition. 23 As for the necessary-condition claim, we would have a situa
tion similar to that in which it is both necessary and sufficient for X's
being Y's biological father that X impregnated the egg that developed
into Y. Nevertheless it is also necessary for X's being Y's father that X
had sperm at the appropriate time, for that itself was necessary for X's
impregnating the egg in question. As for a sufficient condition claim,
though X's heart's ceasing (permanently) to beat is sufficient for X's
death, Y's shooting X in the way Y did was also sufficient for X's death,
since it was sufficient for X's heart's ceasing (permanently) to beat.
What are the chances that the ideal justifiability of the belief that
sugar is sweet is a necessary and sufficient condition of sugar's being
23. This move was suggested to me by Andrew Cortens.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
sweet? First we may note that if sugar is sweet, we would expect this fact
to be discovered by any normal human being with his wits about him
who consumes sugar sufficiently often. This might encourage someone
to suppose that normal eaters of sugar's being justified in believing that sugar
is sweet is a necessary condition of sugar's being sweet. But we can't claim
that it is a strictly necessary condition. It is (not merely logically) possible
that a sugar eater not be justified in believing that sugar is sweet even if
it is sweet. The person may through inattention, faulty memory, or what
ever, fail to register, store, and process the information available from
consuming sugar, with the result that he or she is not justified in believ
ing sugar to be sweet. Thus, even though it would be extremely unusual
for a normal person who has eaten a lot of sugar to fail to be justified in
believing sugar to be sweet even though it is, it is not impossible. And
hence this epistemic condition is not strictly necessary for sugar's being
sweet and hence not indirectly necessary for the truth of the belief that
sugar is sweet.
But these considerations are not strictly relevant to the matter at
hand. According to the epistemic conception of truth, what is necessary
(and sufficient) for the truth of p, along epistemic lines, is not that nor
mal people are justified in believing that p in situations of the sort in
which we typically find ourselves, but rather that the belief is justifiable
in epistemically ideal circumstances. So what we have to consider is whether
that sort of justifiability of the belief that sugar is sweet is necessary and
sufficient for sugar's being sweet.
What should we say about that? Well, it does seem clear that as I have
developed the notion of an epistemically ideal situation, the belief that
sugar is sweet would be justifiable in such a situation. There are readily
available facts that tell strongly for it, and nothing of any significance
that tells against it. But, for two reasons, it would be premature to award
the palm to the epistemic theorist.
(1) The case at hand involves a fact that can be verified by ordinary
observation. But the epistemic theorist needs a universal generalization
over all propositions. He needs it to be the case that for any proposition,
p, it is the case that p only if a belief that p would be justifiable in episte
mically ideal conditions. And what are the prospects of that? Here the
extensional part of my criticism becomes relevant, thus indicating that
the extensional and intensional parts are not so independent of each
other as I may have made it appear. In section v I suggested that there
are true propositions that would not be justifiable even in the most ideal
epistemic circumstances. I suggested that this would be the case for two
classes of propositions-those that are not envisageable by human be
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
ings (or by any finite subjects), and those that are such that even in an
ideal epistemic situation the available evidence would not suffice for
choosing between the proposition in question and various incompatible
alternatives. For such propositions the claim that ideal justifiability is
necessary for its being the case that p (and for its being true that p) is
obviously unacceptable, for in such cases the fact that pobtains without
a belief that p's being ideally justifiable.
I do not wish to put the main weight of my argument on this consider
ation, however, because, as I pointed out when presenting it, I don't see
how to prove that there are such true propositions. At most I claimed to
exhibit a certain plausibility for the assumption. Hence I wish to concen
trate on my second reason.
(2) That second reason runs as follows. Even if every true proposition
were, in fact, ideally justifiable, and vice versa, that would not suffice to
bail out the epistemic theorist. His position concerns the concept of truth
(the meaning of 'true'). Therefore he must maintain that it is conceptually
(semantically) necessary that it is the case that p (and hence that it is
true that p) if and only if a belief that p would be ideally justifiable.
Anything less than that would not reconcile his position with the T
schema. Even if it were non-conceptually, non-analytically true that, for
any p it is the case that p, if and only if a belief that p would be justifiable
in epistemically ideal circumstances, the concept of truth would not be
specified by that biconditional. Thus the present line of defense against
my objection that is based on the T-schema would have to be that it is
conceptually necessary that it is the case that p if and only if a belief that p
is ideally justifiable, and hence, from that and the T schema, that it is
conceptually necessary that it is true that p if and only if a belief that p is
ideally justifiable. And the mere truth of the biconditional-it is the case
that p if and only if it is ideally justifiable that p-does not suffice for that
conceptual linkage. Convincing ourselves that, in fact, sugar wouldn't be
sweet without an idealized inquirer being justified in supposing it to
be-or, for that matter, convincing ourselves that something parallel
holds for all propositions-is not convincing ourselves that it is by virtue
of the concept of truth that it is true that p only if it is ideally justifiable that
p. In fact, wood would not burn unless there were oxygen in the immedi
ate vicinity, but that does not show that having oxygen available is part
of the (ordinary) concept of burning, or that part of what we are saying
when we say that the log is burning is that oxygen is in the vicinity. A
surface wouldn't look red, in "normal" circumstances, unless it were
reflecting light with a frequency that falls within such-and-such a range
(let's assume that something in this general ball park is true); but that
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
doesn't show that when we say that the sweater looks red we are saying
something about the frequency of light waves reflected from the sweater.
Let me spell this out a bit more. Since a nonconceptual equivalence
of the fact that p and the ideal justifiability of a belief that p would not,
in conjunction with the T-schema, show that there is anything epistemic
about the concept of truth or that we are saying anything about idealized
justifiability when we say that a proposition is true, an alethic realist
could cheerfully accept this result, however surprising it might be. He
could say, in good logical and epistemological conscience, that what this
shows is that truth is more accessible to human beings (at least idealized
human beings) than one might have thought. But it doesn't show any
thing at all about the concept of truth. It shows that it is possible to
develop a conception of epistemically ideal circumstances, relative to a
given proposition, such that a human being in such circumstances
would have available to her everything needed to justifiably accept that
proposition if and only if it is true. This would tell us something about
human cognitive powers, and about parameters of epistemic assessment.
But why suppose that it would tell us anything about truth?
So the viability of this way of reconciling an epistemic conception of
truth with the T-schema hangs on the assumption that it is conceptually
true for any proposition p that it is the case that p if and only if a belief
that p would be ideally justifiable. And what should we say about that?
So far as I can see, it is totally lacking in plausibility. Here we have noth
ing like the case we have for taking the generalization of the T-schema,
'(p) it is true that p if and only if p' to be conceptually necessary. There
we are able to see what it is in the concept of truth that makes this
necessarily true. But we found nothing analogous in our development
of the concept of ideal justifiability. It does not violate that concept to
suppose that in some cases a belief that p is ideally justifiable without its
being the case that p or vice versa. We did see that the most plausible
notion of ideal justifiability involves truth conducivity, so that a belief
that p enjoys this status only if it is likely that p. But that falls far short of
conceptually guaranteeing that no such belief is false. Hence I think
we can legitimately ignore this way of reconciling the ideal justifiability
account of truth with the T-schema.
ix An Epistemic Reinterpretation of Content
What recourse, then, is left to the epistemic theorist, other than reject
ing the T-schema? I can see only one other option-a reinterpretation
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
of the content of our statements. The T-schema takes the content of a
statement to lay down what it takes for the statement to be true. Hence
the reason why there are not conditions of an epistemic sort for most of
our statements is that most of them don't assert that anything epistemic
is the case. Of course, we can and do make epistemic statements; we say
that Jim is justified in believing that Sam is out to get him. On the realist
conception of truth, what it takes to make that statement true is that
Jim's belief in question is justified. But usually we are not asserting any
thing of an epistemic sort. Rather we are saying something about sugar
and salt, about ships and sealing wax, and about many other things. Or
so it seems. But an epistemic theorist of truth may seek to save her posi
tion by maintaining, in the face of appearances to the contrary, that all
of our statements are to the effect that some epistemic state of affairs
holds. If that is what is asserted by saying "Sugar is sweet", then, by the
T-schema, the truth of that statement would depend, after all, on some
epistemic condition. What are the prospects for such a massive reinter
pretation?
First, the thesis seems obviously false. Surely it is as evident as anything
can be that most of our statements do not attribute epistemic statuses to
anything, but make claims of quite different sorts. We say that it is rain
ing, that Buffalo won the AFC championship, or that salt contains so
dium. My opponent may claim that I am begging the question here by
assuming a realist interpretation of our statements and beliefs. But what
is the alternative? How can the view that all statements are epistemic
statements be made remotely plausible?
The only way I can see of doing that is to buy into some version of the
absolute-idealist view that there is no fundamental distinction between
thought (discourse) and the reality it is about. The reality with which
our statements and beliefs are concerned is nothing but thought and
discourse that has attained its ultimate goal-to constitute an all em
bracing maximally coherent system. So when I believe that salt contains
sodium I believe something about an aspect of a comprehensive and
fully coherent system of thought. If that is an epistemic state of affairs,
something epistemic is what it takes to make my belief true. If embracing
this view is what it takes to save an epistemic conception of truth, few will
be willing to pay the price. In any event, I can't undertake to go into the
pros and cons of absolute idealism in this book. Hence I will pass on to
what I take to be a decisive difficulty with this attempt at reinterpreta
tion, regardless of the merits or demerits of absolute idealism.
The fatal flaw is this. The supposition that I am always making episte
mic claims about beliefs (statements) does not get so far as to be false.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
It cannot even be coherently thought. Consider the view that when I
believe that sugar is sweet what I believe is that a certain belief is ideally
justifiable, coheres with an all-comprehensive and fully articulated
whole, or has some other epistemic status, E. Well, what belief is it that
I believe to have E? It can't be the belief that sugar is sweet. If it were,
the belief (i. e. , proposition believed) that sugar is sweet would turn out
to be a proper part of itself. The proposition that sugar is sweet is the
proposition that the proposition that sugar is sweet has E. That way lies mad
ness. It must be some other proposition that we are believing to have E.
But whatever candidate we suggest, it too will have to be construed as a
proposition to the effect that some proposition has E. And what proposi
tion is that? The propositional content of the original belief keeps ex
panding. Each time we try to say what proposition is believed to have E,
it turns out to be the proposition that some other proposition has E. The
upshot is that we never succeed in saying what the propositional content
of the original belief is. This is a mug's game or, to speak more philo
sophically, an infinite regress-not the kind that sends us on a never
ending chase up ever-ascending levels, but the kind that is more analo
gous to a broken record. We keep coming back to the same point with
out ever getting beyond it, without ever assigning a definite content to
the belief in question.
The general point is clear. If we try to maintain that every belief is a
belief to the effect that some belief has a certain epistemic status, we
have left ourselves without any resources for specifying what belief it is
we are asserting, on a given occasion, to have a certain epistemic status.
I don't wish, of course, to deny that we can assert that a particular state
ment, proposition, or belief has a certain epistemic status. The trouble
comes with the claim that all statements have this form. That is what
gives rise to the infinite regress. This second way of trying to show an
epistemic conception of truth to be compatible with the T-schema-the
reinterpretation of propositional content-works no better than the
first.
I want to make it explicit that I am not rejecting everything that might
be called "epistemic" interpretations of propositional content. In par
ticular, the above argument is not intended to be directed at a verifica
tionist construal of propositional content, as put forward by Michael
Dummett, for example. At least, it is not intended to be a criticism of
that view on the construal that I take to be the most plausible one. So
construed, Dummett's claim is that every statement is to be understood
as asserting the "verification conditions" of that assertion. Thus if the
verification condition of 'The orchestra played the Beethoven 7th Sym
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
phony' is that the sounds produced by the orchestra (at least roughly)
instantiated a certain score, then what that statement says is that the
sounds produced instantiated that score. This proposal does not run
afoul of the above argument just because it does not construe a state
ment as attributing an epistemic status to that statement (or to any other
statement), but rather equates it with a certain statement on the same
level. That is a different ball game. I do not accept verificationist seman
tics, but that is another story.
Looking back at these two unsuccessful defensive maneuvers, we can
see that epistemic accounts of truth are impaled on the horns of a tri
lemma. They can accept the T-schema only at the price of either main
taining a palpably false conceptual thesis, or giving an interpretation of
propositional content that is not coherently thinkable. If, on the other
hand, they reject the T-schema, they are thereby rejecting what, as Put
nam acknowledges, is a mere truism about truth. In that case they reveal
themselves as not talking about truth at all, and their doctrine is con
demned to irrelevance. Palpable falsity, incoherence or irrelevance. Not
an attractive array of alternatives.
It will not have escaped the reader's notice that my third objection to
an epistemic conception of truth-incompatibility with the T-schema
is also, in effect, an argument for the central claim of this book that
acceptance of the conceptual truth of each instance of the T-schema
(which is what I mean by accepting the T-schema) amounts to accepting
a distinctively realist conception of truth. For if I am right in claiming
that epistemic accounts of the concept of truth are the only serious alter
natives to a realist account, and if they are incompatible with an accep
tance of the T-schema, the latter constitutes a distinctively realist way of
construing the concept of truth, one that excludes important and widely
held alternatives. Thus the argument of this section tells against the al
most universally accepted supposition that the T-schema is completely
neutral between different theories of truth, and constitutes a vindication
of my claim that the T-schema is the core of a distinctively realist account
of truth.
Perhaps one reason the T-schema argument, which forms the heart
of my "intensional critique", has not been noticed by epistemic theorists
is that they are attracted to an epistemic reading of principles like the
T-schema itself, in which case an epistemic account of truth seems to go
better with such principles. A good example of this is found in Crispin
Wright's recent book, Truth and Objectivity (1992). In chapter 1 he ar
gues that if one holds, as "redundancy theorists" typically do, that the
"Disquotational Schema" ('P' is true if and only if P) (DS) "is (all but)
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
a complete explanation of the truth predicate, then one is committed
to denying what redundancy theorists notoriously assert-that 'true' ex
presses no real property but is merely a device of disquotation" (14-15).
He argues that where we have sentences with "assertoric content",
"there will be a distinction between cases where their assertion is justi
fied and cases where it is not", and so "it follows that a norm, or com
plex of norms, of warranted assertibility will hold sway, both
prescriptively and descriptively, over sincere and literal use of the sen
tences to which the T-predicate applies" (17). He then argues that 'true'
and 'warrantedly assertible' "coincide in (positive) normative force"
(18), even though they can still "diverge in extension" (19). What I am
concerned with here is not these conclusions themselves, nor even the
full content of Wright's argument for them, but with only one link in
that argument. The argument gets under way with the following asser
tion.
[G]iven the explanatory biconditional link effected by the Disquota
tional Schema between the claim that a sentence is T [Wright's term
for a maximally neutral truth predicate] and its proper assertoric use,
it follows that "T" is likewise, both prescriptively and. .. descriptively,
a predicate which is normative of assertoric practice. "T" is prescrip
tively normative, because any reason to think that a sentence is T may
be transferred, across the biconditional, into reason to make or allow
the assertoric move which it expresses. (1992, 17)
That is enough for my current purpose. What I want to point out is
that Wright takes the right-hand side of the DS to say something about
"proper assertoric use", that is, "warranted assertibility". It is by reading
it in that way that he considers himself entitled to argue that 'true' is
normative of "assertoric practice", and moreover normative in such a
way that its normative force coincides with that of 'warrantedly assert
ible'. But this is a gross misreading. The right hand parts of the DS and
the Equivalence Schema (ES) ("It is true that P if and only if P") say
nothing about "proper assertoric use" or "warranted assertibility" or
anything else of a metalinguistic character. Take a particular instantia
tion of the schema: 'It is true that sugar is sweet if and only if sugar is
sweet. ' The proposition on the right hand of the equivalence is about
sugar; it attributes sweetness to sugar. It says nothing whatever about
warranted assertibility; it says nothing of any kind about assertion or
about the conditions under which an assertion is proper, correct, or in
order. It asserts a fact about a substance, a foodstuff. There is no excuse
219EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
for supposing that either of these schemata "effects a link" between
muth and some positive epistemic status of assertions.
Why am I castigating Wright at this point for an argument that may
seem totally irrelevant to my present concerns? Because the very mis
reading that Wright seeks to exploit for his purposes can easily encour
age one to suppose that an epistemic conception of truth is compatible
with these schemata. If what ES says to be equivalent to the truth of p is
some positive epistemic status of an assertion that p, then, of course,
the schema is compatible with the supposition that to say of a sentence
(proposition) that it is true is to attribute some positive epistemic status
to it. Indeed, the schema so interpreted implies that. But such a reading
is a misreading in the service of alethic nonrealism. It substitutes for the
truism that the truth of the proposition that p is conceptually equivalent to the
fact that p (its being the case that p) a reading tailor-made for an episte
mic constraint on truth, a reading in which the schema asserts a (pre
sumably conceptual) equivalence between the truth of p and some
positive epistemic status for the proposition that p. Since the epistemic
constraint has been sneaked in at the outset, it is not difficult to find it
there later.
x Back to Dummett
I should emphasize the limited scope of this criticism of epistemic
concepts of truth. It applies only to accounts that identify the concept of
truth with the concept of a positive epistemic status and understand this
identification in the strictest way, so that in saying of a truth bearer that
it is true we are saying of that truth bearer that it enjoys the positive
epistemic status in question. It should be clear that my arguments
against the view trade both on the fact that it makes a conceptual identi
fication and on the fact that it retains the same subject (the truth-value
bearer) for both the analysandum and the analysans. When presenting
arguments from this chapter to audiences I often get reactions that re
flect a supposition that the arguments are also directed against reductive
accounts of propositional content that might also be considered to be
epistemic in character, particularly verificationist reductions. But I do
not suppose for a moment that these arguments tell against such views.
Suppose that someone maintains, as empiricists from Schlick to Dum
mett have done, that every proposition is to be understood as a set of
verification conditions, conditions under which, as we would naturally
say, the proposition would be verified. One might think that my argu
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
ment against the epistemic theorist's second way of avoiding the "con
flict with the T-schema "objection would tell against this view. And,
indeed, if the view were put by identifying the proposition that U. S. mail
boxes are blue with the proposition that the proposition that U. S. mail boxes
are blue is verifiable by the fact that U. S. mail boxes look a certain way to a
normal observer under normal conditions (or something of the sort), that
argument would apply. In that case a reference to the proposition that
pwould be a part of what we are saying the proposition that p to be, and
we would again be involved in an infinite regress in attempting to say
what the proposition that p is. But there is an easy way for the verifica
tionist to avoid this difficulty. She can simply identify the proposition
that p with a statement of the conditions that are such that if they were
ascertained to obtain the proposition would thereby be verified, but
without putting into the analysis the claim that ascertaining those condi
tions to obtain would verify the proposition, thereby forcing herself to
refer to that very proposition in specifying its content. Thus the view
could be that the proposition that U. S. mail boxes are blue is the proposi
tion that U. S. mail boxes look a certain way to a normal observer under normal
conditions. Here there is no reference to the proposition being analyzed
as part of the analysis, and so the infinite regress is avoided. And, more
generally, my arguments against the epistemic conception of truth do
not apply to a verificationist reduction of propositional content just be
cause the latter is not an account of truth at all.
These points have important application to Dummett's views that I
discussed in chapter 4. To begin with, sometimes Dummett puts his veri
ficationist semantics in such a way that it does seem to be vulnerable to
my infinite regress argument. "According to a theory of meaning in
terms of verification, the content of an assertion is that the statement
asserted has been, or is capable of being, verified" (1976, 117). This
suggests that the truth-value bearer is referred to in the specification of
the content of that very bearer, thereby giving rise to the infinite regress.
But elsewhere Dummett's formulations could be developed in a way that
is not so vulnerable. For example:
[T]he sense of a sentence is thought of as being fixed by determining,
not the conditions under which it is to be true, as Frege thought, but
the conditions under which we are able to recognize it as true. (1973,
586)
For him [the anti-realist] the meaning of a statement is intrinsically
connected with that which we count as evidence for or against the
statement[. ] (1978, 162)
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
I say that these statements "could be developed so as not to be vulnera
ble to the infinite regress argument", for Dummett notoriously restricts
himself to more or less indeterminate indications of how the meaning
of a sentence (statement) would be spelled out, rather than giving a
precise recipe. But I take it that Dummett's verificationist reductionism
of propositional content can be construed in the form in which it is not
subject to the infinite regress argument, that form in which the specifi
cation of the content consists simply in listing the relevant verification
conditions without also specifying that they suffice to verify the proposi
tion in question.
But Dummett's verificationist account of truth is another story. Here
it looks as if some of the arguments of this chapter do tell against the
view.
On a verificationist account. .. our notions of truth and falsity. .
consist merely in the conception of a situation's occurring which
would thus conclusively determine its truth-value. (1973, 514)
The truth of such a sentence can consist only in the occurrence of the
sort of situation in which we have learned to recognize it as true, and
its falsity in the occurrence of the sort of situation in which we have
learned to recognize it as false. (1973, 468)
In other words, to say that a statement is true is to say that conditions
exist that we could use to verify it. The concept of truth is the concept
of verifiability. This view would seem to be a suitable target for some of
the arguments of this chapter. Let's see whether some of them do tell
against it.
First consider the two forms of the counterexample argument. The
first involved the suggestion that there are true propositions that no
human being can grasp. Whether such propositions constitute counter
examples to the identification of truth and verifiability depends on what
restrictions are put on the notion of verifying conditions. If they include
only conditions we are capable of ascertaining, then there would be no
verifying conditions for such propositions, for the same reason that they
would not be ideally justifiable (by us). If, on the other hand, no such
restriction is put on verifying conditions, it may be that there can be
verifying conditions for such propositions, even though we would never
be able to discover what they are.
On the exegetical question it is clear that Dummett does understand
verifying conditions as subject to such a restriction. This is clear from
the way in which he insists that truth values have be construed in such a
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
way that we can determine what truth value a given statement has. And
his arguments for his position turn on the conditions under which we
could learn the meaning of a sentence. Both these points are amply
documented in chapter 4. Hence, it seems clear that this part of the
counterexample argument applies as fully to Dummett as to Putnam.
The second part of the argument would seem to apply as well. This
involved the suggestion that there are true propositions that are such
that even in the most ideal epistemic situation there would not be
enough evidence to decide between a given such proposition and one
or more incompatible alternatives. It follows from this that there would
be no verifying conditions for such a proposition. Hence if there are
true propositions of this sort, they constitute counterexamples to Dum
mett's account of truth.
To be sure, we must recognize that it follows from Dummet's verifica
tionist semantics that there could be no such propositions (no such sen
tence meanings) as the counterexample arguments posit. But in
holding that these arguments tell against Dummett's view of truth, I am
not saddling the arguer with Dummett's verificationist semantics. On
the contrary, my suggestion is that these arguments reveal difficulties in
the whole Dummettian package, though the specific point of applica
tion is the alethic component of the package.
Turning to the circularity argument, it clearly does not apply in the
anti-Putnam form, for in that form it turns on the claim that the concept
of truth is needed to explain the concept of ideal justifiability, and Dum
mett makes no use of the latter concept. But an exactly parallel argu
ment can be wielded against Dummett. Indeed, it seems much more
obvious that verifiability has to be explained in terms of truth, as I
pointed out in chapter 4. For what does it mean to verify a statement,
other than showing it to be true? Similarly, what it means to confirm a
statement (where this is construed as something less decisive than veri
fication) is that considerations have been adduced that show the state
ment likely to be true, or that constitute significant reasons for taking
the statement to be true.
With respect to the final argument-incompatibility with the T
schema-there will be the same prima facie case against Dummett. If it
is a conceptual necessity that grass's being green is both necessary and
sufficient for its being true that grass is green, then what room is there
for the existence of verifying conditions to be conceptually necessary
and sufficient for the truth of grass's being green? Looking at the two
ways we imagined the Putnamian seeking to rebut this prima facie case,
we can easily see that the first way is no more available to Dummett than
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH 223
to Putnam. It seems no more plausible to take the existence of verifying
conditions for the statement that grass is green to be conceptually neces
sary for grass's being green, than to take the ideal justifiability of that
statement to be conceptually necessary for that state of affairs. In partic
ular, there is nothing in the concept of verifying conditions that guaran
tees that there are such conditions for every state of affairs. Again, a
verificationist semantics may imply the contrary, but so much the worse
for that semantics.
But for reasons given above, the second attempt to escape conflict
with the T-schema-namely, reinterpretation of propositional con
tent-would seem to be viable for Dummett. For, as we have just seen,
Dummett's account of propositional content in terms of verifying condi
tions can be in terms of a simple listing of such conditions for each
statement, instead of a form in which the statement is referred to as
what the conditions suffice to verify. This would enable him to avoid the
infinite regress generated by the latter form. Thus, although his theory
of truth comes into prima facie conflict with the T-schema, he can, un
like Putnam, avoid this by giving his verificationist interpretation of con
tent a form that does not involve putting the content bearer in the
analysandum.
And so, though not all the arguments of this chapter against Putnam
tell against Dummett's account of truth, enough do to pose real prob
lems for him. In addition there are difficulties with the verificationist
theory of content he could use to escape the last objection, one of which
I sketchily presented in Chapter 4, section iii.
If it is my view that some of the objections to Putnam in this chapter,
or analogues thereof, tell against Dummett's verificationist account of
the concept of truth, why didn't I use them against that account in chap
ter 4? To be sure, they weren't developed at that point of the book; but,
obviously, I could have introduced them there. The significant reason is
that in chapter 4 I argued that Dummett's verificationist account of
truth was not at all required by his verificationism. Given his verifica
tionist theory of meaning (propositional content), which is absolutely
fundamental to his position in any case, the requirements of verifica
tionism are fully satisfied by using that theory in conjunction with a real
ist conception of truth. For if all propositional content is made up of
verification conditions, then the truth of any proposition, on a realist
conception of truth, will depend on the obtaining of verification condi
tions anyway. There is no need to introduce verificationist restrictions
twice, once for content and once for truth. Since in saying that salt con
tains sodium I am saying that certain verification conditions obtain, on
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
a realist account of truth the truth value of what I say will depend on
whether relevant verification conditions are satisfied. This is just a
straight application of the realist idea that the conditions of truth are
given by what is asserted. Since, on these grounds, I concluded that the
verificationist account of truth was totally lacking in motivation, I did
not feel that it was worthwhile making an argument against it part of my
criticism of Dummett.
xi Realist and Antirealist Prospects
for Determining Truth Value
Now I turn to a consideration of reasons epistemic theorists of truth
give for their position. As I pointed out earlier, in a sense I have already
done this. Since epistemic conceptions of truth constitute the only seri
ous alternative to a realist conception, in criticizing various arguments
against the realist conception in Chapters 3-6 I have been, in effect,
criticizing arguments for an epistemic conception. However, when we
think of antirealist arguments as pro-epistemic-conception arguments,
there is still one piece of unfinished business. In Chapter 3 I discussed
the antirealist argument that on a realist conception of truth it is impos
sible to determine whether a proposition is true. I believe that I suc
ceeded in drawing the fangs of the argument by exposing the
shallowness of the reasons given for that supposed incapacity. But im
plicit in that argument was the contention that we are in a better posi
tion to determine truth values on some nonrealist construal of truth.
Since that issue could not be usefully addressed prior to the delineation
of such a construal, I postponed its consideration until this chapter. Be
cause Putnam's version of an epistemic conception of truth seems to me
the strongest one, I will devote most of this section to asking what our
prospects are of determining truth value on that conception, and
whether those prospects are better than they are when we think of truth
along realist lines.
Before getting into the nitty-gritty let me lay out the nonrealist's basic
idea here and the reason for its intuitive appeal. While the realist makes
truth value depend on states of affairs that go far beyond us-far beyond
our experience, thought, and discourse-the epistemic theorist seems
to "bring truth back home", lodge it in matters that are "within" our
thought and experience-the epistemic status of our beliefs and state
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
ments. 24 The ensuing discussion will reveal whether this intuition holds
up under critical scrutiny.
To forestall any impression that my conclusions hang on idiosyncratic
features of Putnam's version, I will first say a few words about the accessi
bility of truth on a coherentist theory of truth. Near the beginning of
this chapter I quoted Bradley as referring to truth as "that which satisfies
the intellect"25, "an ideal expression of the Universe, at once coherent
and comprehensive". 26 And I noted that Blanshard holds that a proposi
tion is true if it coheres with an all comprehensive and fully articulated
whole. 27 I will understand 'coherence' in the way spelled out at the end
of section iv. A system of propositions, statements, or beliefs is coherent
to the extent that it is both consistent and tightly unified by logical,
probabilistic, and explanatory relations. The components of the system
"fit together" closely through mutual implication, explanatory ties, and
other modes of reciprocal support.
In thinking about the extent to which we could tell whether a given
belief is true in Bradley's or Blanshard's sense, we must remember that
not any old coherent system is truth generative for its constituents. It
must be a "comprehensive", "all-inclusive" system. This stipulation
raises a serious question as to what "all inclusive" can mean on a coher
ence theory. It is not as if we can presuppose an independent realm of
fact by reference to which the completeness of a system can be judged.
If we could do that, we could say that a system is absolutely comprehen
sive if and only if for every existing entity and every property, it included
either the proposition that that entity has that property or the proposi
tion that it does not. But on the account of truth under consideration
the constitution of reality is determined by the contents of the most
coherent comprehensive system. So we have to have already identified a
comprehensive system in order to examine a system for comprehensive
ness. But let that pass and assume that there is some suitable way for the
coherentist to assess degrees of inclusiveness. Presumably it would only
be an enormously large system that would qualify--a system far in excess
of anything we have on our hands at present or anything we have any
real prospect of attaining. That being the case, let's consider the outlook
for determining with respect to a given proposition whether it would
find a place in an "all comprehensive and fully articulated whole" that
would exhibit maximum coherence. It is clear that we would have little
24. This intuition is one that is at home in internalist, but not in externalist epistemologies.
25. 1914, 1.
26. 1914, 223.
27. 1939, 2: 264.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
to go on. We are envisaging an ideal extension of our present and past
efforts to develop unified systems of knowledge, an extension to the
point at which all our knowledge becomes perfectly unified in a single
all-comprehensive system. We have little idea of what shape this would
take much less what its detailed contents would be. It is true that pro
grammes for "unified science" have been aired in the past. But they
have been very programmatic indeed. Moreover, the actual develop
ment of science and other domains of knowledge have not followed the
paths these pretentious programmes have marked out. Witness the fate
of the unified science movement of the Vienna Circle in the first half of
this century. So far is the second half of the century from following these
directives that science is much less unified now than it was a hundred
years ago. Thus the classical coherence theory of truth can hardly lay
claim to making the determination of what propositions are true more
feasible than a realist conception.
Now for Putnam's version, which is in terms of an ideal epistemic
situation. We will first have to recapitulate the outcome of our lengthy
and tortuous struggle to work out a respectable conception of such a
situation. The salient points are these. (1) It will involve the cognitive
availability of all relevant evidence. (2) In order to make sense of this
we have to use the notion of truth. (3) In order to determine what facts
are relevant we have to have some way of choosing among alternative
sets of background assumptions, and the only way we saw to do this was
to make heavy, though not exclusive, appeal to the coherence of a total
system of belief. The background assumptions of choice would be those
that are yielded by such a system.
In considering whether this conception of truth gives us a more cogni
tively accessible target than a realist conception, it is tempting to make
short work of the whole question by focusing on (2), the point that
the realist conception of truth is presupposed by the notion of an ideal
epistemic situation. Hence to determine what is or isn't justifiable in
such a situation we have to be able to determine what propositions are
true in a realist sense, for that is necessary for determining the compo
nents of the ideal epistemic situation by reference to which ideal justifi
ability, and hence epistemically constrained truth, is determined. But
this argument depends on assuming that it is truth in a realist sense that
the notion of an ideal epistemic situation presupposes. That is clear to
me, for I take realist truth to be truth. Hence if a certain concept presup
poses truth, realist truth is what it presupposes. But to use this conviction
in an argument against Putnam would be question begging. Hence I will
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
base the assessment on the other features of an ideal epistemic situation,
(1) and (3).
As for (1), the question concerns our capacity to determine whether
a given belief would be justified in the light of all relevant considera
tions. The clinker here is "all". To what extent are we, presently or in
the foreseeable future, in a position to determine what would come out
as justified on the basis of all relevant considerations? Can we make an
informed judgment on what would go into that totality? And if not, how
can we make a sufficiently informed judgment as to whether a given
belief would be ideally justifiable? We are better placed to make these
assessments for some propositions than for others. For what is observ
able we can, pace extreme theory-relativity-of-observation views, pretty
well survey what is relevant to epistemic status-the character of the
sensory experience, background beliefs that bear on the likelihood of
what is putatively observed, relevant features of the condition and situa
tion of the observer, the properties of the medium, and so on. With
more theoretical matters, on the other hand, it would be rash indeed to
suppose that we can specify everything that is relevant to justification.
To take an extreme example, how about views as to the course of events
in the first one-tenth of a second after the Big Bang? With a domain of
theory in as much flux as this, we constantly encounter new relevant
facts or hitherto unsuspected relevance of previously known facts. If you
consider this example too recherché to be significant, consider the in
ability of physicists in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries to realize
the relevance for Newtonian physics of the considerations-empirical
and theoretical-that led to the development of relativity theory and
quantum mechanics.
I believe that this line of thought could be extended to throw cold
water on the idea that we are generally in a good position to make judg
ments as to what would and would not be justifiable under ideal episte
mic circumstances, at least when we get away from the empirical and
rational bases of our knowledge. And for those bases we are in a good
position to determine truth in a realist sense. Hence it would seem that,
so far as feature (1) is concerned, an ideal justifiability conception of
truth does not give us any edge over a realist conception in determining
truth values.
When we turn to feature (3) things look even bleaker for the episte
mic theorist. Here the reasons given above for denying that coherence
theory renders truth more accessible come into play. For what (3) says
is that one thing we have to do to determine what considerations are
relevant to the ideal epistemic assessment of a belief is to determine
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
what more or less theoretical propositions would figure in a total system
the members of which are most coherent with each other and with em
pirical (observational) and rational (self-evident) bases. Ideally this
would mean spelling out the full constitution of such a system, and that
is obviously far beyond our powers. But even something more modest
that would still provide a basis for a sound judgment as to which of
alternative sets of propositions would be in the maximally coherent sys
tem would seem to be a pipe dream. How could we make an informed
judgment on this without a more complete grasp of the nature of a
maximally coherent system than we are able to attain? Thus feature (3)
is such as to make it beyond doubt that we are in a much worse position
to determine Putnamian truth than we are to determine realist truth.
Even for observation reports, since they are inherently defeasible, we
would need a considerable grasp of the (allegedly unique) maximally
coherent system to determine whether it contains sufficient defeaters
for a given prima facie justified observation report. Thus, ironically
enough, the very thing that has made an epistemic account of truth
seem attractive to many-its promise to remove truth from the status of
something inaccessibly transcendent by making it internal to our cogni
tive operations and hence easily within our grasp-turns out to be one
of its most serious liabilities. What has happened is that in order to de
velop an epistemic conception that is not desperately implausible as an
account of truth, we are forced to introduce a conception of epistemi
cally ideal circumstances that are so far removed from our actual episte
mic situation as to make it impossible for us to make informed
judgments as to what would or would not be justifiable in such circum
stances. The best laid plans of mice and men!
xii A Nonconceptual Epistemic Theory of Truth
I have devoted this chapter to laying out and criticizing an epistemic
theory of the concept of propositional truth, in other terms, an epistemic
theory of the meaning of 'true' in which it is applied to propositions,
beliefs, and statements. But even if these criticisms are decisive, an epi
stemic theorist might make a stand at another point. He might reformu
late his position as a theory of the nature of the property of truth. To be
sure, the property with which he would be dealing is the one picked out
by our concept of propositional truth. Nevertheless, as I pointed out in
chapter 1, there could be facts about the nature of the property that are
no part of the content of our concept of that property. This is a familiar
EPISTEMIC CONCEPTIONS OF TRUTH
theme in recent philosophical literature. 28 The property of being water
is the property of having the chemical constitution H2O, even though the
(ordinary) concept of water involves nothing about hydrogen or oxygen.
The property of being hot to a certain degree is the property of having a
certain average kinetic energy of constituent molecules, but our ordinary con
cept of heat involves no reference to kinetic energy of molecules. In
parallel fashion, it might be that the property of being true is the prop
erty of being justifiable in ideal epistemic circumstances, even though
the concept of truth contains nothing about justification.
What are the chances that this property-identification form of an epi
stemic theory of truth is correct? I want to consider this question in
two parts. (1) Do the arguments in this chapter against an epistemic
conception of truth have any force against this "nature of the property"
view? (2) To what extent is this view at all plausible?
As for (1), my second main criticism-that the concept of ideal justi
fiability involves the concept of truth-has no application to the prop
erty version, just because that version is not concerned with a definition
of the term 'true' or an analysis of the concept of truth. Hence defini
tional or analytical circularity is not a problem. The property of being
true could be the property of being justifiable in ideal epistemic condi
tions, even if the concept of ideal epistemic conditions cannot be ex
plained without using the concept of truth. This is analogous to the way
in which the property of (a physical object's) being red could be the
property of being disposed to produce sensations of redness, even if the
concept of a sensation of redness could not be explained without using
the concept of a physical object's being red.
Nor does the third criticism-that the epistemic theory conflicts with
the T-schema-apply to the property version. For although the view that
the property of truth is the property of being ideally justifiable does put
forward something as necessary and sufficient for a belief that p's being
true other than the fact that p, it doesn't claim ideal justifiability to be
conceptually necessary and sufficient for truth. And, as I brought out in
developing my criticism, it is this claim that brings the epistemic account
into conflict with the T-schema. Where we can distinguish between what
belongs to the concept of P and what belongs to the property of P, there
may be necessary and sufficient conditions for the application of the
property that are not embodied in the concept. Having a chemical com
position of sodium chloride is necessary and sufficient for a substance's
being salt, even though that is different from the conditions embedded
28. See especially Saul Kripke's "Naming and Necessity" in Davidson and Harman 1972.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
in our (ordinary) concept of salt (looking and tasting a certain way).
One who claims that the property of truth is ideal justifiability, and
avoids claiming that the concept of truth is the concept of ideal justifiabil
ity, need run into no conflict with the view that the concept of truth is
specified by the T-schema.
On the other hand, the first criticism-that there are counterexam
ples to the equation of truth and ideal justifiability-has equal force
against the property version. An identification of the property of truth
and the property of ideal justifiability is certainly incompatible with the
existence of true propositions that would not be justifiable in ideal epi
stemic circumstances. But since this is the only one of the three that
applies to the property version, and since I admitted it to be less than
conclusive, I cannot claim that my criticisms of the concept version of
an epistemic account of truth also dispose of the property version.
That being the case, we should go on to consider whether the prop
erty version possesses any plausibility, given that the concept version is
untenable. Since the concept of truth is realist-uniquely identified by
the T-schema-what reason could there be for the hypothesis that the
property picked out by that concept is ideal justifiability? To be sure, if
the concept does not make explicit everything necessarily involved in
the property, as we are assuming, that leaves open the possibility that this
something extra is ideal justifiability. But what reason could there be for
this suggestion? What could so much as give anyone the idea that a
proposition has the property of truth if and only if it is justifiable in an
ideal epistemic situation? Once we have given up the idea that the con
cept of truth is to be analyzed in terms of ideal justifiability, I can see no
rationale whatever for supposing that it is the property of ideal justifi
ability that fits the specifications laid down by the T-schema. The natural
way of going from the T-schema to a further delineation of the property
so marked out is the path of the correspondence theory. Since the con
cept of truth is such that a proposition is true if and only if there obtains
a fact that realizes the content of the proposition, that naturally suggests
that if we are to say something further about the property of truth, it
would be in terms of what it is for a fact to have the same content as a
proposition; that is, it would involve some account of the correspon
dence of proposition and fact, some way of spelling out what it is for
them to have the same content. By contrast, I can see no plausible route
from the T-schema to the idea that it is ideal justifiability that constitutes
the property in question. Thus the property identification version of an
epistemic account of truth fares no better than its conceptual cousin.
CHAPTER 8
Doing without Truth
i The Scope of This Chapter
At the beginning of Chapter 1 I formulated alethic realism as a con
junction of two theses.
(1) THE REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH IS THE CORRECT ONE (for
that use of 'true' in which statements, beliefs, and propositions are eval
uated as true or false).
(2) TRUTH IS IMPORTANT. It is important, for a variety of purposes,
that statements, beliefs, and propositions, be assessed for truth value.
Up to this point the book has been solely concerned with (1). I have
been explicating the realist conception of truth (Chapter 1), exploring
its relations to other positions thought of as forms of realism (Chapter
2), defending it against various criticisms (Chapters 4-6), and criticiz
ing the main rival conception. (Chapter 7). The time has now come to
address the second thesis. I will not give it equal billing. I don't see that
it requires the kind of defense in depth I have accorded (1). Neverthe
less, like any philosophical position, it is by no means universally ac
cepted. Hence it will not be inappropriate to defend it against its
detractors.
Do I take 'truth' in (2) to be restricted to realist truth? Does (2) say
that it is important that propositions be assessed for truth in the realist
sense? Since (2) is a component of alethic realism, it would be natural
to read it that way. But there is also a good reason for giving it a more
modest interpretation, according to which (2) in itself leaves open how
propositional truth is to be explicated. The reason is that (2) is but one
component of a complex view, the other component of which is (1), the
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
thesis that the realist conception of truth is the conception expressed
by 'true' when attributed to propositions. This implies that it would be
unnecessary duplication to build a commitment to the realist concep
tion into thesis (2) itself. In defending (2), I can simply bring out the
importance of assessing propositions, statements, and beliefs for truth,
without worrying about how 'true' is to be understood, leaving it to the
sis (1) to deal with that. This is the procedure I will follow in this chap
ter. My opponents here will not be those who advocate some nonrealist
account of propositional truth, but rather those who question or deny
the importance of determining truth values. Against such views I will be
pointing out some of the reasons it does matter a great deal whether
our beliefs and statements are true or false. This result is then to be
interpreted in the light of the argument of the rest of the book to the
effect that the truth that is shown here to be important is realist truth.
I should also give advance notice that I will not be dealing in this
chapter with one sort of view that might be thought to fall under the
general description, "views that deny the importance of truth". These
are the deflationary theories that deny that we are attributing any prop
erty to a proposition, statement or belief when we utter a sentence of
the form 'X is true'. In a sense, such views imply that it is not important
to determine what truth values propositions have. Since they deny that
there are any such things as truth values for propositions to "have", they
are committed to denying that it is important (or unimportant for that
matter) to find out which truth value a given proposition has. Neverthe
less, there are two reasons for not bringing them into this discussion.
First, I take myself to have disposed of deflationary views in Chapter 1,
section xi. Hence I feel free here to presuppose that there are genuine
properties of propositional truth and falsity, however they are to be con
strued, and on that basis to consider whether, and if so why, it is impor
tant for central human concerns to ascribe these properties correctly.
Second, and more importantly, it is not necessary to read deflationary
accounts as opposed to the thesis of this chapter. Though they construe
apparent truth-value attributions as not seriously involving the attribu
tion of properties to alleged truth-value bearers, they by no means want
to eliminate those putative attributions or minimize their importance.
It is just that they construe such utterances as not seriously asserting
properties of truth or falsity to anything. Since their position is not op
posed to the importance of engaging in (apparent) truth-value attribu
tions and determining which of them to accept, they cannot be
reckoned as opponents of the position defended here.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
i Reasons for De-Emphasizing Truth
The most natural way to proceed in this chapter would be to first
present my story of why it is important to assess propositions for truth
value, and then consider various objections to that story. But I think that
the smoothest entrée into this controversy is to begin with some reasons
for denying the importance of truth and then, as a response to that
denial, get into the story of why truth is indispensable. This is the order
I will follow.
Perhaps the commonest route to pooh-poohing truth goes through
epistemic theories of truth I have been criticizing. One impressed by
Bradley, James, or Dewey may thereby favor the idea of construing truth
in terms of some favorable epistemic status. But then he begins to have
doubts as to whether this epistemic conception captures what people
typically have in mind when they call a belief, statement, or proposition
'true'. But in spite of these doubts, it still seems to him that the epistemic
status in question is what we are really after in our cognitive enterprises,
rather than truth in the realist sense. It seems to him that the quest for
realist truth is a wild-goose chase, while the quest for coherence, "being
fruitfully led through our experience", or resolution of problematic sit
uations is not only feasible, but of central importance for human life.
These reflections might lead him to express his position not by profer
ring the epistemic status as a reinterpretation of truth, but rather by
pushing for the replacement of truth with the favored epistemic status. It
is like the difference between behaviorism as a view about the correct
analysis of mental terms (concepts) ["analytical" or "logical" behavior
ism], and behaviorism as a proposal to quit dealing in mentalistic terms
or concepts altogether (however construed) and restrict our consider
ation of the psychology of human beings to their behavior and disposi
tions thereto [what is sometimes called "methodological" behaviorism].
In Chapter 7 I presented the great pragmatist figures-Peirce, James,
and Dewey-as pursuing the former line, and I picked quotations that
support that attribution. But we can find the other strain in their writ
ings as well. Thus James not infrequently denigrates the aim at realist
truth, under the guise of some such term as "copying", rather than
claiming that truth is best construed in some other way, such as getting
into satisfactory relations with other parts of our experience.
A priori, however, it is not self-evident that the sole business of our
minds with realities should be to copy them. (1909, 50)
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
If our symbols fit the world, in the sense of determining our expecta
tions rightly, they may even be the better for not copying its terms.
(1909, 51)
seems,
Theoretic truth, truth of passive copying, sought in the sole interests
of copying as such, not because copying is good for something.
if you look at it coldly, to be an almost preposterous ideal. Why should
the universe, existing in itself, also exist in copies? (1909, 40)
In Richard Rorty's latter-day adherence to what he calls "pragmatismfind this emphasis in a purer form.
"
we
The pragmatist agrees that if one wants to preserve the notion of "cor
respondence with reality" then a physicalistic theory of reference is
necessary-but he sees no point in preserving that notion. The prag
matist has no notion of truth which would enable him to make sense
of the claim that if we achieved everything we ever hoped to achieve
by making assertions we might still be making false assertions, failing
to "correspond with something". (Rorty 1982, xxiv)
When he [the pragmatist] asks himself about a given statement S,
whether he "knows what has to be the case for it to be true" or merely
knows "the conditions which we recognize as establishing the truth or
falsity of statements of that class", he feels as helpless as when asked
"Are you really in love, or merely inflamed by passion? ". .. He refuses
to take a stand-to provide an "analysis" of "S is true", for example,
or to either assert or deny bivalence. He refuses to make a move in
any of the games in which he is invited to take part. (Rorty 1982,
xxviii)
What really needs debate between the pragmatist and the intuitive
realist is not whether we have intuitions to the effect that "truth is
more than assertibility". .. .. . Of course we have such intuitions. How
could we escape having them? We have been educated within an intel
lectual tradition built around such claims. .. But it begs the question
between pragmatist and realist to say that we must find a philosophical
view which "captures" such intuitions. The pragmatist is urging that
we do our best to stop having such intuitions, that we develop a new
intellectual tradition. (Rorty 1982, xxix-xxx)1
Thus instead of advocating what we have seen in Chapter 7 to be desper
ately implausible equations of truth with one or another favorable epi
stemic status, the pragmatist, or other epistemic theorist of truth, may
1. In fairness to Rorty I should point out that he has since disavowed these comments. See
Rorty, forthcoming.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
wye instead that we give up concern for "truth" (naturally thought
in realist terms) and set our sights instead on the favored epistemic
catus(es) in question.
But though this may be the most common pathway to the abandon
ment of truth, it is by no means the only one. Philosophers innocent of
any truck with epistemic theories of truth have been led, in one way or
another, to question the apparent truism that the ultimate goal of cogni
non is to believe what is true and refrain from believing what is false and
to propose alternative goals as more basic, central, or worthwhile. Thus
the central aim might be identified as "predictive power" or "explana
tory efficacy" or "maximal coherence in our belief system". When
thinkers seek to dethrone truth in favor of claimants like these, without
coming to this from disenchantment with an epistemic theory of truth,
it is typically because of suppositions like those I sought to discredit in
Chapter 3, to the effect that truth is unattainable or that we can never
know whether we have attained it or not. It is then supposed that pre
dictive or explanatory power, or coherence, is something that we can
get at, something the presence or absence of which we can ascertain,
and hence something it is reasonable and feasible to look for. In section
viii I will look at a still different route to the denigration of truth.
iii Why Truth Is Important
Whatever the motivation of a thinker who rejects a concern for the
truth values of our beliefs and assertions, the question she raises must
be confronted. What reasons are there for supposing that truth plays
a crucial, perhaps indispensable role in our intellectual and practical
transactions with the world?
The most obvious answer to the question, "Why, if at all, is it impor
tant for us to consider whether our beliefs are true? " is: "Because it is
important for us to determine what states of affairs obtain where that
has a bearing on our practical or theoretical concerns". No one, I as
sume, will question the point that it often makes a big difference to
how we should conduct ourselves, theoretically or practically, whether a
certain state of affairs obtains. It is important to my thinking about cau
sality whether causality amounts to counterfactual dependence, and it
makes a crucial difference to what it is most advisable for me to do next
whether a burglar is in the house. But then it follows from the T-schema
that it is correspondingly important whether it is true that causality
amounts to counterfactual dependence and whether it is true that a bur
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
glar is in the house. For the state of affairs that p obtains if and only if it
is true that p. However I won't concentrate on these cases in which a
truth value is attributed to a specified proposition. For in these cases it
is very plausible to suppose that our ordinary concerns can be satisfied
by attention to the proposition itself, rather than to what truth value the
proposition bears. And hence a concern with truth would not seem to
be ineliminable here. If I should be philosophical enough to express my
concern in the second case by saying, "I've got to find out whether it's
true that there's a burglar in the house", the likes of Ramsey could point
out that I might just as well have said "I've got to find out whether
there's a burglar in the house", thereby short circuiting any reference
to truth. 2
But the need for considering truth value is by no means limited to
determining whether this or that particular proposition is true. There
are also more general concerns that involve the concepts of truth and
falsity. We often have occasion to make general statements involving
'true' and 'false', statements that generalize over propositions without
predicating 'true' or 'false' of any particular proposition. For each of
these areas a consideration of truth values is often of capital importance.
I will illustrate this with a look at several such areas-logic, semantics,
practical reasoning, and epistemology, the first three briefly and the last
more fully.
As for deductive logic, the most obvious place for truth is in the char
acterization of such central logical relations as entailment and contra
diction. One proposition entails another if and only if it is impossible
for the former to be true and the latter false. Hence the use of truth
tables to check the validity of arguments that turn on propositional con
nectives. One proposition contradicts another if and only if it is neces
sary that they have different truth values (assuming here only two truth
values-true and false). 3 There are much more complex ways in which
the concept of truth figures in one or another approach to logic, for
example, model theory. But I will leave that exposition to others.
The role of truth in semantics has been highlighted in recent decades
by Davidson's advocacy of a truth-conditions theory of meaning. I my
2. In diverting attention away from these attributions of truth to a specified proposition, I
am not reneging on my rejection of redundancy theory in Chapter 1. The point here is not that
'It is true that p' "says the same thing" as 'p', a view I reject, but that our concerns can usually
be as well served by considering whether that pas by considering whether it is true that p.
3. As pointed out in Chapter 4, section iv, even Dummett acknowledges that a realist con
ception of truth is needed to explicate the notion of logical validity.
4. See his "Truth and Meaning", reprinted in Davidson 1984, and the enormous literature
spawned by this.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
elf do not agree with this as a general theory of linguistic meaning
(Alston 1994), but a felicitous way of bringing out what it is for sen
gences that are usable to make assertions to have a certain meaning, is
to make explicit the contribution such a sentence makes to the truth
conditions of an assertion it is used to make.
A concern with truth bulks large in practical reasoning and, more
generally, in the mental direction of our efforts to deal with the environ
ment. The basic point can be stated very simply and seems overwhelm
ingly obvious. If our interactions with X are guided by true beliefs about
X they are much more likely to be successful in attaining the goals of
that interaction, ceteris paribus, than if they are guided by false beliefs.
In trying to accomplish something it is of the utmost importance to act
on true beliefs about matters relevant to that enterprise. If I set out to
repair an air conditioner I am well advised to have true rather than false
beliefs about the structure and operation of that device. If I am trying
to influence someone to adopt a certain course of action it is crucial for
me to have true beliefs about the present beliefs, attitudes, and preju
dices of that person. And so on. What could be more obvious? Neverthe
less, as Cicero wrote, there is nothing so obvious that it has not been
denied in the books of the philosophers. One book in which this obvi
ous truism is denied is Stich's The Fragmentation of Reason (1990). In
section viii of this chapter I will examine Stich's position. Pending that,
I will be taking it that the above truism is, indeed, true.
At this point I must take account of a likely reaction to the illustrations
I give of the importance of generalizations concerning truth values. This
reaction extends to generalizations the same judgment I made on attri
butions of truth to particular propositions. It might be expressed as fol
lows. "You tell us that it is important in logic to construe the entailment
of q by p as the impossibility of p's being true and q's being false. But
why couldn't that same point be made without mentioning truth and
falsity simply by saying that for any p and q, p entails q if and only if it is
not possible that p and not-q? The same response can be made to your
point that if a certain belief plays an essential role in guiding my at
tempts to reach goal G, then I am more likely to reach G if that belief is
true than if it is false. Why can't that same point be made without men
tioning truth and falsity by saying that for any G and p, if my attempts to
reach G are guided by a belief that p, then I am more likely to reach G
if p. And the first point to be made in this next section about the impor
tance of truth for epistemology (my critic is endowed with foreknowl
edge! ) is that a belief counts as knowledge only if it is true. But why can't
we make that same point by saying: "For any p, a belief that p counts as
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
knowledge that p only if p? " Thus it appears that the cases in which you
claim an importance for considerations of truth values can be handled
without saying anything about truth values. "
This sounds as if it thoroughly deflates my claims in this chapter. To
be sure, I have not yet exhibited all my cases, but they can all be re
sponded to in the same vein. Before explaining why I think this reaction
does not vitiate the thesis of this chapter, let me set aside a response
some thinkers would favor. My critic, along with many deflationists, re
lies on substitutional quantification to carry out the 'true'-free replace
ments. If substitutional quantification were subject to crippling defects,
that would secure an unassailable place for 'true' and 'false' in general
izations of the sort I consider in this chapter. It is often pointed out that
truth-value attributions in generalizations enable us to avoid substitu
tional quantification. 5 But I have already made explicit that I take substi
tutional quantification to be unproblematically intelligible. Indeed, I
have made use of it in my own formulations. Hence I will not take a
reliance on it to vitiate the above response.
To come to the reply I will give, it is clear that this criticism trades on
the form of deflationism we have in C. F. J. Williams's What Is Truth?
(1976). It is the pattern of analysis featured there that the critic employs
to blunt my claims for the importance of a consideration of truth values.
To be sure, this does not mean that he is committed to the central defla
tionary thesis that apparent truth-value attributions are something quite
different. Nevertheless my objections in Chapter 1 to that thesis can be
used in another way to reveal the hollowness of the present objection.
There I pointed out that the strongest forms of deflationism--those of
Grover and Williams-could lay claim to providing alternative formula
tions for apparent truth attributions that are analyses in the strictest
sense, synonymous sentences that put the content in different terms. I
did express doubts that the prosentential analyses really did say what the
originals do, but in any event our concern here is with analyses of the
sort produced by Williams; and in those cases I did unqualifiedly en
dorse the synonymy thesis. 'For any pif p is asserted in the book, p' seems
to say just exactly what 'Everything asserted in the book is true' does.
But if that is how they are related, we haven't made any real change of
substance, of content, by switching from one formulation to the other.
We have merely changed to a different way of saying the same thing. We
have not gotten rid of truth and falsity; we have only gotten rid of 'true'
and 'false'. The concepts of truth and falsity are still there; it is just that
5. See, e. g. , Horwich 1990, chap. 1, sec. 6.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
they are not exhibited by the manifest verbal content of the sentence.
There is much less in the substitution than meets the eye. Hence the
critic's substitutivity thesis doesn't really imply that my thesis of the im
portance of considering truth value is false. For even when we eschew
'true' and 'false' in favor of substitutional quantification over proposi
tions, we are still considering truth and falsity, but by another name.
The rose still smells as sweet. "
Now we can see why truth attributions to specified propositions are to
be treated differently, for the present purpose, from generalizations.
Just because the Ramsey equivalence of 'p' and 'It is true that p' cannot
lay claim to synonymy, the way is left clear for recognizing that they have
different contents. And hence when we see that the former can serve
the same purposes as the latter, we have seen that those purposes can
be served without any consideration of truth value. But for the general
izations the Williams treatment leaves the content unaffected, and so
the replacement leaves us still considering truth value, though what we
are saying or thinking is expressed differently.
I would make essentially the same response to another claim that the
points I make do not require bringing in truth values. "None of this
shows that truth must be brought into epistemology, etc. The functions
of the concept of truth could equally well be performed by other con
cepts such as fact, and what is the case. Thus instead of saying that a belief
counts as knowledge only if it is true, we could just as well say that it
counts as knowledge only if it is a belief as to what is the case. Instead of
saying that a condition renders a belief justified only if it renders it likely
to be true, we could just as well say, 'only if it renders it likely that the
belief corresponds to a fact'. And so for my other claims for the indispens
ability of truth. "
My response to this, again, is not to deny that we could just as well use
the "fact" or the "is the case" lingo instead of "true" lingo, but rather
to deny that this makes any significant difference. These notions,
though not exactly the same, are tightly bound in a small package. As I
pointed out in Chapter 1, the T-schema itself can be formulated in such
6. This response is, of course, related to the remarks I made at the beginning of the chapter
about deflationary theories, but it is not just the same. There I was explaining why I was not
discussing deflationary theories as opponents of the chapter's thesis. One of the reasons was
that they were not denying the importance of considering (putative) truth-value attributions but
rather giving a particular construal of them. The present response, by contrast, is directed at an
argument for the thesis that truth-value attributions have no essential importance, an argument
that employs tools developed by deflationists for purposes they, if I am right, do not share. The
common feature of my two discussions, as well as the critique of deflationism in Chapter 1, is
the idea that if analyses like those of Williams work, then they do not have some of the implica
tions we might suppose they have, and that some thinkers have supposed they have.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
a way as to make this explicit. Instead of saying "It is true that p if and
only if p" I could make essentially the same point by saying "It is the
case that p if and only if p" or "It is a fact that p if and only if p". These
locutions are necessarily equivalent to each other. Hence they can be
freely interchanged in larger contexts without running any risk of alter
ing truth value. 'True' is the more natural adjective to use in attribution
to propositions, beliefs, and statements, but the alternative epistemolog
ical dicta just exhibited, in terms of "is the case that" and "is a fact
that", make basically the same point as the more familiar formulations
in terms of 'true'. Thus the objection holds on a verbal level, but the
verbal shifts make no difference to the substantive issues. One who de
cries reliance on the concept of truth would not be cheered by being
told that instead of thinking of knowledge as requiring true belief, we
can say instead that it requires belief in what is actually the case. "With
a friend like that" he may say, "who needs an enemy? "
iv Truth and Epistemology: Knowledge and Justification
This brings me to epistemology for which I promised a more ex
tended treatment. Here truth figures heavily in accounts of both knowl
edge and the justification of belief, two of the main concerns of
epistemology. I will begin with knowledge.
It is admitted on almost all hands that the truth of p is a necessary
condition of knowing that p. If it is false that you are an English noble
man, then it is impossible for me to know that you are an English noble
man, whatever else is the case. There is considerable controversy over
what else is necessary for one's knowing that p. The dominant twentieth
century approach is to suppose that knowledge that p is a kind of belief
that p, one that satisfies certain further conditions. The most popular
line has been that what turns a true belief into knowledge is justification.
To know that p is to have a true justified belief that p. Even after Gettier
effectively exploded the idea that having a true justified belief is sufficient
for knowledge, a majority of epistemologists continue to suppose that it
is at least necessary, and that what is required for sufficiency is this plus
one or more additional conditions. Others in the post-Gettier era turn
their backs on justification and look for a quite different approach. But
through all this there is general agreement that at least truth is required.
And how could it be otherwise? What sense could we make of the sugges
tion that even though there is no life on Mars you or I know that there
is life on Mars? There are, of course, derivative or ironical uses of 'know'
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
that are compatible with falsity. "I just knew that he was going to be here.
So where is he? " But it is clear, if anything is, that a fully serious attribu
tion of knowledge that p requires the truth of p for its truth.
Before launching on what will turn out to be an extended discussion
of epistemic justification, I must call attention to a way in which the
discussion will be, by my lights, oversimplified. Since this is not a treatise
on epistemology, and since I can make the points I am concerned to
make most simply by talking as if there is some unique objective reality
called 'epistemic justification' about the nature of which epistemologists
have different and incompatible views, I proceed to talk that way. Actu
ally I hold that there is no such reality, and that putative disagreements
about the nature of epistemic justification are best viewed as emphases
on one or another "epistemic desideratum", each of which is cognitively
valuable in some way. Since my concern here is only to illustrate the ways
in which the notion of truth appears in epistemology, those appearances
would still be there if epistemology were conducted under the aegis of
"epistemic desiderata" rather than in the context of an attempt to deter
mine what epistemic justification is.
The relation of truth to justification is both more complex and more
controversial than its relation to knowledge. On the one hand, it is gen
erally agreed that it is conceptually possible for one to be justified (ratio
nal) in believing that p when it is false that p. That point was underlined
in the last chapter, where I pointed out the impossibility of identifying
truth with justification of the ordinary sort. On the other hand, it is
generally thought that justification has some intimate relation with
truth, though there is no agreement on just what this is. On a "truth
conducivity" position, it is a fundamental constraint on conditions of
justification that the satisfaction of those conditions guarantee that it is
at least highly probable that the belief in question be true. Thus if I
claim that one is justified in believing that p provided one has done
everything one can to assure oneself that the belief is true, and if it can
be shown that this does not guarantee a probability of truth for the
belief, my claim must be rejected. Furthermore, it is held that this con
straint stems from the concept of epistemic justification. It is part of what
is meant by "being justified in believing that p" that one has satisfied
conditions that guarantee a significant likelihood that the belief is true.
If entailment does not constitute the general connection between jus
tification and truth, what weaker tie might? Consider a case. Judy and
Jack are taking a train on a fall evening. His view is obscured and he
asks what color the foliage is. She might say, "Green", to which he
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
might reply, "Can it still be green this far north? " A natural answer
would be, "I can see it clearly, and it certainly looks green". It is sig
nificant that this answer both responds to a challenge of the truth of
her statement and expresses a justification for her believing it. Imag
ine, moreover, that Jack perversely rejoins: "I know your seeing it
clearly and its looking green to you justifies your belief, but is that
relevant to its truth? " What are we to make of this? .. . [H] is rejoinder
seems unintelligible. I believe that it appears unintelligible precisely
because of the conceptual connection between (epistemic) justifica
tion and truth: it seems to be at least partly constitutive of justification
that, in some way, it counts toward truth. (Audi 1993, 300-301)
An improved alternative to the normative concepts of justification is
the notion of justification as an adequate indication, relative to one's total
evidence, that a proposition is true. Such an adequate indication is pro
vided for one by something that makes a proposition, P, evidentially
more probable for one, on one's total evidence, than not only - P but
also P's probabilistic competitors. .. . On this notion, an epistemic
justifier of a proposition is simply a certain sort of truth indicator, or
evidential probability-maker for that proposition. (Moser 1989,
42-43)
S's believing that h on the basis of R is epistemically justified at t iff
S's believing that on the basis of R is a reliable indication that h at t.
(Swain 1981, 99)
From a different point of view Alvin Plantinga, after initially identifying
a belief's being what he calls "warranted" with its being "produced by
my cognitive faculties functioning properly in a congenial environ
ment", feels constrained to add the requirement that "the segment of
the design plan governing the production of the belief in question must
also be aimed at truth" (1993b, 17)
The claim that justification is essentially truth conducive is often sup
ported by taking the basic aim of cognition to be the acquisition of true
beliefs and the avoidance of false beliefs.
[Epistemic justification] has to do with a specifically epistemic dimen
sion of evaluation. Beliefs can be evaluated in different ways. One may
be more or less prudent, fortunate, or faithful in holding a certain
7. This is a stronger notion than justification', as usually conceived, for Plantinga character
izes warrant as "that, whatever precisely it is, which. .. makes the difference between knowledge
and mere true belief" (1993a, 3). Most epistemologists of the post-Gettier era who use the term'
justification' do not hold that justification is enough by itself to make true belief into knowl
edge. I will ignore this difference in these remarks.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
belief. Epistemic justification is different from all that. Epistemic eval
uation is undertaken from what we might call "the epistemic point of
view". That point of view is defined by the aim at maximizing truth
and minimizing falsity in a large body of beliefs. .. . [A]ny concept of
epistemic justification is a concept of some condition that is desirable
or commendable from the standpoint of the aim at maximizing truth
and minimizing falsity[. ] (Alston 1989, 83-84)
[E]pistemic justification is essentially related to the so-called cognitive
goal of truth, insofar as an individual belief is epistemically justified
only if it is appropriately directed toward the goal of truth. More spe
cifically, on the present conception, one is epistemically justified in
believing a proposition only if one has good reason to believe it is true.
To accept a proposition in the absence of good reason is to neglect the
cognitive goal of truth. (Moser 1985, 4)
But we have no
Why should we, as cognitive beings, care whether our beliefs are epi
stemically justified? Why is such justification something to be sought
and valued? .. . [T]he following answer seems obviously correct. .. .
What makes us cognitive beings at all is our capacity for belief, and
the goal of our distinctively cognitive endeavors is truth: we want our
beliefs to correctly and accurately depict the world. If truth were some
how immediately and unproblematically accessible. .. then the con
cept of justification would be of little significance. .
such immediate and unproblematic access to truth, and it is for this
reason that justification comes into the picture. The basic role of justi
fication is that of a means to truth, a more directly attainable mediating
link between our subjective starting point and our objective goal. .. .
If our standards of epistemic justification are appropriately chosen, bringing
it about that our beliefs are epistemically justified will also tend to
bring it about. .. that they are true. If epistemic justification were not
conducive to truth in this way, if finding epistemically justified beliefs
did not substantially increase the likelihood of finding true ones, then
epistemic justification would be irrelevant to our main cognitive goal
and of dubious worth. (Bonjour 1985, 7-8)
Finally, Goldman (1986) surveys a number of criteria for the rightness
of "J-rules", rules that lay down conditions for a belief's being justified.
These criteria are based on one or another valuable consequence of
belief. Consequences Goldman considers as candidates for this slot in
clude coherence, explanation, practical usefulness, and truth. The up
shot of his discussion is that truth, the "verific consequence", is the only
one that survives critical scrutiny. This leads to the view that a set of
J-rules is acceptable only if following them would lead to a preponder
ance of true over false beliefs (98-106).
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
Thus on this truth-conducivity view the concept of truth plays a crucial
role in the concept of justification. Because of this we can't provide the
most basic defense of a thesis as to what conditions are sufficient for
the justification without considering whether the satisfaction of those
conditions would make it likely that the belief in question is true.
But by no means all theorists of epistemic justification embrace truth
conducivity. Its rejection typically stems from an "internalist" orienta
tion, according to which being justified in believing that p is a matter of
how things seem from the subject's own perspective--where that per
spective is usually identified with what one can ascertain just on reflec
tion-rather than a matter of the objective likelihood of the belief's
being true.
[T]he concept of epistemic justification is. internal and immediate
in that one can find out directly, by reflection, what one is justified
in believing at any time. (Chisholm 1989, 7)
The usual approach to the traditional questions of theory of knowl
edge is properly called "internal" or "internalistic". The internalist
assumes that, merely by reflecting upon his own conscious state, he
ca formulate a set of epistemic principles that will enable him to find
out, with respect to any possible belief he has, whether he is justified
in having that belief. The epistemic principles that he formulates are
principles that one may come upon and apply merely by sitting in
one's armchair, so to speak, and without calling for any outside assis
tance. In a word, one need consider only one's own state of mind.
(Chisholm 1989, 76)
Every one of every set of facts about S's position that minimally suffices
to make S, at a given time, justified in being confident that p must be
directly recognizable to S at that time. By 'directly recognizable' I mean
this: if a certain fact obtains, then it is directly recognizable to S at a
given time if and only if, provided that S at that time has the concept
of that sort of fact, S needs at that time only to reflect clear-headedly
on the question of whether or not that fact obtains in order to know
that it does. (Ginet 1975, 34)
8. On the contemporary scene this truth-conducivity perspective on justification is specially
connected with a "reliabilist" approach to justification, the view that to be justified in believing
that p is for the belief that p to be generated, or sustained, by a reliable process, mechanism, or
disposition, where a process is reliable provided it would, in a wide range of suitably varied cases,
produce a large proportion of true beliefs. But a truth-conducivity account of justification is by
no means restricted to reliabilism and other forms of "externalism", where externalism is the
view that what makes for justification need not be accessible to the subject just on reflection.
Among the authors we have cited, Goldman and Swain are reliabilists, but Bonjour and Moser,
so far from being reliabilists, are not even externalists. Plantinga is only partially a reliabilist,
while Alston and Audi represent different ways of combining internalism and externalism.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
Internalism. .. treats justifiedness as a purely internal matter: if P is
justified for S, then S must be aware (or at least be immediately capa
ble of being aware) of what makes it justified and why. (Bach 1985,
32)
There is a tension between internalism and truth conducivity just be
cause the fact that a condition bestows an objective likelihood of truth
on a belief is not something that one can ascertain just on reflection.
Hence internalists typically reject truth conducivity. 9
According to this traditional conception of "internal" epistemic justi
fication, there is no logical connection between epistemic justification
and truth. (Chisholm 1989, 76)
Epistemic rationality is distinguished from other kinds of rationality
by its truth-directed goal. The goal is for one now to believe those
propositions that are true and now not to believe those propositions
that are false.
However, to say that the goal that helps distinguish epistemic ratio
nality from other kinds of rationality is a truth-directed goal is not to
say that truth is a prerequisite of epistemic rationality. In particular, it
is not to say that it impossible for what is epistemically rational to be
false, and likewise it is not even to say that it is impossible for most of
what is epistemically rational to be false. (Foley 1987, 155; see the
whole chapter, "Epistemic Rationality and Truth")
There are many versions of just how justification is a function of the
subject's "perspective". One idea is that it is a matter of whether the
subject is satisfying intellectual obligations, or not violating intellectual
obligations, in believing that p. I will call such a conception of justifica
tion (one in terms of some version of the "required-forbidden-permit
ted" triad) a DEONTOLOGICAL conception.
One is justified in being confident that p if and only if it is not the case
that one ought not to be confident that p; one could not be justly
reproached for being confident that p. (Ginet 1975, 28)
The rational belief is the belief which does not violate our noetic obli
gations. The rational belief is the belief which, by reference to our
noetic obligations, is permitted. .. . Rationality consists in not violating
those duties concerning one's believings. (Wolterstorff 1983, 144)
9. But not invariably. Recall the earlier quotations from Bonjour and Moser, who are both
internalists in the present sense and who take justification to be essentially truth conducive.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
Another idea is that a belief is justified if the subject has sufficient (ade
quate) reasons, grounds, or evidence for the belief: "Doxastic attitude
D toward proposition p is epistemically justified for S at t if and only if
having D toward p fits the evidence S has at t" (Feldman and Conee,
"Evidentialism", in Moser and Vander Nat, 1987, 334). We have already
seen formulations of this sort in the two passages from Moser quoted
above, but Moser combined this idea with a truth-conducivity concep
tion of justification, whereas Feldman and Conee disavow any such con
nection.
It is clear that accounts of justification in terms either of nonviolation
of obligations or of evidence will be compatible with internalism only if
whatever is deemed sufficient for justification is so construed that it is
cognitively accessible on reflection. For the deontological accounts, that
means that we will have to understand nonviolation of an obligation in
terms of how it seems to the subject or what the subject is justified in
supposing, rather than in terms of objective facts that the subject might
or might not be capable of ascertaining. Thus if the obligation, objec
tively formulated, is to believe a proposition only if it is true, justification
will depend not on whether one satisfies that objective condition but on
whether one believes what one supposes to be the truth or what one is
justified in supposing to be the truth, where the latter alternative is so
construed that whether one's belief is justified is always something re
flectively accessible, as Chisholm maintains above. As for the account in
terms of "fitting the evidence", we will have to understand "evidence",
"reasons", or "grounds" in such a way that they are, to use Ginet's ter
minology, always "directly recognizable" by the subject. Moreover we
will have to construe the requirement that the grounds are "adequate"
or "sufficient" so that this too can be determined by the subject just by
considering the question. This means that the "adequacy" of the
grounds cannot be construed in terms of their conferring an objective
probability of truth on the belief they ground, or in terms of constituting
an adequate indication of the truth of the belief. The "adequacy" will
have to construed more subjectively-as a matter of satisfying an intu
itively endorsed epistemic principle (Chisholm) or as being such that
the subject would, on sufficient reflection, deem the grounds to be an
adequate indication of the truth of the belief (Foley).
I go through these internalist accounts of justification in order to
point out that here too truth plays an essential role in the understanding
of justification, though a different role from the one it plays in truth
conducive conceptions of justification. In the latter there was a straight
forward conceptual connection between justification of the belief and
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
the likelihood of its truth. Here the connection is more indirect. I have
already hinted at it, but let me spell it out more explicitly.
On the deontological version of internalism, truth comes in by virtue
of the fact that a prominent place, among intellectual obligations, is
typically given to the obligation to believe what is true and to avoid be
lieving what is false. (As already made explicit, such an obligation will
have to construed more subjectively, for example, as an obligation to
believe what in one's best judgment is true and to avoid believing what
in one's best judgment is false. ) This is spelled out in the following pas
sage from Chisholm, in which he is explaining his notion of 'more rea
sonable than', in terms of which he defines terms for various degrees of
justification. The variables 'p' and 'q' range over "doxastic attitudes"
toward propositions-accepting, rejecting, and "withholding" (neither
accepting nor rejecting).
We may assume that every person is subject to a purely intellectual
requirement that of trying his best to bring it about that, for every
proposition h that he considers, he accepts h if and only if h is true.
One might say that this is the person's responsibility or duty qua intel
lectual being. .. . One way, then, of re-expressing the locution "p is
more reasonable than q for S at t" is to say this: "S is so situated at t
that his intellectual requirement, his responsibility as an intellectual
being, is better fulfilled by p than by q". (Chisholm 1977, 14)
On this view we cannot think about whether S is justified in believing
that p without employing the concept of truth. For S will be justified in
her belief only if she is trying her best to believe what is true.
Truth comes into the second internalist account in either of two ways.
According to the first, adequate evidence, reasons, or grounds for a be
lief are those that satisfy the believer's intuitive sense of what is sufficient
to establish the likelihood of the truth of the belief, whether it is an
objectively adequate indication of truth or not. According to the second,
given definitive expression by Foley (1987), one is justified in believing
that p (Foley says "rational" rather than "justified") if and only if one
would believe on sufficient reflection that one has adequate reasons or
grounds for supposing it to be true that p. 10 On both versions truth en
ters into the conception of rationality (justification) but indirectly, as
filtered, so to say, through the subject's conception of the situation, ei
10. This is not exactly Foley's formulation (see 1987, chap. 1), but I don't believe that I am
misrepresenting him.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
ther her actual conception or the conception she would have if she re
flected sufficiently.
Thus on all the accounts of justification I have been considering we
cannot raise and answer questions of whether various beliefs are justified
without employing, or presupposing, the notion of truth. My argument
here would be much simpler if I could claim, in good conscience, that
the same holds for all the prominent, not obviously misguided ways of
thinking about epistemic justification, but, alas, such is not the case. I
will point out some theories of justification that seek to get along with
out bringing in reference to truth in the next section when we consider
what happens to epistemology if we turn our backs on truth.
v Justification without Truth
It may be claimed that the above points merely reflect the fact that
epistemologists are working within a tradition in which truth plays a
major role. And it might be suggested, as Rorty said in one of the above
passages, that we should break free of that tradition and strike out in
new ways. Rorty would not be impressed with my survey of the standard
ways of construing knowledge and epistemic justification. He would take
this as reinforcing his contention that traditional epistemology has
reached a dead end and constitutes a useless foot shuffling that holds
no promise of advancing our understanding. In the face of challenges
like that it behooves me to go beyond what I have just done and con
front the question of whether anything valuable or essential would be
lost if we were to turn our backs on truth.
Here too we can usefully divide the discussion into two parts, one on
knowledge and one on justification. As for the former, it seems clear
that we cann preserve anything like the standard conception of knowl
edge if we cannot distinguish knowledge from (mere) belief by the fact
that knowledge entails truth. 'Know' is the preeminent "success term"
in epistemology; and the most basic kind of success it involves consists
in truth. I really know that the document is in that safe when I am in a
position to pick out the true answer as to where the document is. That
is not, of course, to say that knowledge is merely true belief. A belief
could be true by accident. I might have a completely irrational convic
tion that the document is in that safe and, by luck, get it right. That isn't
knowledge. But, on the other hand, if the document isn't there, it is
impossible that I should know that it is. No power on earth, or in heaven,
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
could enable me to know what isn't so, since no power can override
conceptual necessities. !!
Again, justification presents a more complex picture. Matters are
quite straightforward with truth-conducivity views. They will obviously
go by the board if we jettison truth. For on such a view a crucial neces
sary condition for something's being a justifying condition for a belief
of a certain type is that it renders the belief likely to be true. If truth is
abandoned, that constraint goes down the drain and with it this whole
way of thinking about the matter. There are, of course, also non-truth
conducivity conceptions of justification. But, as we saw, at least some of
these depend on the notion of truth, though in a more indirect way.
These accounts of justification too would fall by the wayside if the con
cept of truth were abandoned. So what is left? At this point we must turn
to the hitherto unexplored internalist views of justification that keep it
free of any sort of conceptual entanglement with truth. I will look briefly
at two.
Earlier I quoted Ginet (1975) as characterizing justified belief as be
lief that is permitted by the relevant intellectual norms or standards. It is
belief for which one "could not be justly reproached". In developing
this idea Ginet, unlike Chisholm, does not say anything about a master
obligation to try one's best to believe what is true and avoid believing
what is false. No supreme intellectual standard of any sort is identified.
Instead Ginet identifies particular conditions of permitted belief when
discussing various modes of justification-inferential, perceptual, me
morial. There is no suggestion that these are derivable from a funda
mental aim at truth and the avoidance of falsity. The specific principles
are represented as standing on their own feet.
To be sure, Ginet avoids identifying epistemic justification with the
mere permissibility of belief, for he recognizes that it can be permissible
for one to believe that p (one can "have a justification" for believing
that p) for other than epistemically relevant reasons. He mentions a case
in which "S's strong desire that R should be his trustworthy friend, and
S's reasons for having that desire. .. may justify S, in a perfectly good
sense, in maintaining his confidence that R would not do such a thing
[lift cash from the till]" (1975, 29). This is the sort of consideration
that leads epistemologists to distinguish epistemic justification of belief
from moral or prudential justification. 12 The usual way of making that
11. One may suggest that what distinguishes knowledge from mere belief is that the former
involves conclusive justification. But in order for justification to be conclusive enough to convert
mere belief into knowledge, it has to be strong enough to guarantee the truth of the belief. And
so the concept of truth still comes into the picture.
e, e. g. , Alston 1989, 83; Bonjour 1985, 6-7; Moser 1985, 4-512.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
distinction is in terms of truth as the basic goal by reference to which
beliefs are to be assessed as epistemically justified or not. 13 Ginet, however,
does not mention truth in this connection. Instead he lays it down that
epistemic justification is disinterested justification, which he explains as
justification "that does not involve wanting it to be the case that p❞ (29).
I don't think that this succeeds in separating epistemic justification of
belief from all others, for the moral justification of a belief that p may
well not involve wanting the proposition that p to be true. If I am justified
in believing Smith innocent of a crime because I have promised to trust
him, it may or may not be that I want Smith to be innocent. But leave
that aside. The point is that Ginet lays out a concept of epistemic justifi
cation that makes no reference to truth. If this conception is viable,
something I will be considering shortly, it enables us to develop a theory
of epistemic justification without any reliance on truth.
Pollock (1974) puts forward the view that the content of our most
basic concepts are given by "justification conditions".
To learn the meaning of a concept is certainly not to learn its "defini
tion". It is to learn how to use it, which is to learn how to make justifi
able assertions involving it. Thus it seems to me inescapable that the
meaning of a concept is determined by its justification conditions.
(12)
Just what is necessary before we can truly say of a person that he has
learned the concept of a certain kind of thing, such as "red thing" or
"bird"? .. . [I]f in fact the child did not know how to ascribe the con
cept and its complement justifiably (i. e. , he did not know how to justi
fiably determine whether something was a bird), this would show that
he had not learned how to identify birds and so does not have the
concept.
Conversely, when the child has learned to judge justifiably whether
a thing is a bird (i. e. , he has learned to ascribe the concept and its
complement to things justifiably), we are satisfied that he knows how
to identify birds and so has got the concept right-he knows what a
bird is. (13-15)
In other words, to possess the concept of a bird, or of any other kind of
thing or property that is perceivable (let's follow Pollock in calling these
"perceptual properties"), is to have the ability to make justified attribu
tions of it; it is to have a working knowledge of the "justification condi
tions" of the concept. But if that is what it is to have the concept, then
13. See the passages cited in n. 12.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
what the concept is can be specified by laying out those justification
conditions. Those conditions constitute the content of the concept.
It was assumed that having once spelled out the justification condi
tions for a statement, we would have to go on to prove that those are
the justification conditions by deriving them from the meaning of the
statement (which was identified with the truth conditions). To prove
that the purported justification conditions are the justification condi
tions would be to derive them from something deeper. But in fact
there is generally nothing deeper. The justification conditions are
themselves constitutive of the meaning of the statement. We can no
more prove that the justification conditions of "That is red" are the
justification conditions than we can prove on the basis of something
deeper about the meaning of "bachelor" that all bachelors are un
married. Being unmarried constitutes part of the meaning of "bache
lor" and as such cannot be derived from anything deeper about the
meaning of "bachelor"; and analogously the justification conditions
of "That is red" or "He is in pain" are constitutive of the meanings
of those statements and hence cannot be derived from any deeper
features of their meanings. There are no deeper features. (1974, 21)
To say that a belief that X is a bird is justified by a perceptual presenta
tion of such-and-such a kind is simply to spell out what is involved in the
concept of a bird. What justifies a certain concept attribution is deter
mined by the constitution of that concept and requires no further basis.
Justification stands on its own feet, without any support from considera
tions of truth.
Unfortunately, Pollock, unlike Ginet, neglects in his 1974 account to
tell us what he means by 'justified' in the epistemic sense. Without some
account of the sense of 'justification' in which, he avers, (many) con
cepts are made up of "justification" conditions, one doesn't know what
to make of the position. Nor, with respect to our present concern, do
we have any basis for judging whether the concept of justification is free
of entanglements with the concept of truth. However, in a later book(1986) Pollock has more to say about the concept. Like Ginet he identifies it with "epistemic permissibility". "A justified belief is one that it is'
epistemically
 permissible' to hold. Epistemic
 justification
 is a normative
notion. It pertains to what you should or should not believe. But it is a
uniquely epistemic normative notion. Epistemic permissibility must bedistinguished from both moral and prudential permissibility" (7; See
also 124-25). But Pollock does not distinguish the epistemic permissibility of belief from other kinds in terms of the interested-disinterested
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
distinction, as Ginet does. Indeed, he does not make it very explicit how
he is drawing the distinction. He speaks of the epistemic point of view.
"Thus I will think of epistemic justification as being concerned with
questions of the form, 'When is it permissible (from an epistemological
point of view) to believe P? '" (124). But he fails to spell out just what he
takes this point of view to consist in. What I gather from the discussion as
a whole is that he supposes what makes permissibility of belief epistemic
is that it stems from a certain kind of source, namely, the norms we
have internalized that govern "right reasoning". "Epistemic norms are
supposed to guide us in reasoning and thereby in forming beliefs. The
concept of epistemic justification can be explained by explaining the
nature and origin of the epistemic norms that govern our reasoning. 14 I
have called this 'the reason-guiding concept of epistemic justification'
(p. 125). In supposing that this gives a sufficient answer to the question,
"What distinguishes epistemic permissibility from prudential or moral
permissibility? ", Pollock is assuming that we have not also internalized
moral or prudential norms that govern reasoning. In any event, it is
clear that he does not mark out epistemic justification in terms of an
aim at truth or in any other way that involves the concept of truth. 15
vi Troubles with Deontological Conceptions of Justification
It is not without significance that both of the attempts to explain justi
fication without bringing in truth construe justification as a kind of per
missibility of belief. Perhaps truth-free accounts of justification must be
like this. As we saw earlier, one can also have a deontological conception
of justification that brings truth into the account by taking the master
epistemic obligation to be the obligation to believe what is true and to
refrain from believing what is false, or some more subjective version of
this. 16 Nevertheless, it is also possible to take intellectual obligations or
norms for belief to stand on their own and not owe their authority to
their relation to truth, as both Ginet and Pollock do.
In fairness to these authors, I should point out that they do not ignore
14. Pollock makes it explicit that he is using 'reasoning' in a broad sense in which it includes
basing beliefs on experience. In other words 'reasoning' is used to cover any sort of belief forma
tion.
15. He explicitly rejects the thesis that a belief is epistemically permissible if and only if what
is believed is sufficiently probable (1986, 135).
16. Among the epistemologists I have cited, Bonjour, Moser (1985), and Goldman are good
examples of deontologists who bring truth into the account. Indeed, they all hold a truth-con
ducivity view of epistemic justification.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
truth in epistemology altogether. They go along with the customary
truth condition for knowledge, and Ginet makes use of the notion of
truth in explaining his fourth condition for knowledge (over and above
having a true justified belief), the requirement of what he calls "exter
nal conclusiveness". But they do eschew any reference to truth in the
theory of epistemic justification, and it is this that we are presently exam
ining.
If it is true that only deontological conceptions of epistemic justifica
tion can be laid out without using the concept of truth, that in itself, in
my opinion, lands them in a peck of trouble. For, as I have argued at
length elsewhere17, no such concept is viable. If the relevant require
ments (proscriptions, permissions. .. ) are applied directly to doxastic
attitudes themselves (believing, rejecting, withholding), then we are
committed to an untenable assumption of the effective voluntary con
trol of doxastic attitudes. If, on the other hand, the justification of a
doxastic attitude depends on the causal antecedents of that attitude--
antecedents that don't contain any (or too much) of what is epistemi
cally forbidden-then justification becomes too easy; it doesn't have the
cutting edge for the sake of which it is thought to be epistemically valu
able. I will not repeat my arguments for these claims but will instead
pass on to three difficulties with the "justification without truth" posi
tion that can be more succinctly set out in full.
vii Problems with Any Truth-Free Justification
First there is the question of how to distinguish epistemic justification
of belief from other sorts of justification. As we have seen, a reference
to the "epistemic point of view", defined by a concern for believing
what is true and avoiding believing what is false, is an obvious way to do
this. What distinguishes epistemic justification is that it is valuable for
the pursuit of those goals. If we eschew that way of making the distinc
tion, how can we do it? We have seen that Ginet's interested
disinterested distinction doesn't suffice. Pollock, as we saw, thinks that
the distinction can be made by identifying epistemic justification with
what is permitted by internalized norms for reasoning. But why should
we suppose that we possess only epistemic norms for reasoning? Why
shouldn't there be moral or prudential norms for what Pollock calls
"reasoning", that is, belief formation. How else could there be moral
17. "The Deontological Conception of Epistemic Justification", in Alston 1989.
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
or prudential permissibility of belief, except by way of conformity with
appropriate moral or prudential norms? If that is right, Pollock's way of
marking off epistemic permissibility works no better than Ginet's.
Another suggestion for distinguishing epistemic justification from
other kinds without bringing in truth would be to think of it as conduci
vity to some other master goal of cognition. I will take as my guide Gold
man's discussion in chapter 5 of Epistemology and Cognition (1986).
Goldma distinguishes five candidates for "justificationally valuable
consequences":
(1) verific consequences: believing truths, not believing falsehoods
(2) coherence consequences: achieving coherence in one's belief (or
creedal probability) corpus
(3) explanatory consequences: believing propositions that explain other
believed propositions
(4) pragmatic consequences: realizing one's practical, nonintellectual
goals
(5) biological consequences: surviving, reproducing, propagating one's
genes. (Goldman 1986, 98) 18
For each of these we can consider whether we can bring out what is
distinctive of epistemic justification in terms of its conducivity to that
kind of consequence.
Consequences (4) and (5) can be eliminated right away as insuffi
ciently discriminative. It obviously won't distinguish epistemic from pru
dential justification to claim that only the former is valuable for the
attainment of "practical", "nonintellectual" or basic biological goals!
As for (2), though it is a distinctively intellectual desideratum, we have
already seen that there are decisive reasons for denying that pure coher
ence suffices for epistemic justification, the main reason being that
there is a potential infinity of incompatible but equally coherent systems
of belief. That leaves (1) and (3). Consequence (1) explicitly involves
the notion of truth, and it does not take much probing of (3) to find
18. I don't mean to suggest that Goldman is concerned here with my current problem of
distinguishing epistemic from other kinds of justification. He is rather engaged in finding a
criterion for right rules of justification. However, I find his list of "justificationally valuable con
sequences" useful for my purpose.
Note too that although one might well think that justification of belief is a central goal of cogni
tion, one could hardly bring in that goal to explain what differentiates epistemic from other
justification. For if the goal is to have the necessary relevance it will have to be epistemic justifica
tion of which we are speaking. And saying that what is distinctive of epistemic justification is that
it is valuable in attaining the goal of epistemic justification could scarcely be thought to throw
light on what epistemic justification is!
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
that notion under the surface. What is it to explain something? That is
a difficult question and one for which, in my opinion, no illuminating,
generally applicable answer has been given. But I don't need to get into
that to make the present point. In whatever way we spell out what is
involved in rendering something 'explained', it will remain the case that
an adequate, successful explanation involves citing something true as
providing the explanation. In whatever way a set of false statements is
explanatorily related to the explanandum, they will not constitute the
explanation of it. If the target of my explanation is the fact that I am
getting no sound from my loudspeakers, it is obvious that their not
being hooked up to a source of signals is related to this explanandum
in the right sort of way to be an explanans. If that is true, it will explain
it. But only if. We haven't lit on what really explains the defect until
we have specified some true proposition (s) that is (are) related to the
explanandum in the right sort of way.
Thus this survey of candidates for the basic goal of cognition, by refer
ence to which epistemic justification could be distinguished from other
types, provides no hope of any satisfactory choice that does not involve
the concept of truth. Doing without truth leaves us without any way of
framing an adequate concept of epistemic justification.
The second difficulty has to do with criteria for the assessment of
principles that lay down conditions of justification. How do we tell which
principles to adopt? So long as we are working with a truth-conducivity
conception of justification we have something to go on. If a necessary
condition for C's justifying belief B is that C renders B significantly likely
to be true, we have a lodestar that will guide us in distinguishing be
tween genuine justifiers and impostors. At least we do if, as seems to be
the case, we can often tell when conditions do render a belief probably
true. If a certain type of perceptual presentation is a strong indication
that there is maple tree in front of me, then such a presentation passes
at least that requirement for being a justifier of that belief. And if that
is all it takes to be a justifier (perhaps together with the requirement,
obviously satisfied here, of being cognitively accessible to the subject),
we can without more ado judge that being perceptually appeared to in
that way justifies the belief that one is face to face with a maple tree. If
a great deal of a certain kind of noise emanating from a certain house
is a reliable sign that a party is going on therein, then by observing that
noise we are thereby (truth-conducively) justified in supposing that a
party is going on. And so on.
But how will we make a rational, principled choice between compet
ing claims to justificatory efficacy if we abandon all reference to truth,
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
likelihood of truth, probability of truth, reliable indication of truth, and
the like? What will there be for us to go on in determining what justifies
what? Let's see what our truth-value-free justification theorists have to
say about this. Here is Ginet's answer.
Insofar as positions directly recognizable to a person can be objectively
ranked as to how strong a belief in a given proposition, p, they justify
that person in having-that is, insofar as we have a concept and prac
tice of objective justification of degrees of belief-the ultimate author
ity for this ranking must be the concurring judgments of reasonable,
experienced people who have the notion of and an interest in the
practice of rational, objective justification of degrees of belief and who
give the positions in question their thoughtful consideration. If we say
of two sorts of directly recognizable positions that one would clearly
justify a stronger belief in p than the other. .. we are right if and only
if this would be the overwhelming judgment of reasonable, experi
enced people who knew what they were considering (so that their
judgment would not be changed by their attending better to the na
ture of the positions in question or their having more experience or
more rational intellig e). (Ginet 1975, 37)
The chief difficulty with Ginet's view is that his ultimate appeal is to
raw intuition. I call this appeal "ultimate" because there is no provision
for any check on the accuracy or validity of those intuitions. They consti
tute the last word, from which there is no further court of appeal. If that
is the best we can do, we can learn to live with it. But since a truth
conducivity conception of justification gives us something better, we are
ill advised to rest content with bare, unexamined intuition in this
sphere.
As for Pollock, his story as to how we tell whether we have the right
principles of justification is that they are determined by the concepts
involved in the beliefs in question. In section v I laid out this position as
it is expounded in Pollock 1974. The account of the structure of con
cepts is more elaborate and more sophisticated in Pollock's later work
(1986, 147-48), but the application to the basis of justification is the
same. Since concepts are constituted, at least in part, by "justification
conditions", it is conceptually true that the belief that a tree is in front
of me is justified by what the concept of a tree (in conjunction with the
other concepts involved) lays down as sufficient for justification of such
a belief.
I believe that this position fares no better than Ginet's. For one thing,
there are reasons to doubt that our concepts are constituted, even in
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
part, by justification conditions. If our concept of a tree, for example,
were so constituted, how could that concept be possessed by subjects
that have no inkling, even in a practical, know-how sense of justification
or conditions of justification? Moreover if, as Pollock acknowledges in
the later book, a given concept contains more than a set of justification
conditions, we are faced with the question of why we should suppose
that the satisfaction of the justification conditions involved guarantees
the justification of the application of the rest of the concept to some
thing. Let's say that part of the concept of tree is vegetable organism, and
that the concept also contains a specification of the kind of perceptual
experience that would justify taking a perceived object to be a tree. That
raises the question why we should suppose that this perceptual condi
tion justifies the attribution of the rest of the concept-being a vegeta
ble organism, for example? To be sure, by hypothesis, we find them
stuck together in the same concept. But what guarantees, or even gives
us reason to think, that they have been advisedly combined? Is this just
another appeal to the status quo, along with Ginet's appeal to the judg
ment of "reasonable, experienced people"? Again, we would like a
deeper, more impressive rationale than this. 19
The demerit that attaches to truth-value-free justification by reason of
its relatively uncritical character is intimately connected with the third
defect-the fact that it fails to throw light on why we should be inter
ested in justification. Remember Bonjour on this point.
If epistemic justification were not conducive to truth in this way, if
finding epistemically justified beliefs did not substantially increase the
likelihood of finding true ones, then epistemic justification would be
irrelevant to our main cognitive goal and of dubious worth. It is only
if we have some reason for thinking that epistemic justification consti
tutes a path to truth that we as cognitive beings have any motive for
preferring epistemically justified beliefs to epistemically unjustified
ones. (1985, 8)
Ginet's and Pollock's construals of justification fall under this stricture.
Ginet, to focus on him, says that we are epistemically justified in believ
ing that p if we have a disinterested justification for p, where its being
disinterested just amounts to its not depending on our wanting it to be
the case that p. And that is to say that if we were to believe that p we
would be doing what we are permitted to do, what we could not be
19. For a more extended discussion of difficulties in Pollock's position see Alston 1993,
39-45
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
reproached for, again where this is not because of what we want to be
the case. But why should it be so important to us whether we have a
"disinterested" justification, or whether we are "disinterestedly" per
mitted to believe that p? Before we get terribly exercised about this, we
need to know a good deal more about what it comes to than Ginet gives
us. In particular, why should we suppose that justification, so construed,
is of any value or importance in the quest for knowledge? Why should
we suppose, as Ginet claims, that justification, as he has portrayed it, is
necessary for knowledge? So long as no connection with truth or the
probability thereof is built into the concept of justification, it is difficult
to see why we should aim at our beliefs being justified rather than the
reverse if we are seeking truth and knowledge.
These defects stem from the thinness of what our theorists have pro
vided by way of a concept of epistemic justification. It is a matter of
permissibility of belief, not by reason of what we want (Ginet), or it is
based on the norms of belief formation that we have in fact internalized
(Pollock). With no more than this to go on, it is small wonder that we
are left wondering how to distinguish epistemic justification from other
modes, how to assess principles of justification, and why we should re
gard justified belief as a pearl of great price. These are grave disabilities,
indeed. If this is the result of shunning truth, we had better think twice
before signing on to that enterprise.
I have been considering the effects of eliminating truth in the episte
mology of knowledge and justification. As for knowledge we have seen
that it would disembowel the concept to the point of unrecognizability.
As for justification, it would strip us of any sufficiently contentful con
ception of epistemic justification, leave mysterious the reason we should
find it valuable in the pursuit of knowledge, prevent us from giving an
adequate account of what distinguishes epistemic from other species of
justification of belief, and leave us without any effective means for mak
ing rational choices between competing claims as to what justifies what.
Not an attractive prospect. The advantages of dispensing with truth
would have to be enormous if they were to outweigh the cost.
viii Stich on the Unimportance of Truth
The last bad-mouther of truth I will consider is Stephen Stich. In his
recent book, The Fragmentation of Reason (1990) he undertakes the he
roic task of arguing that it is of no importance whether our beliefs are
true. The argument, in brief summary, goes as follows.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
Beliefs are treated as brain-state tokens that have propositional con
tent by virtue of being "mapped" onto propositions (or something play
ing the same role) by some "interpretation function". He thinks in
terms of bits or aspects of these brain-state tokens as functioning like
linguistic items in a "language of thought". "[T]he idea is that beliefs
are complex psychological states which, like sentences, can be viewed as
built up out of simpler components" (109). Stich opts for a "causal/
functional" understanding of the interpretation function. To simplify
matters lets say that a belief gets content by virtue of a causal relation to
"referents". But, Stich points out, there are a lot of causal relations out
there, and not all of them will be relevant to determining the referent
of a given mental "term". On one choice of causal relations 'water'
refers to H2O, while on another choice it refers to Putnam's notorious
XYZ (stuff that looks and tastes just like H2O but has a different chemi
cal constitution), while on still another it refers to the sum of the two.
But, of course, the truth conditions for a mental "sentence" are inti
mately dependent on the interpretation function that assigns referents
to the sentence components. And Stich takes this to imply that we have
different concepts of truth (or truth-like relations) for different inter
pretation functions: "So while the interpretation function based on the
intuitively sanctioned notion of reference might specify that a certain
belief token of mine is true if and only if there is no H2O on the sun, an
interpretation function based on REFERENCE*** would specify that the
same belief token is true (or, better, TRUE***) if and only if there is no
H2O or XYZ on the sun" (117). Stich then proceeds to argue that we
have no sufficient reason, either intellectual or practical, for preferring
our beliefs to exhibit TRUTH rather than any of its innumerable alterna
tives, TRUTH*, TRUTH**, TRUTH***, and so on.
What are we to say of these astounding results? I could challenge Stich
on the last point and argue that good, old-fashioned truth is preferable
to its heterodox alternatives, but as I see it, the main trouble with the
argument comes much earlier. Stich is, in fact, flying under false colors.
He purports to be offering us a choice between different truth relations,
whereas the alternatives he considers are really between different ways
of assigning propositional content to bearers of such content-beliefs,
sentences, assertions, or whatever. The apparently startling results sim
ply amount to the familiar claim that there is, in principle, an indefinite
number of ways of assigning referents (and, I would say more basically,
meanings) to sentences or any sentence-like entities 20, together with the
20. I don't agree that beliefs can be taken in the way Such does. A string of phonemes can,
A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
equally banal point that the propositional content of the entity, and
hence its truth conditions, will vary depending on those assignments. So
the variation is a semantic one. Stich, as we have seen, takes this to show
that there is an indefinitely large number of different truth-like concepts
that can be applied to beliefs and in terms of which they can be assessed,
our familiar concept of propositional truth being only one of them. But
I see absolutely no justification for this further step. Let's agree that
the propositional content of a belief depends on the "interpretation
function". But for any such function there will be a (more or less pre
cise) propositional content, and that will give us something whose truth
value we can consider. It is only after the proposition has been assigned that
the question of truth value can be raised. Stich has been led astray by the
common practice, already decried more than once in this book, of treat
ing sentences and the like as bearers of truth value. Indeed, he pushes
this common fallacy one step further by taking uninterpreted sentences as
bearers of truth value. It is only by making this move that he can suppose
that different propositional interpretations of sentences (real or men
tal) determine different concepts of truth. As I said earlier, truth is a
"post-semantic" concept. Questions of truth come up only after we have
semantic content. Hence, even if we are as free as Stich supposes to
choose an "interpretation function" for a belief, this would only imply
a semantic indeterminacy. It would have no tendency to imply an indeter
minacy of the truth concept. It would still remain true that whatever
the propositional content with which we endow a particular belief or
sentence, there is no alternative in sight to asking the old, familiar ques
tion about truth value.
Put this point in another way. Stich thinks that truth is a relation that
directly connects bearers of meaning, reference, and propositional con
tent, to truth values (or, perhaps, to what is responsible for the bearer
being true or false). Thus whenever we have a different way of associat
ing a belief, sentence, or whatever to a proposition-a different proposi
tional function-we have a fundamentally different way of associating
the belief or whatever to a truth value, and so a different concept of
truth. But in fact the variability or indeterminacy, if any, applies only to
the first step the assignment of propositional content. Once that is re
in principle, bear any one of indefinitely many different meanings, depending on what semantic
rules hold sway in the language in which it is a word, phrase, or sentence. But beliefs are not, in
my view, semantically neutral in their intrinsic character in this way. We can't first (correctly)
identify something as a belief and then proceed to choose between many different "interpreta
tions" for it. We can't recognize it as a belief except in terms of some particular propositional
content or other. But I won't press this point here.
DOING WITHOUT TRUTH
solved, there is no room for any further indeterminacy with respect to truth. Our
familiar realist conception of truth goes into action on whatever proposi
tion we wind up with. If the belief is the belief that p, then it is true if
and only if p, and that uniquely identifies truth. There is no plethora of
truth concepts between which a choice is called for. Thus there is no
need to challenge Stich's argument that there are no sufficient reasons
for preferring old-fashioned truth to its innumerable rivals, for there are
no such rivals between which to choose.
In my delineation of his position, I have more than once hinted that
I am not at all disposed to accept Stich's claims of indeterminacy even
on the semantic level. I take propositional contents of beliefs to be
"built in" by virtue of their functional role in the psyche, thereby fore
stalling any need for choice between "interpretation functions". Sen
tences in a language are, obviously, more semantically flexible in
principle. Nevertheless, facts of how people use language in a commu
nity largely fix the available interpretations of phrases, words, and sen
tences, again leaving little room for anyone to come along with a kit of
"interpretation functions". Of course, it is always possible to propose
new meanings for linguistic units, but one may or may not be successful
in moving the language in that direction. One cannot endow a semantic
unit in an actual language with a new meaning just by a wave of the
wand. However, it has not been necessary for my purposes here to chal
lenge Stich on this point. Even if he is fully justified in his suppositions
about semantic indeterminacy, he is not entitled, I have argued, to move
from that to alethic indeterminacy.
Epilogue
This completes my exposition and defense of alethic realism. In Chap
ters 1 and 2 I have presented and discussed a variety of ways of formulat
ing a realist conception of truth and have explored its connections with
various forms of realism. Since I take this way of thinking of proposi
tional truth to be overwhelmingly plausible on the face of it, my efforts
in its defense have been directed to answering its critics, who have both
claimed that it is untenable and put forward alternative construals.
Chapters 2-6 are devoted, in large part, to defusing attacks on the real
ist conception, and Chapter 7 presents what I take to be fatal objections
to its only serious rival-an epistemic conception. Finally, in Chapter 8
I defend the other component of alethic realism--that a concern with
(realist) truth is important both theoretically and practically.
I can imagine someone accepting everything I have said in this book
and still feeling dissatisfied with the outcome. For one thing, a reader
might find cause for complaint in various things I haven't done. I will
mention just two examples.
(1) I haven't explained how to determine whether a given statement
is true. True. I haven't done so, because that is a completely different
enterprise, one called "epistemology". I am very interested in epistemol
ogy and have published extensively in the field. But my concern here is
with the concept of propositional truth, how to get straight as to what
propositional truth is. To be sure, that has a bearing on what is relevant
to determining truth value. We can scarcely undertake to determine
whether x is P without understanding what it is for something to be P.
But for any property, P, a grasp of what it is constitutes only the first step
in figuring how to tell whether a particular kind of x is P. It is only that
first step with which this book is concerned, and I assume that one who

A REALIST CONCEPTION OF TRUTH
to stem from several sources-verificationism about meaning, anti-abso
lutism in metaphysics, objections to claims to immediate knowledge, to
name a few that have surfaced in my discussion. (To be sure, I have
argued that it is misguided to suppose that any of these positions do tell
against a realist construal of truth. ) If someone were to put a gun to my
head and force me to formulate a single fundamental root of opposition
to realism about truth, I suppose that I would say "intolerance of vulner
ability". In supposing that what we believe and assert is rendered true
or false by whether what a belief or assertion is about is as the belief or
assertion would have it to be, we are acknowledging a liability to falsity
that is, in a fundamental way, out of our control. We can, of course, take
such precautions as are open to us to ensure that this condition for
truth is satisfied. But in the final analysis whether what we say is true is
determined not by anything we do or think, but by the way things are--
the things we are talking about. This vulnerability to the outside world,
this "subjection" to stubborn, unyielding facts beyond our thought, ex
perience, and discourse, seems powerfully repugnant, even intolerable
to many. As a Christian, I see in this reaction a special case of the original
sin, insisting on human autonomy and control and refusing to be subser
vient to that on which our being and our fate depends, which for the
Christian is God. But in this context I don't want to insist on a theologi
cal interpretation. The attitude of which I am speaking can be found
among many philosophers who are, at least consciously, wholly innocent
of any tendencies to rebel against God, a being not accorded a place in
their pantheon. Assuming that there is something to this diagnosis, I
will leave it to the reader to reflect on whether this "intolerance of vul
nerability" is an attitude that commends itself on reflection.
I will comment on one more possible reaction to my argument, and
here, as in the initial reactions I considered, I cannot quote a live reactor
but will have to construct her as I go along. Still sticking with the crea
ture of my fond imagination who agrees with everything I have said, let's
now suppose this creature to ask the following. "Why does it make so
much difference after all whether we have the right conception of truth?
Why make such a fuss over it? Even if an epistemic conception is subject
to fatal flaws, what harm does it do? "
The best answer to this question is the simplest one. "It is better to
have things straight than to have them distorted or confused. It is better
to have a correct understanding of concepts, especially fundamental
ones, than to misunderstand them. And this is the case, apart from any
further consequences there might be. After all, as philosophers we are
dedicated to getting as accurate and perspicuous a view as possible of
the basic concepts we use in our thought and discourse. "
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alston, William P. 1958. "Ontological Commitments". Philosophical Studies 9: 8-17.
- 1989. Epistemic Justification: Essays in the Theory of Knowledge. Ithaca, N. Y. : Cornell
University Press.
1991. Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience. Ithaca, N. Y. : Cornell
University Press.
1993a. The Reliability of Sense Perception. Ithaca, N. Y. : Cornell University Press.
1993b. "Epistemic Desiderata". Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 53, 3.
1994. "Illocutionary Acts and Linguistic Meaning". In Foundations of Speech Act
Theory, ed. S. L. Tsohadtzidis. London: Routledge.
-. 1995. "Realism and the Christian Faith". International Journal for Philosophy of
Religion 38, 3.
Audi, Robert. 1993. The Structure of Justification. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Ayer, A. J. 1946. Language, Truth, and Logic. 2d. ed. London: Victor Gollancz Ltd. , ed. 1959. Logical Positivism. New York: The Free Press.
Bach, Kent. 1985 "A Rationale for Reliabilism". The Monist 68, no. 2.
Bennett, Jonathan. 1988. Events and Their Names. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Blackburn, Simon. 1984. Spreading the Word. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Blanshard, Brand. 1939. The Nature of Thought. 2 vols. London: George Allen &
Unwin.
Bonjour, Laurence. 1985. The Structure of Empirical Knowledge. Cambridge, Mass. : Har
vard University Press.
Bouwsma, O. K. 1965. Philosophical Essays. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Bradley, F. H. 1914. Essays on Truth and Reality. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Carnap, Rudolf. 1947. Meaning and Necessity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Chisholm, Roderick. 1976. Person and Object. La Salle, Ill. : Open Court.
1977. Theory of Knowledge 2d. ed. Englewood Cliffs, N. J. : Prentice-Hall.
1981. The First Person. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
1989. Theory of Knowledge. 3d. ed. Englewood Cliffs, N. J. : Prentice-Hall.
David, Marian. 1994. Correspondence and Disquotation: An Essay on the Nature of Truth.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Davidson, Donald. 1984. Inquiries Into Truth and Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford Uni
versity Press.
1990. "The Structure and Content of Truth". Journal of Philosophy 87, no. 6,
279-328.
Davidson, Donald, and Gilbert Harman, eds. 1972. Semantics of Natural Language.
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Devitt, Michael. 1984. Realism and Truth. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Dewey, John. 1920. Reconstruction in Philosophy. New York: Henry Holt.
Dretske, Fred. 1969. Seeing and Knowing. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
1981. Knowledge and the Flow of Information. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.
Dummett, Michael. 1973. Frege: Philosophy of Language. New York: Harper & Row.
1975. "What is a Theory of Meaning? I". In Mind and Language, ed. Samuel
Guttenplan. London: Oxford University Press.
1976. "What is a Theory of Meaning? II". In Truth and Meaning, ed. Gareth
Evans and John McDowell. London: Oxford University Press.
1978. Truth and Other Enigmas. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press.
1991. The Logical Basis of Metaphysics. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University
Press.
Edwards, Paul. 1967. The Encyclopedia of Philosophy. New York: Macmillan and the Free
Press.
Field, Hartry and Gilbert Harman. 1982. "Symposium on Putnam's Reason, Truth
and History". Journal of Philosophy 79, 10.
Fodor, Jerry. 1975. The Language of Thought. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell.
Foley, Richard. 1987. The Theory of Epistemic Rationality. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard
University Press.
Ginet, Carl. 1975. Knowledge, Perception, and Memory. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Goldman, Alvin I. 1986. Epistemology and Cognition. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard Uni
versity Press.
Grover, Dorothy L. 1992. A Prosentential Theory of Truth. Princeton, N. J. : Princeton
University Press.
Gunderson, Keith. 1975. Language, Mind, and Knowledge: Minnesota Studies in the Phi
losophy of Science, Vol. VII. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Hahn, Lewis E. , and Paul A. Schilpp, eds. 1986. The Philosophy of W. V. Quine. LaSalle,
Ill. : Open Court.
Heller, Mark. 1988. "Putnam, Reference, and Realism". Midwest Studies in Philosophy,
12. Realism and Antirealism.
Hempel, Carl G. 1935. "On the Logical Positivists' Theory of Truth". Analysis 2, no.
4, 50-59.
Hesse, Mary B. 1966. Models and Analogies in Science. Notre Dame: University of Notre
Dame Press.
Horwich, Paul. 1990. Truth. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
James, William. 1909. The Meaning of Truth. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University
Press.
- 1975. Pragmatism. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press.
Katz, Jerrold J. 1981. Language and Other Abstract Objects. Totowa, N. J. : Rowman and
Littlefield.
Kirkham, Richard L. 1992. Theories of Truth: A Critical Introduction. Cambridge, Mass. :
MIT Press.
Lehrer, Keith. 1974. Knowledge. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
LePore, Ernest, ed. 1986. Truth and Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald
Davidson. New York: Blackwell.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
BIBLIOGRAPHY 267
Lewis, David. 1984. "Putnam's Paradox". Australasian Journal of Philosophy 62.
Macdonald, Margaret, ed. 1954. Philosophy and Analysis. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Mackie, J. L. 1973. Truth, Probability, and Paradox: Studies in Philosophical Logic. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Moser, Paul K. 1985.
1989. Knowledge and Evidence. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moser, Paul K. , and Arnold Vander Nat. 1987. Human Knowledge: Classical and Contem
porary Approaches. New York: Oxford University Press.
Empirical Justification. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Peacocke, Christopher. 1983. Sense and Content. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peirce, Charles Sanders. 1934. "How To Make Our Ideas Clear. " In Collected Papers,
ed. C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss, vol. 5. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press.
Plantinga, Alvin. 1982. "How To Be an Anti-Realist". Proceedings and Addresses of the
American Philosophical Association.
- 1993. Warrant and Proper Function. New York: Oxford University Press.
Pollock, John. 1974. Knowledge and Justification. Princeton, N. J. : Princeton University
Press.
1986. Contemporary Theories of Knowledge. Totowa, N. J. : Rowman & Littlefield.
Price, Huw. 1988. Facts and the Function of Truth. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Prior, A. N. 1971. Objects of Thought. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Putnam, Hilary. 1978. Meaning and the Moral Sciences. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
1981. Reason, Truth, History. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
1983. Realism and Reason: Philosophical Papers, Vol. 3. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
1987. The Many Faces of Realism. LaSalle, Ill. : Open Court.
1989. Representation and Reality. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.
1990. Realism With a Human Face. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press.
1992a. Renewing Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press.
1992b. "Replies". Philosophical Topics, 20, no. 1.
Quine, Willard van Orman. 1953. From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press.
1960. Word
1969. Ontological Relativity and Other Essays. New York: Columbia University
Press. ,
and Object. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.
F. P. 1978. Foundations: Essays in Philosophy, Logic, Mathematics and Economicsed. D. H. Mellor. Atlantic Highlands, N. J. : Humanities Press.
Rorty, Richard. 1979. Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature. Princeton, N. J. : Princeton
University Press.
1982. Consequences of Pragmatism. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Forthcoming. "Comments". In Realism/Antirealism and Epistemology, ed. Christo, N. J. : Rowman & Littlefield.
Russell, Bertrand. 1912. The Problems of Philosophy. New York: Henry Holt and Com
pany.
1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Schlick, Moritz. 1936. "Meaning and Verification". Philosophical Reviews 45
Searle, John. 1983. Intentionality. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stalnaker, Robert. 1984. Inquiry. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press. Yale University Press. Stevenson, Charles L. 1944. Ethics and Language. New Haven:
Ran
Stich, Stephen. 1983. From Folk Psychology to Cognitive Science: The Case Against Belief.
Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.
1990. The Fragmentation of Reason. Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press.
Strawson, Peter F. 1950a. "Truth". Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume 24.
1950b. "On Referring". Mind, 59, no. 235.
1964. "A Problem About Truth-A Reply to Mr. Warnock". In Truth, ed.
George Pitcher. Englewood Cliffs, N. J. : Prentice-Hall.
Swain, Marshall. 1981. Reasons and Knowledge. Ithaca, N. Y. : Cornell University Press.
Van Cleve, James. 1985. "Epistemic Supervenience and the Rule of Belief". The Mo
nist, 68, no. 1.
Van Inwagen, Peter. 1988. "On Always Being Wrong". Midwest Studies in Philosophy,
12.
-. 1990. Material Beings. Ithaca, N. Y. : Cornell University Press.
Vendler, Zeno. 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy. Ithaca, N. Y. : Cornell University Press.
Vision, Gerald. 1988. Modern Anti-Realism and Manufactured Truth. London:
Routledge.
Wiggins, David 1980. "What Would Be a Substantial Theory of Truth? " In Philosophi
cal Subjects: Essays Presented to P. F. Strawson, ed. Zak Van Stratten. Oxford: Claren
don Press.
Williams, Bernard. 1973. Problems of the Self. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, C. J. F. 1976. What is Truth? Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Williams, Michael. 1977. Groundless Belief. New Haven: Yale University Press.
1986. "Do We (Epistemologists) Need a Theory of Truth? " Philosophical Topics
-
14, no. 1.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 1922. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London: Routledge &
Kegan Paul.
Wolterstorff, Nicholas. 1983. "Can Belief in God Be Rational If It Has No Founda
tions? " In Faith and Rationality: Reason and Belief in God, ed. Alvin Plantinga &
Nicholas Wolterstorff. Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Wright, Crispin. 1992. Truth and Objectivity. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University
Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY

