Normalized Text
E L A R three composition. E L A R three composition.
Various writing types. Various writing types.
Writing can be narrative when telling a story, persuasive when making an argument, or informative when delivering information. While each type of writing can include different forms and styles, these are the three main types of writing. Writing can be narrative when telling a story, persuasive when making an argument, or informative when delivering information. While each type of writing can include different forms and styles, these are the three main types of writing.
Each type of writing has its own purpose, audience, organization, and style choices. Each type of writing has its own purpose, audience, organization, and style choices.
Writing type narrative descriptive. Purpose tells a story describes a specific person, place, event, thing, or idea. Elements details figurative language dialogue transition words. Subgenres stories vignettes letters memoirs poems. Writing type narrative descriptive. Purpose tells a story describes a specific person, place, event, thing, or idea. Elements details figurative language dialogue transition words. Subgenres stories vignettes letters memoirs poems.
Writing type persuasive argumentative. Purpose argues a point of view attempts to convince the audience to believe a certain way. Elements positions or claims arguments and counterarguments supporting evidence persuasive language. Subgenres speeches advertisements debates reviews persuasive essays. Writing type persuasive argumentative. Purpose argues a point of view attempts to convince the audience to believe a certain way. Elements positions or claims arguments and counterarguments supporting evidence persuasive language. Subgenres speeches advertisements debates reviews persuasive essays.
Writing type informative expository. Purpose explains or describes a specific topic in a clear and factual way. Elements objective tone facts and data thesis and topic statements supporting details. Subgenres essays reports informative pieces textbooks. Writing type informative expository. Purpose explains or describes a specific topic in a clear and factual way. Elements objective tone facts and data thesis and topic statements supporting details. Subgenres essays reports informative pieces textbooks.
Various contexts of writing. Various contexts of writing.
Writing is used in different contexts, both in and out of the classroom. Students can use writing to express oneself with words, describe experiences, people, and objects, explain and summarize important or interesting information, reflect upon ideas and experiences, persuade others to believe or do something, solve problems, appreciate others (thank you notes, invitations), entertain others (poems or short narrative stories). Writing is used in different contexts, both in and out of the classroom. Students can use writing to express oneself with words, describe experiences, people, and objects, explain and summarize important or interesting information, reflect upon ideas and experiences, persuade others to believe or do something, solve problems, appreciate others (thank you notes, invitations), entertain others (poems or short narrative stories).
Teaching writing types and various contexts. Teaching writing types and various contexts.
Student writers need practice choosing the right type of writing narrative, persuasive, or informative based on purpose and audience for their writing tasks. This skill supports clear communication, helps meet academic expectations, and prepares students to adjust their writing for both school and real world tasks. Student writers need practice choosing the right type of writing narrative, persuasive, or informative based on purpose and audience for their writing tasks. This skill supports clear communication, helps meet academic expectations, and prepares students to adjust their writing for both school and real world tasks.
Writing type narrative descriptive. Purpose tells a story describes a specific person, place, event, or idea. Elements sensory details figurative language dialogue. Sub genre stories vignettes memoirs poems. Writing type narrative descriptive. Purpose tells a story describes a specific person, place, event, or idea. Elements sensory details figurative language dialogue. Sub genre stories vignettes memoirs poems.
Writing type persuasive argumentative. Purpose argues a point of view attempts to convince the audience. Elements claims supporting evidence counterclaims persuasive language. Subgenres speeches reviews advertisements persuasive essays. Writing type persuasive argumentative. Purpose argues a point of view attempts to convince the audience. Elements claims supporting evidence counterclaims persuasive language. Subgenres speeches reviews advertisements persuasive essays.
Writing type informative expository. Purpose explains or describes a topic clearly and factually. Elements objective tone facts and data topic sentences supporting details. Subgenres informational text how to guides reports textbooks. Writing type informative expository. Purpose explains or describes a topic clearly and factually. Elements objective tone facts and data topic sentences supporting details. Subgenres informational text how to guides reports textbooks.
Writing instruction should go beyond defining types. It should provide guided practice in selecting, organizing, and shaping ideas to meet the demands of each writing type, the writing context, and the audience. Writing instruction should go beyond defining types. It should provide guided practice in selecting, organizing, and shaping ideas to meet the demands of each writing type, the writing context, and the audience.
Identifying context and audience. Identifying context and audience.
Writing standards expect students to write for a range of purposes and audiences, so assignments should give them practice writing for an audience other than their teacher or classmates. To develop flexibility as writers, students need regular opportunities to address real or imagined readers with specific expectations. Writing standards expect students to write for a range of purposes and audiences, so assignments should give them practice writing for an audience other than their teacher or classmates. To develop flexibility as writers, students need regular opportunities to address real or imagined readers with specific expectations.
Teaching students to identify the audience and context of a writing task helps them make purposeful decisions throughout the writing process. When students understand why they are writing and who will read their work, they are better equipped to choose the appropriate writing type, organize their ideas clearly, and revise their tone and structure to meet the task's demands. Teaching students to identify the audience and context of a writing task helps them make purposeful decisions throughout the writing process. When students understand why they are writing and who will read their work, they are better equipped to choose the appropriate writing type, organize their ideas clearly, and revise their tone and structure to meet the task's demands.
Strategies to support this skill include use authentic writing prompts present real world scenarios (e g, writing a letter to a principal or creating a blog post for younger students) that make audience and purpose clear. Anchor early planning to purpose during prewriting, have students name the audience and goal before selecting the writing type. Ask guiding questions model questions such as who will read this, why am I writing it, and what does my reader expect. Compare models show examples of writing on the same topic for different audiences (e g, a news article versus a personal story about the same event). Strategies to support this skill include use authentic writing prompts present real world scenarios (e g, writing a letter to a principal or creating a blog post for younger students) that make audience and purpose clear. Anchor early planning to purpose during prewriting, have students name the audience and goal before selecting the writing type. Ask guiding questions model questions such as who will read this, why am I writing it, and what does my reader expect. Compare models show examples of writing on the same topic for different audiences (e g, a news article versus a personal story about the same event).
Supporting tone, style, and organization. Supporting tone, style, and organization.
Once students identify the purpose and audience for a writing task, they must adjust their tone, style, and organization accordingly. These elements vary across writing types and are shaped by both the writer's goals and the reader's expectations. Once students identify the purpose and audience for a writing task, they must adjust their tone, style, and organization accordingly. These elements vary across writing types and are shaped by both the writer's goals and the reader's expectations.
Tone reflects the writer's attitude toward the topic and audience. Tone reflects the writer's attitude toward the topic and audience.
Style includes sentence structure, word choice, and voice. Style includes sentence structure, word choice, and voice.
Organization refers to how ideas are arranged chronologically, logically, or by importance. Organization refers to how ideas are arranged chronologically, logically, or by importance.
Each writing type calls for a different approach. Although these features may shift based on context and audience, the table below outlines typical guidelines for tone, style, and organization for each writing type. Each writing type calls for a different approach. Although these features may shift based on context and audience, the table below outlines typical guidelines for tone, style, and organization for each writing type.
Writing type persuasive argumentative. Tone confident, assertive, purposeful. Style clear transitions, persuasive voice, precise wording. Organization claims supported by evidence, logical progression. Writing type persuasive argumentative. Tone confident, assertive, purposeful. Style clear transitions, persuasive voice, precise wording. Organization claims supported by evidence, logical progression.
Writing type narrative descriptive. Tone reflective, emotional, vivid. Style descriptive language, varied sentence structure. Organization chronological sequence or story arc. Writing type narrative descriptive. Tone reflective, emotional, vivid. Style descriptive language, varied sentence structure. Organization chronological sequence or story arc.
Writing type informative expository. Tone neutral, objective, factual. Style clear, concise language academic tone. Organization logical structure suited to the topic. Writing type informative expository. Tone neutral, objective, factual. Style clear, concise language academic tone. Organization logical structure suited to the topic.
Educators must teach these elements explicitly. Students need modeling, guided practice, and feedback to apply the appropriate tone, style, and structure based on purpose and audience. Educators must teach these elements explicitly. Students need modeling, guided practice, and feedback to apply the appropriate tone, style, and structure based on purpose and audience.
Instructional strategies. Instructional strategies.
Some instructional strategies are applicable across all writing types, while others are specific to particular forms of writing. The following are highly applicable model intentional variation demonstrate how writing changes with different purposes and audiences. Annotate mentor texts highlight how tone, word choice, and structure align with the writing type. Provide sentence frames and mentor phrases offer scaffolds that reflect each writing type, such as opinion openers or sequencing transitions. Use checklists during drafting include tone, structure, and language as part of peer review or revision. Revise with the audience in mind encourage students to reread drafts and adjust based on whether the writing fits the intended reader and purpose. Some instructional strategies are applicable across all writing types, while others are specific to particular forms of writing. The following are highly applicable model intentional variation demonstrate how writing changes with different purposes and audiences. Annotate mentor texts highlight how tone, word choice, and structure align with the writing type. Provide sentence frames and mentor phrases offer scaffolds that reflect each writing type, such as opinion openers or sequencing transitions. Use checklists during drafting include tone, structure, and language as part of peer review or revision. Revise with the audience in mind encourage students to reread drafts and adjust based on whether the writing fits the intended reader and purpose.
Writing types and instructional focus. Writing types and instructional focus.
Each type of writing requires students to draw on different skills, which means instruction must adapt to the specific demands of the task to meet student needs. Narrative writing often challenges students to organize events clearly and use descriptive detail. Persuasive writing requires students to form logical arguments and support them with evidence, while informative writing depends on clarity, structure, and precise language. Instruction should target the specific skills each writing type demands. Each type of writing requires students to draw on different skills, which means instruction must adapt to the specific demands of the task to meet student needs. Narrative writing often challenges students to organize events clearly and use descriptive detail. Persuasive writing requires students to form logical arguments and support them with evidence, while informative writing depends on clarity, structure, and precise language. Instruction should target the specific skills each writing type demands.
Instructional priorities by writing type. Instructional priorities by writing type.
Narrative descriptive plan a story or sequence of events that makes sense to the reader. Establish characters, setting, and a clear conflict or central idea. Use sensory details and description to show rather than tell. Use dialogue and pacing to develop scenes and maintain reader interest. Narrative descriptive plan a story or sequence of events that makes sense to the reader. Establish characters, setting, and a clear conflict or central idea. Use sensory details and description to show rather than tell. Use dialogue and pacing to develop scenes and maintain reader interest.
Persuasive argumentative take and maintain a clear position from the start. Organize claims and supporting evidence logically. Address counterarguments effectively. Use tone and language suited to the audience and purpose. Persuasive argumentative take and maintain a clear position from the start. Organize claims and supporting evidence logically. Address counterarguments effectively. Use tone and language suited to the audience and purpose.
Informative expository organize ideas into logical groups using an outline or graphic organizer. Write clear topic sentences and use transitions to guide the reader. Support ideas with accurate facts, examples, or definitions. Maintain an objective tone and use precise, academic language. Informative expository organize ideas into logical groups using an outline or graphic organizer. Write clear topic sentences and use transitions to guide the reader. Support ideas with accurate facts, examples, or definitions. Maintain an objective tone and use precise, academic language.
Example question. Example question.
Students are working on informative writing. During the revision stage of an essay unit, the teacher wants to help them improve the clarity and structure of their ideas. Which of the following instructional strategies is most appropriate? Students are working on informative writing. During the revision stage of an essay unit, the teacher wants to help them improve the clarity and structure of their ideas. Which of the following instructional strategies is most appropriate?
A using a graphic organizer to help students group related facts and improve topic sentences. A using a graphic organizer to help students group related facts and improve topic sentences.
B providing sentence starters for adding more compelling dialogue and actions between characters. B providing sentence starters for adding more compelling dialogue and actions between characters.
C distributing a checklist to help students strengthen rhetorical appeals in each paragraph. C distributing a checklist to help students strengthen rhetorical appeals in each paragraph.
D using a mind map to help students brainstorm stronger opinion statements for their introduction. D using a mind map to help students brainstorm stronger opinion statements for their introduction.
Answer choice explanations. Answer choice explanations.
Dialogue and character actions are features of narrative writing, not informative writing, making choice B incorrect. Choice C is also wrong because rhetorical appeals are used to persuade an audience and are inappropriate in objective, fact based writing. Choice D can be eliminated because brainstorming opinion statements is a persuasive writing activity. It also belongs in the planning stage, not during revision. Therefore, choice A is the best option because a graphic organizer helps students improve the organization of their ideas and clarify topic sentences, which is essential in informative writing. Dialogue and character actions are features of narrative writing, not informative writing, making choice B incorrect. Choice C is also wrong because rhetorical appeals are used to persuade an audience and are inappropriate in objective, fact based writing. Choice D can be eliminated because brainstorming opinion statements is a persuasive writing activity. It also belongs in the planning stage, not during revision. Therefore, choice A is the best option because a graphic organizer helps students improve the organization of their ideas and clarify topic sentences, which is essential in informative writing.
Stages of the writing process. Stages of the writing process.
Writing can be a complex process. Writers go through stages before holding a final, polished product. The stages of the writing process are prewriting, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing. Writing can be a complex process. Writers go through stages before holding a final, polished product. The stages of the writing process are prewriting, drafting, revising, editing, and publishing.
Stage prewriting. Description identify the writing purpose and intended audience. Brainstorm and organize ideas. Gather necessary information and plan content. Stage prewriting. Description identify the writing purpose and intended audience. Brainstorm and organize ideas. Gather necessary information and plan content.
Stage drafting. Description develop a first draft based on prewriting ideas. Focus on organizing ideas logically without worrying about perfection. Expand ideas into sentences and paragraphs. Stage drafting. Description develop a first draft based on prewriting ideas. Focus on organizing ideas logically without worrying about perfection. Expand ideas into sentences and paragraphs.
Stage revising. Description review the draft to strengthen content and clarity. Ensure the writing aligns with the purpose and audience. Enhance organization, transitions, word choice, and sentence variety. Add, clarify, or remove details to improve meaning. Stage revising. Description review the draft to strengthen content and clarity. Ensure the writing aligns with the purpose and audience. Enhance organization, transitions, word choice, and sentence variety. Add, clarify, or remove details to improve meaning.
Stage editing. Description correct errors in grammar, spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and formatting. Ensure consistency in style, tone, and mechanics. Stage editing. Description correct errors in grammar, spelling, punctuation, capitalization, and formatting. Ensure consistency in style, tone, and mechanics.
Stage publishing. Description create a clean final version of the writing. Share the completed product with the intended audience. Stage publishing. Description create a clean final version of the writing. Share the completed product with the intended audience.
Revising improves the content. Editing corrects conventions. Revising improves the content. Editing corrects conventions.
Teaching the writing process. Teaching the writing process.
Teachers should provide direct instruction for each phase of the writing process. Teachers should provide direct instruction for each phase of the writing process.
The writing process is recursive, meaning that the work done in each stage influences what will be done in the others. The writing process is recursive, meaning that the work done in each stage influences what will be done in the others.
It's common to switch between the stages. For example, students may return to the editing and revising stages several times before publishing. It's also important to note that not every piece of writing must undergo all five stages. Completing activities that focus on only part of the writing process can help students develop particular skills that can later be applied to the process as a whole. It's common to switch between the stages. For example, students may return to the editing and revising stages several times before publishing. It's also important to note that not every piece of writing must undergo all five stages. Completing activities that focus on only part of the writing process can help students develop particular skills that can later be applied to the process as a whole.
Writing process instructional strategies. Writing process instructional strategies.
Prewriting concept maps and topic webs. Question stems. Quick writes, freewriting, and journaling. Prewriting concept maps and topic webs. Question stems. Quick writes, freewriting, and journaling.
Drafting word processing tools. Modeling. Collaborative writing. Drafting word processing tools. Modeling. Collaborative writing.
Revising rubrics. Writing conferences. Peer revision. Revising rubrics. Writing conferences. Peer revision.
Editing editing checklists. Grammar mini lessons. Editing editing checklists. Grammar mini lessons.
Publishing digital platforms. Group reading. Portfolios. Publishing digital platforms. Group reading. Portfolios.
Generating ideas for writing. Generating ideas for writing.
While it is sometimes appropriate to provide students with a writing topic or prompt, it is equally necessary to encourage students to choose their own ideas for writing. Teachers can encourage students to generate their own ideas by incorporating rigorous questioning into instruction. Ask students questions that challenge their line of thinking, require them to synthesize information, require data or evidence to support an opinion, suggest solutions to larger issues. While it is sometimes appropriate to provide students with a writing topic or prompt, it is equally necessary to encourage students to choose their own ideas for writing. Teachers can encourage students to generate their own ideas by incorporating rigorous questioning into instruction. Ask students questions that challenge their line of thinking, require them to synthesize information, require data or evidence to support an opinion, suggest solutions to larger issues.
As students learn to answer these questions in class, they can mimic this line of questioning. Students can use these types of questions as models to guide their own lines of inquiry as they read and interpret new information in and out of the classroom. As students learn to answer these questions in class, they can mimic this line of questioning. Students can use these types of questions as models to guide their own lines of inquiry as they read and interpret new information in and out of the classroom.
Once the class is ready to begin prewriting, some students will inevitably come back with an I don't know what to write about, or I don't have anything to say about this. They will need guidance in generating ideas for writing, which is when the following strategies are helpful. Once the class is ready to begin prewriting, some students will inevitably come back with an I don't know what to write about, or I don't have anything to say about this. They will need guidance in generating ideas for writing, which is when the following strategies are helpful.
Strategies for generating ideas. Strategies for generating ideas.
Many techniques can be used to generate ideas for writing. Some are more appropriate for descriptive writing, while others work well for argumentative or persuasive essays. Choosing the strategy that best matches the writing assignment will help students be more successful in generating and choosing a topic for writing. Here is a brief outline of some strategies. Many techniques can be used to generate ideas for writing. Some are more appropriate for descriptive writing, while others work well for argumentative or persuasive essays. Choosing the strategy that best matches the writing assignment will help students be more successful in generating and choosing a topic for writing. Here is a brief outline of some strategies.
Brainstorming generating ideas quickly and with less organization. Brainstorming generating ideas quickly and with less organization.
Brainstorming is a great way to get ideas flowing and start the process before refining a topic more concretely. Brainstorming can take on many forms and can be done independently or in groups. For example, students could be asked to create a list of words, ideas, or thoughts associated with a starting topic. Students preparing for a descriptive essay about winter might list sensory details about the season or activities that happen during winter. Brainstorming is a great way to get ideas flowing and start the process before refining a topic more concretely. Brainstorming can take on many forms and can be done independently or in groups. For example, students could be asked to create a list of words, ideas, or thoughts associated with a starting topic. Students preparing for a descriptive essay about winter might list sensory details about the season or activities that happen during winter.
Freewriting writing with no immediate purpose. Freewriting writing with no immediate purpose.
Sometimes writers experience a block of ideas. When they don't know what to write, writing anything can help get the process started. After five or ten minutes, the writer pauses, reviews the previous work, and looks for inspiration. A section of the initial freewrite is then used as a starting off point for a new piece of writing with a clear purpose or topic. Sometimes writers experience a block of ideas. When they don't know what to write, writing anything can help get the process started. After five or ten minutes, the writer pauses, reviews the previous work, and looks for inspiration. A section of the initial freewrite is then used as a starting off point for a new piece of writing with a clear purpose or topic.
Mapping focuses on the relationship between ideas. Mapping focuses on the relationship between ideas.
This strategy has a few names idea maps, mind maps, and clustering, to name a few. This strategy has a few names idea maps, mind maps, and clustering, to name a few.
The topic is put in the center, and connected ideas are linked around, with supporting thoughts linked to those in their own bubbles. Students can use this map as a general outline for writing and to guide research as they investigate the branches of the map. The topic is put in the center, and connected ideas are linked around, with supporting thoughts linked to those in their own bubbles. Students can use this map as a general outline for writing and to guide research as they investigate the branches of the map.
Background reading using reading to spark a writing topic. Background reading using reading to spark a writing topic.
Sometimes people are encouraged to delve deeper into a topic after reading about it. Reading an informational text about recycling could encourage students to research recycling practices in their town and write a persuasive essay about local recycling programs. Mentor texts can also be used to encourage writing. After reading a particularly emotional narrative piece, students can mimic the author's style to create their own narrative writing. Sometimes people are encouraged to delve deeper into a topic after reading about it. Reading an informational text about recycling could encourage students to research recycling practices in their town and write a persuasive essay about local recycling programs. Mentor texts can also be used to encourage writing. After reading a particularly emotional narrative piece, students can mimic the author's style to create their own narrative writing.
Asking questions using questions to fully investigate a topic. Asking questions using questions to fully investigate a topic.
When researching a question, students can use the five W s and an H to explore the entirety of a topic. Asking who what where when why and how requires students to investigate all sides of a topic. Students may know the answer to who or what, but discover that they need more information to answer the other four questions. When researching a question, students can use the five W s and an H to explore the entirety of a topic. Asking who what where when why and how requires students to investigate all sides of a topic. Students may know the answer to who or what, but discover that they need more information to answer the other four questions.
Clear and effective organization. Clear and effective organization.
Clear and coherent writing should be organized logically. Most writing follows predictable patterns based on the organizational structure chosen for the text. Each organizational structure also has traditional transition words that enable the reader to move from point to point smoothly. Clear and coherent writing should be organized logically. Most writing follows predictable patterns based on the organizational structure chosen for the text. Each organizational structure also has traditional transition words that enable the reader to move from point to point smoothly.
Sequence chronological writing is organized based on time or space. This is the best organizational style for narrative writing, how tos, or historical descriptions. Paragraphs should move from the first or earliest event to the last or most recent. Sequence chronological writing is organized based on time or space. This is the best organizational style for narrative writing, how tos, or historical descriptions. Paragraphs should move from the first or earliest event to the last or most recent.
Descriptive writing focuses on completely describing one item or event. Well organized descriptive writing will answer the questions of who, what, where, when, why, and how. Descriptive writing may also incorporate some elements of chronological organization. Descriptive writing focuses on completely describing one item or event. Well organized descriptive writing will answer the questions of who, what, where, when, why, and how. Descriptive writing may also incorporate some elements of chronological organization.
Cause and effect writing is usually argumentative and seeks to explain why things are the way they are. Well organized cause and effect writing will have related cause effect components next to each other in the paragraph, and appropriate transition words will be used to establish the relationship. Cause and effect writing is usually argumentative and seeks to explain why things are the way they are. Well organized cause and effect writing will have related cause effect components next to each other in the paragraph, and appropriate transition words will be used to establish the relationship.
Compare and contrast writing will appear well organized if the types of examples are written in a parallel structure and like unlike details are paired together. Compare and contrast writing will appear well organized if the types of examples are written in a parallel structure and like unlike details are paired together.
Problem and solution writing will clearly define the problem using examples and then provide a well defined suggested solution to the problem. Problem and solution writing will clearly define the problem using examples and then provide a well defined suggested solution to the problem.
Students can practice writing with clear and coherent organization through activities like reading a passage and identifying the type of organization used, adding transitions to example sentences that match the best organizational structure, piecing together individual sentences in the proper order to make a well organized paragraph, practicing writing sentences that use parallel structure, creating and using outlines to generate paragraphs and essays. Students can practice writing with clear and coherent organization through activities like reading a passage and identifying the type of organization used, adding transitions to example sentences that match the best organizational structure, piecing together individual sentences in the proper order to make a well organized paragraph, practicing writing sentences that use parallel structure, creating and using outlines to generate paragraphs and essays.
Clear and coherent style. Clear and coherent style.
A clear and coherent style refers to the ability to thoroughly describe and create concise, precise, and interesting sentences. A concise sentence is brief but still contains all necessary information. A precise sentence contains specific details and avoids wordy descriptions. While attempting to be concise and precise, writing should also maintain a style appropriate to the piece. For example, if students attempt to mimic written expression from the seventeen hundreds, their writing would need to contain more detailed and repetitive words and expressions. A clear and coherent style refers to the ability to thoroughly describe and create concise, precise, and interesting sentences. A concise sentence is brief but still contains all necessary information. A precise sentence contains specific details and avoids wordy descriptions. While attempting to be concise and precise, writing should also maintain a style appropriate to the piece. For example, if students attempt to mimic written expression from the seventeen hundreds, their writing would need to contain more detailed and repetitive words and expressions.
To practice writing with concision and precision, lessons and activities might focus on replacing multiple adjectives or adverbs with one stronger term, consider saying the Victorian house instead of the house with the intricate wrap around porch and decorative eaves, switching from passive to active voice, instead of the table was knocked over by the rowdy kids say the rowdy kids knocked over the table, choosing specific nouns, replace the man with the bright yellow jacket and hard hat with the construction worker, picking one term rather than explaining, replace we went to the city to listen to the band and orchestra with we went to the city to listen to the symphony, avoiding starting sentences with there is or there are, instead of there are many desserts in the kitchen use many desserts are in the kitchen, eliminating wordy or unnecessary prepositional phrases, replace the piece of the puzzle fell on the floor with the puzzle piece fell on the floor, due to the fact that the power went out, we were unable to complete our assignment can be changed to we were unable to complete our assignment because the power went out. To practice writing with concision and precision, lessons and activities might focus on replacing multiple adjectives or adverbs with one stronger term, consider saying the Victorian house instead of the house with the intricate wrap around porch and decorative eaves, switching from passive to active voice, instead of the table was knocked over by the rowdy kids say the rowdy kids knocked over the table, choosing specific nouns, replace the man with the bright yellow jacket and hard hat with the construction worker, picking one term rather than explaining, replace we went to the city to listen to the band and orchestra with we went to the city to listen to the symphony, avoiding starting sentences with there is or there are, instead of there are many desserts in the kitchen use many desserts are in the kitchen, eliminating wordy or unnecessary prepositional phrases, replace the piece of the puzzle fell on the floor with the puzzle piece fell on the floor, due to the fact that the power went out, we were unable to complete our assignment can be changed to we were unable to complete our assignment because the power went out.
Transition words. Transition words.
Transition words are words or phrases used to link sentences and ideas together. Transition words have implied meanings, so it's important to use appropriate transitions in writing for clarity. For example, by using the transition for example, the reader is cued into the content of this sentence before reading it you expect to see an example of transition words in use. If this paragraph had used an inappropriate transition, such as second or similarly, the flow would be interrupted. Transition words are words or phrases used to link sentences and ideas together. Transition words have implied meanings, so it's important to use appropriate transitions in writing for clarity. For example, by using the transition for example, the reader is cued into the content of this sentence before reading it you expect to see an example of transition words in use. If this paragraph had used an inappropriate transition, such as second or similarly, the flow would be interrupted.
While some transition words can be used in multiple organizational structures, here is a small overview of common transitions for each organizational pattern. While some transition words can be used in multiple organizational structures, here is a small overview of common transitions for each organizational pattern.
Chronological or sequential order first, second, third, next, finally. Chronological or sequential order first, second, third, next, finally.
Comparison and contrast similarly, on the other hand, but, likewise. Comparison and contrast similarly, on the other hand, but, likewise.
Cause and effect because, as a result, therefore. Cause and effect because, as a result, therefore.
Definition and example for example, for instance, such as. Definition and example for example, for instance, such as.
Problem and solution as a result, because, so that. Problem and solution as a result, because, so that.
Details and main ideas in narrative and descriptive writing. Details and main ideas in narrative and descriptive writing.
Defining the main idea of narrative or descriptive writing usually means focusing on one specific event and working to create an experience for the reader. Ask students to choose strong memories or create fictitious events that evoke a strong emotion. Once they've decided on a main idea, they can begin to add details and description. Defining the main idea of narrative or descriptive writing usually means focusing on one specific event and working to create an experience for the reader. Ask students to choose strong memories or create fictitious events that evoke a strong emotion. Once they've decided on a main idea, they can begin to add details and description.
Descriptive details, such as figurative or sensory language, should be included to provide the reader with a unique understanding and experience. Enable students to focus on including the following by allowing them to see examples in existing texts, discuss and analyze the effectiveness of these stylistic choices, and practice writing with them before completing a more thorough narrative piece. Descriptive details, such as figurative or sensory language, should be included to provide the reader with a unique understanding and experience. Enable students to focus on including the following by allowing them to see examples in existing texts, discuss and analyze the effectiveness of these stylistic choices, and practice writing with them before completing a more thorough narrative piece.
Specific nouns, adjectives, and verbs choosing strong, specific words creates a clear picture in the reader's mind. Discuss as a class the difference between examples such as he was wearing a blue coat, and the dark haired gentleman strolled into the room wearing a midnight blue tweed jacket with brass buttons. Specific nouns, adjectives, and verbs choosing strong, specific words creates a clear picture in the reader's mind. Discuss as a class the difference between examples such as he was wearing a blue coat, and the dark haired gentleman strolled into the room wearing a midnight blue tweed jacket with brass buttons.
Using similes, metaphors, and figurative language read and discuss examples where figurative language is used to enhance the reader's mental image or emotion related to a text. Using similes, metaphors, and figurative language read and discuss examples where figurative language is used to enhance the reader's mental image or emotion related to a text.
Sensory language including adjectives that appeal to the five senses helps the reader more clearly envision the details. Students can practice using sensory language through many different activities, for example, taking one random object and describing its taste, texture, sound, smell, and appearance. Encourage students to be creative for the harder categories like taste and smell. Sensory language including adjectives that appeal to the five senses helps the reader more clearly envision the details. Students can practice using sensory language through many different activities, for example, taking one random object and describing its taste, texture, sound, smell, and appearance. Encourage students to be creative for the harder categories like taste and smell.
Details and main ideas in informative and persuasive writing. Details and main ideas in informative and persuasive writing.
Once students have decided on or been given a topic for their writing, they must effectively introduce their argument and provide supporting details. In order to teach this skill, provide examples of short paragraphs with clear thesis statements and compelling details. Have students identify the thesis statement and then rank the supporting details from strongest to weakest. Another activity to practice writing thesis statements is to provide a paragraph without a thesis statement and ask students to write the thesis themselves. Once students have decided on or been given a topic for their writing, they must effectively introduce their argument and provide supporting details. In order to teach this skill, provide examples of short paragraphs with clear thesis statements and compelling details. Have students identify the thesis statement and then rank the supporting details from strongest to weakest. Another activity to practice writing thesis statements is to provide a paragraph without a thesis statement and ask students to write the thesis themselves.
Writing a strong thesis statement can be challenging for students. A thesis statement should be a concise summary of the main idea of the paper. Often first drafts will begin along the lines of this paper will be about, or I'm going to discuss. One strategy that can be helpful for students is to provide a template for a strong thesis statement, and allow them to fill in the parentheses with the words that best fit their topic. Writing a strong thesis statement can be challenging for students. A thesis statement should be a concise summary of the main idea of the paper. Often first drafts will begin along the lines of this paper will be about, or I'm going to discuss. One strategy that can be helpful for students is to provide a template for a strong thesis statement, and allow them to fill in the parentheses with the words that best fit their topic.
While the majority of people believe (insert opposing idea), the reality is (insert main idea). While the majority of people believe (insert opposing idea), the reality is (insert main idea).
(Insert topic) is important because (supporting detail one), (supporting detail two), and (supporting detail three). (Insert topic) is important because (supporting detail one), (supporting detail two), and (supporting detail three).
Once students have filled in the parentheses with their paper's specific details, these generic statements can be reworked to include more descriptive and interesting verbiage. Once students have filled in the parentheses with their paper's specific details, these generic statements can be reworked to include more descriptive and interesting verbiage.
Once the thesis statement has been written, students need to choose supporting details that are relevant to the topic and will provide sufficient support for their arguments. Provide opportunities to practice assessing supporting details in existing texts for relevance and how the details support and build up the argument. Other activities to scaffold this skill might include choosing details to include from a list in a paragraph, ordering existing details from strongest to weakest, or removing poor supporting details from existing text. Once the thesis statement has been written, students need to choose supporting details that are relevant to the topic and will provide sufficient support for their arguments. Provide opportunities to practice assessing supporting details in existing texts for relevance and how the details support and build up the argument. Other activities to scaffold this skill might include choosing details to include from a list in a paragraph, ordering existing details from strongest to weakest, or removing poor supporting details from existing text.
Facilitate student understanding of the structures of informative and persuasive writing. For example, in a short answer response, the thesis statement may be one sentence of a one paragraph response. Comparatively, traditional academic essays will have a very different structure. While there are variations in structure depending on the prompt and the purpose, traditionally, the thesis in an essay will usually be included at the end of the first paragraph. Each body paragraph that follows will begin with a topic sentence that reflects the thesis statement (topic sentences do not restate the thesis, but they do focus on a specific idea represented in the thesis). It is also common practice to include the thesis, restated in a new way, in the conclusion of the essay. Facilitate student understanding of the structures of informative and persuasive writing. For example, in a short answer response, the thesis statement may be one sentence of a one paragraph response. Comparatively, traditional academic essays will have a very different structure. While there are variations in structure depending on the prompt and the purpose, traditionally, the thesis in an essay will usually be included at the end of the first paragraph. Each body paragraph that follows will begin with a topic sentence that reflects the thesis statement (topic sentences do not restate the thesis, but they do focus on a specific idea represented in the thesis). It is also common practice to include the thesis, restated in a new way, in the conclusion of the essay.
Developing voice and style in writing. Developing voice and style in writing.
Developing one's voice as a writer may take time. The only real method to honing one's natural writing voice and style is to practice writing. Teachers can assist students in finding their own particular voice and style in a variety of ways. Free writes, identifying one's audience, reading, and revision are a few ways in which a teacher can help foster the evolution of their students' voices and styles in writing. Here are some of those activities explained in more detail. Developing one's voice as a writer may take time. The only real method to honing one's natural writing voice and style is to practice writing. Teachers can assist students in finding their own particular voice and style in a variety of ways. Free writes, identifying one's audience, reading, and revision are a few ways in which a teacher can help foster the evolution of their students' voices and styles in writing. Here are some of those activities explained in more detail.
Have students do a first draft of an assignment that focuses only on expressing their ideas in their own voice. Make it clear that revisions are expected, and that they will deal with the technical aspects of writing in later drafts. Have students do a first draft of an assignment that focuses only on expressing their ideas in their own voice. Make it clear that revisions are expected, and that they will deal with the technical aspects of writing in later drafts.
Encourage students to include appropriate personal details and thoughts into their writing as much as possible. Encourage students to include appropriate personal details and thoughts into their writing as much as possible.
Direct students to imagine a specific audience they are writing to for each assignment. Direct students to imagine a specific audience they are writing to for each assignment.
Study the styles of writers with strong personal voices. Identify the word choices and sentence lengths of authors such as Maya Angelou, J R R Tolkien, Jane Austen, and Ernest Hemingway. Have students guess the author of individual passages. Ask students to mimic the style of a famous author in a short writing assignment. Study the styles of writers with strong personal voices. Identify the word choices and sentence lengths of authors such as Maya Angelou, J R R Tolkien, Jane Austen, and Ernest Hemingway. Have students guess the author of individual passages. Ask students to mimic the style of a famous author in a short writing assignment.
Have each student keep a writing portfolio so that they can observe their developing personal voice and style. Have each student keep a writing portfolio so that they can observe their developing personal voice and style.
Teaching revision and editing skills. Teaching revision and editing skills.
Teaching students to edit and revise their writing effectively is an essential part of developing independent writers. Editing and revising help students improve clarity, use correct language conventions, and strengthen the overall structure of their work. Use the following strategies and tools when guiding students through the revising and editing stages of the writing process. Teaching students to edit and revise their writing effectively is an essential part of developing independent writers. Editing and revising help students improve clarity, use correct language conventions, and strengthen the overall structure of their work. Use the following strategies and tools when guiding students through the revising and editing stages of the writing process.
Model the process teachers should demonstrate the editing process on their own writing, modeling what to look for and how to mark areas for correction. Model the process teachers should demonstrate the editing process on their own writing, modeling what to look for and how to mark areas for correction.
Think aloud example a teacher says, I wonder if this sentence would make more sense at the end of this paragraph, while revising their own writing. Think aloud example a teacher says, I wonder if this sentence would make more sense at the end of this paragraph, while revising their own writing.
Use rubrics or checklists use rubrics or checklists to target specific skills, such as capitalizing proper nouns or using quotation marks. Use rubrics or checklists use rubrics or checklists to target specific skills, such as capitalizing proper nouns or using quotation marks.
Show before and after examples show side by side essays, one before editing and one after, to help students recognize the value and importance of editing. Show before and after examples show side by side essays, one before editing and one after, to help students recognize the value and importance of editing.
Use editing shorthand and color coding introduce basic editing shorthand in early elementary school and build on the skill each year. Use color coding to identify patterns of errors. Use editing shorthand and color coding introduce basic editing shorthand in early elementary school and build on the skill each year. Use color coding to identify patterns of errors.
Integrate technology use online editing tools to enhance the process after students have edited and revised their work. Integrate technology use online editing tools to enhance the process after students have edited and revised their work.
Read writing aloud students should read their own writing aloud to identify areas for improvement in flow, organization, and style. Read writing aloud students should read their own writing aloud to identify areas for improvement in flow, organization, and style.
Editing versus revising. Editing versus revising.
Editing and revising are often grouped together, but they are two distinct stages of the writing process. While revising focuses on improving the content, organization, and clarity of ideas, editing focuses on correcting grammar, punctuation, and mechanics. Editing and revising are often grouped together, but they are two distinct stages of the writing process. While revising focuses on improving the content, organization, and clarity of ideas, editing focuses on correcting grammar, punctuation, and mechanics.
When editing, students should examine sentence structure, verb tense and subject verb agreement, capitalization, punctuation, spelling. When editing, students should examine sentence structure, verb tense and subject verb agreement, capitalization, punctuation, spelling.
When revising, students should add or remove sentences or words, add transition words, change the order of sentences or paragraphs, change words to improve content or clarity, assess the overall flow of the text. When revising, students should add or remove sentences or words, add transition words, change the order of sentences or paragraphs, change words to improve content or clarity, assess the overall flow of the text.
Revising focuses on improving the content, organization, and clarity of ideas editing focuses on correcting grammar, punctuation, and mechanics. Revising focuses on improving the content, organization, and clarity of ideas editing focuses on correcting grammar, punctuation, and mechanics.
Example question. Example question.
During a one on one writing conference with her teacher, a student shows her first draft and describes the areas she plans to change in the final draft. She plans to move a paragraph to an earlier part of the essay, add a transition sentence to the second paragraph, and remove redundant content in the final paragraph. The teacher notices several mechanical errors, but the student feels the essay is ready for a final draft. Which of the following steps should the teacher first take to support this student? During a one on one writing conference with her teacher, a student shows her first draft and describes the areas she plans to change in the final draft. She plans to move a paragraph to an earlier part of the essay, add a transition sentence to the second paragraph, and remove redundant content in the final paragraph. The teacher notices several mechanical errors, but the student feels the essay is ready for a final draft. Which of the following steps should the teacher first take to support this student?
A suggest that the student use online editing software to identify errors. A suggest that the student use online editing software to identify errors.
B give the student a checklist to use as she looks for errors in her writing. B give the student a checklist to use as she looks for errors in her writing.
C ask the student to read her essay aloud to identify areas for improvement. C ask the student to read her essay aloud to identify areas for improvement.
D allow the student to turn in her essay as is to build writing confidence. D allow the student to turn in her essay as is to build writing confidence.
Answer choice explanations. Answer choice explanations.
Choice A should not be the first step in supporting the student. Students can use online editing tools to support or enhance the editing process, but these tools should not be the first step when identifying mechanical errors. Students should first learn to recognize mistakes independently, then use online editing tools to identify additional errors or areas for improvement. Choice A should not be the first step in supporting the student. Students can use online editing tools to support or enhance the editing process, but these tools should not be the first step when identifying mechanical errors. Students should first learn to recognize mistakes independently, then use online editing tools to identify additional errors or areas for improvement.
Reading an essay aloud, choice C, is an effective way for students to identify areas for improvement in their writing. However, this strategy lends itself more to revising structure and organization than identifying mechanical errors. The student has already identified areas for improvement in organization but needs to edit her writing for mechanical errors. Reading an essay aloud, choice C, is an effective way for students to identify areas for improvement in their writing. However, this strategy lends itself more to revising structure and organization than identifying mechanical errors. The student has already identified areas for improvement in organization but needs to edit her writing for mechanical errors.
Choice D does not allow the student to learn from their mistakes and grow in their writing abilities. Building writing confidence is important, but the teacher should still guide the student to identify specific errors in her writing. Choice D does not allow the student to learn from their mistakes and grow in their writing abilities. Building writing confidence is important, but the teacher should still guide the student to identify specific errors in her writing.
Providing an editing checklist, choice B, will help the student focus on specific areas to edit, such as ending punctuation or capitalization of proper nouns. Checklists are an effective tool to use during the editing stage of the writing process and can be adapted for any grade level. Providing an editing checklist, choice B, will help the student focus on specific areas to edit, such as ending punctuation or capitalization of proper nouns. Checklists are an effective tool to use during the editing stage of the writing process and can be adapted for any grade level.
Sentence structure. Sentence structure.
There are four types of sentence structure. By mixing these in writing, authors can illustrate different points and vary the reading tempo. There are four types of sentence structure. By mixing these in writing, authors can illustrate different points and vary the reading tempo.
Types of clauses. Types of clauses.
Sentences are made with clauses. A clause is a group of words that contains a subject and a verb. Sentences are made with clauses. A clause is a group of words that contains a subject and a verb.
An independent or main clause can stand alone as a sentence. They can be found in all types of sentences. An independent or main clause can stand alone as a sentence. They can be found in all types of sentences.
The lion roared at the hyenas. The lion roared at the hyenas.
Giraffes eat acacia leaves, but koalas eat eucalyptus leaves. Giraffes eat acacia leaves, but koalas eat eucalyptus leaves.
This sentence contains two independent clauses joined with the coordinating conjunction but. This sentence contains two independent clauses joined with the coordinating conjunction but.
A dependent or subordinate clause begins with a subordinating conjunction. It cannot stand alone as a complete sentence. It requires a comma if the clause is at the beginning of the sentence. A dependent or subordinate clause begins with a subordinating conjunction. It cannot stand alone as a complete sentence. It requires a comma if the clause is at the beginning of the sentence.
My shoes are brown because they are covered in mud. My shoes are brown because they are covered in mud.
Since they are covered in mud, I must leave my shoes outside. Since they are covered in mud, I must leave my shoes outside.
Types of conjunctions. Types of conjunctions.
A coordinating conjunction connects grammatical units of equal rank, such as two independent clauses. They include the words for and nor but or yet so. A coordinating conjunction connects grammatical units of equal rank, such as two independent clauses. They include the words for and nor but or yet so.
F A N B O Y S is a mnemonic device used to remember the coordinating conjunctions. F A N B O Y S is a mnemonic device used to remember the coordinating conjunctions.
A subordinating conjunction connects a dependent clause to an independent clause. Many words can function as subordinating conjunctions in the English language. Common examples include although because in order to once since though unless. A subordinating conjunction connects a dependent clause to an independent clause. Many words can function as subordinating conjunctions in the English language. Common examples include although because in order to once since though unless.
Types of sentence structures. Types of sentence structures.
There are four types of sentence structure. The type of clauses dictates syntax rules. There are four types of sentence structure. The type of clauses dictates syntax rules.
A simple sentence is one independent clause. A simple sentence is one independent clause.
My hat is blue. My hat is blue.
A compound sentence is two or more independent clauses joined by a coordinating conjunction or semicolon. A compound sentence is two or more independent clauses joined by a coordinating conjunction or semicolon.
My hat is blue, and my shoes are white. My hat is blue, and my shoes are white.
My hat is blue is independent. My shoes are white is also independent. The comma plus the conjunction and correctly join the two independent clauses. My hat is blue is independent. My shoes are white is also independent. The comma plus the conjunction and correctly join the two independent clauses.
A complex sentence contains one independent clause and at least one dependent clause, joined by a subordinating conjunction. A complex sentence contains one independent clause and at least one dependent clause, joined by a subordinating conjunction.
My shoes are brown because they are covered in mud. My shoes are brown because they are covered in mud.
My shoes are brown is independent. Because they are covered in mud is dependent. The word because is the subordinating conjunction that joins them together. My shoes are brown is independent. Because they are covered in mud is dependent. The word because is the subordinating conjunction that joins them together.
A compound complex sentence contains at least two independent clauses and at least one dependent clause. A compound complex sentence contains at least two independent clauses and at least one dependent clause.
My hat is blue, and my shoes are brown because they are covered in mud. My hat is blue, and my shoes are brown because they are covered in mud.
My hat is blue and my shoes are brown are both independent clauses. Because they are covered in mud is the dependent clause. My hat is blue and my shoes are brown are both independent clauses. Because they are covered in mud is the dependent clause.
Example question. Example question.
After they ate dinner, Zoe and Gavin watched a movie together. After they ate dinner, Zoe and Gavin watched a movie together.
This sentence is an example of which of the following? This sentence is an example of which of the following?
A simple sentence. A simple sentence.
B compound sentence. B compound sentence.
C complex sentence. C complex sentence.
D compound complex sentence. D compound complex sentence.
Answer choice explanations. Answer choice explanations.
First, identify the clauses. This sentence has one independent clause Zoe and Gavin watched a movie together and one dependent clause after they ate dinner. First, identify the clauses. This sentence has one independent clause Zoe and Gavin watched a movie together and one dependent clause after they ate dinner.
Choice A is incorrect because a simple sentence has one subject and one verb and is a complete thought. This example has an independent and a dependent clause. Choice A is incorrect because a simple sentence has one subject and one verb and is a complete thought. This example has an independent and a dependent clause.
Choice B is incorrect because a compound sentence has at least two independent clauses. Since our first clause cannot stand alone as a sentence, this sentence is not compound. Choice B is incorrect because a compound sentence has at least two independent clauses. Since our first clause cannot stand alone as a sentence, this sentence is not compound.
Choice D is not correct because a compound complex sentence has two independent clauses and one or more dependent clauses. This example has one independent clause and one dependent clause. Choice D is not correct because a compound complex sentence has two independent clauses and one or more dependent clauses. This example has one independent clause and one dependent clause.
Choice C is correct because a complex sentence contains an independent clause and at least one dependent clause. Choice C is correct because a complex sentence contains an independent clause and at least one dependent clause.
Teaching proper writing and grammar conventions. Teaching proper writing and grammar conventions.
Writing conventions build on earlier skill development in phonological knowledge and alphabetic awareness and continue to build as students learn to write complete, thoughtful sentences and paragraphs with correct grammar and usage. Writing conventions build on earlier skill development in phonological knowledge and alphabetic awareness and continue to build as students learn to write complete, thoughtful sentences and paragraphs with correct grammar and usage.
Given the number of grammatical conventions and concepts students must master, it is essential for teachers to identify the skills students are expected to understand at different grade levels. Given the number of grammatical conventions and concepts students must master, it is essential for teachers to identify the skills students are expected to understand at different grade levels.
Once grade level skills are identified, teachers should provide direct instruction, modeling, and multiple activities to practice those skills. Strategies for developing writing conventions include the following. Once grade level skills are identified, teachers should provide direct instruction, modeling, and multiple activities to practice those skills. Strategies for developing writing conventions include the following.
Strategy direct instruction. Examples whole class, small group, or individual instruction proper grammar spelling punctuation capitalization verb tense pronouns subject verb agreement comma usage. Upper elementary instruction quotation marks citing sources avoiding plagiarism. Strategy direct instruction. Examples whole class, small group, or individual instruction proper grammar spelling punctuation capitalization verb tense pronouns subject verb agreement comma usage. Upper elementary instruction quotation marks citing sources avoiding plagiarism.
Strategy ongoing grammar practice. Examples short daily editing passages peer editing modeling teachers thinking aloud during the revising and editing stages of writing teachers self correcting writing errors in daily instruction. Strategy ongoing grammar practice. Examples short daily editing passages peer editing modeling teachers thinking aloud during the revising and editing stages of writing teachers self correcting writing errors in daily instruction.
Strategy writing exemplars. Examples wide variety of mentor texts examples of effective student writing examples of bad writing to correct. Strategy writing exemplars. Examples wide variety of mentor texts examples of effective student writing examples of bad writing to correct.
Strategy scaffolding. Examples focusing on one to two targeted skills per writing assignment sentence stems editing checklists. Strategy scaffolding. Examples focusing on one to two targeted skills per writing assignment sentence stems editing checklists.
Strategy engaging activities. Examples sentence building activities using word cards or magnetic words to promote proper syntax grammar or punctuation scavenger hunts using texts in the classroom or a provided passage interactive whiteboards for revising and editing. Strategy engaging activities. Examples sentence building activities using word cards or magnetic words to promote proper syntax grammar or punctuation scavenger hunts using texts in the classroom or a provided passage interactive whiteboards for revising and editing.
Strategy reference material. Examples anchor charts of the writing process, punctuation rules, and grammar conventions editing checklists word walls that show the spelling of irregular words. Strategy reference material. Examples anchor charts of the writing process, punctuation rules, and grammar conventions editing checklists word walls that show the spelling of irregular words.
Written versus spoken language. Written versus spoken language.
It's essential to acknowledge the distinctions between written and spoken English, as well as how these similarities and differences can impact student comprehension and performance. For example, students may be accustomed to hearing and using slang terms, such as text speak or abbreviations like L O L or O M G. While these are acceptable in an informal setting, students must learn how to adjust their speech and writing patterns for formal situations and writing assignments. It's essential to acknowledge the distinctions between written and spoken English, as well as how these similarities and differences can impact student comprehension and performance. For example, students may be accustomed to hearing and using slang terms, such as text speak or abbreviations like L O L or O M G. While these are acceptable in an informal setting, students must learn how to adjust their speech and writing patterns for formal situations and writing assignments.
Writing instruction for English language learners. Writing instruction for English language learners.
English language learners (E L L s) are learning to speak and write in English while simultaneously acquiring content knowledge in English. Therefore, it is essential that reading and writing instruction is explicit and inclusive in phonemic awareness, phonics, decoding, and word recognition skills. E L L s must also be taught vocabulary, comprehension strategies, spelling, fluency, and grammar. These strategies are most effectively taught within a meaningful framework rather than in isolation. English language learners (E L L s) are learning to speak and write in English while simultaneously acquiring content knowledge in English. Therefore, it is essential that reading and writing instruction is explicit and inclusive in phonemic awareness, phonics, decoding, and word recognition skills. E L L s must also be taught vocabulary, comprehension strategies, spelling, fluency, and grammar. These strategies are most effectively taught within a meaningful framework rather than in isolation.
Assessment and intervention grammar and writing conventions. Assessment and intervention grammar and writing conventions.
Some formal and informal activities to consider when assessing grammar and writing conventions may include working together as a class to complete daily sentence corrections on the board, asking students to explain sentence errors to assess their understanding of grammar rules, practicing a single convention with targeted assignments, such as practicing quotation marks by writing dialogue, writing lists to practice comma usage, sorting proper and common nouns to practice capitalization, having students correct a peer's writing for specific grammar rules, ask students to edit for only one or two rules at a time, asking students to correct errors from their own writing, model identifying and correcting errors in the teacher's writing, demonstrate correct usage as much as possible so students see more correct examples than incorrect. Some formal and informal activities to consider when assessing grammar and writing conventions may include working together as a class to complete daily sentence corrections on the board, asking students to explain sentence errors to assess their understanding of grammar rules, practicing a single convention with targeted assignments, such as practicing quotation marks by writing dialogue, writing lists to practice comma usage, sorting proper and common nouns to practice capitalization, having students correct a peer's writing for specific grammar rules, ask students to edit for only one or two rules at a time, asking students to correct errors from their own writing, model identifying and correcting errors in the teacher's writing, demonstrate correct usage as much as possible so students see more correct examples than incorrect.
When assessing student writing for proper grammar and conventions, there is a fine line between overwhelming the student with corrections and identifying which areas are truly important. For example, if a fourth grade student is consistently forgetting to capitalize the first letters in a sentence, that element needs more attention than misusing a semicolon. Using a rubric, or clearly communicating which grammar skills should be a primary focus will ensure that students can practice the necessary skills and the teacher will not be overworked trying to grade for every grammatical or usage error possible. When assessing student writing for proper grammar and conventions, there is a fine line between overwhelming the student with corrections and identifying which areas are truly important. For example, if a fourth grade student is consistently forgetting to capitalize the first letters in a sentence, that element needs more attention than misusing a semicolon. Using a rubric, or clearly communicating which grammar skills should be a primary focus will ensure that students can practice the necessary skills and the teacher will not be overworked trying to grade for every grammatical or usage error possible.
The teacher should choose one or two skills from student generated writing to focus corrections on. Once a skill has been identified, the teacher needs to determine how to address and remediate it. Does the student require remedial activities or direct instruction in the skill? This might be an opportune time to use small group work to address a common problem area for multiple students. The teacher should choose one or two skills from student generated writing to focus corrections on. Once a skill has been identified, the teacher needs to determine how to address and remediate it. Does the student require remedial activities or direct instruction in the skill? This might be an opportune time to use small group work to address a common problem area for multiple students.
Whenever possible, students should be given the opportunity to reflect upon and correct their own errors. This could be achieved in a number of ways. Students might resubmit an essay with corrections made. They could write the corrections on a separate piece of paper. They could verbally identify what needs correcting and how to fix it. Students need multiple opportunities to practice and correctly follow grammar rules to internalize the concept. Whenever possible, students should be given the opportunity to reflect upon and correct their own errors. This could be achieved in a number of ways. Students might resubmit an essay with corrections made. They could write the corrections on a separate piece of paper. They could verbally identify what needs correcting and how to fix it. Students need multiple opportunities to practice and correctly follow grammar rules to internalize the concept.
Setting goals. Setting goals.
One technique for assessing a student's progress on grammar or usage is to track the number of errors for a specific skill. This goal could be set by the student or by the teacher based on a recent writing assignment. For example, a student turns in a short essay with thirty misspelled words. The teacher and student set a goal that the next essay will only have twenty five misspelled words. The teacher can assess this student's essay with this specific goal in mind, and the student can track via a graph or chart whether or not the goal was met. Students might have one goal or numerous goals, depending on their writing skill level. Ideally, as the student writes more and continues tracking, the number of errors for a specific skill will decrease over time as the student learns to watch for and master this skill. One technique for assessing a student's progress on grammar or usage is to track the number of errors for a specific skill. This goal could be set by the student or by the teacher based on a recent writing assignment. For example, a student turns in a short essay with thirty misspelled words. The teacher and student set a goal that the next essay will only have twenty five misspelled words. The teacher can assess this student's essay with this specific goal in mind, and the student can track via a graph or chart whether or not the goal was met. Students might have one goal or numerous goals, depending on their writing skill level. Ideally, as the student writes more and continues tracking, the number of errors for a specific skill will decrease over time as the student learns to watch for and master this skill.
Dialogue tag followed or preceded by a comma or punctuation mark, with quotation marks around the quotation. Example as Mark exited the highway, he thought, I hope this is the right way. Dialogue tag followed or preceded by a comma or punctuation mark, with quotation marks around the quotation. Example as Mark exited the highway, he thought, I hope this is the right way.
Concise (writing) in writing, a sentence that is brief but still contains all necessary information. Concise (writing) in writing, a sentence that is brief but still contains all necessary information.
Editing reviewing the draft for corrections in grammar, mechanics, and spelling. Editing reviewing the draft for corrections in grammar, mechanics, and spelling.
Writing conference an individual meeting with students to discuss their drafts to help them revise their work before submitting a final product, and to help the teacher assess student understanding and modify instruction as needed. Writing conference an individual meeting with students to discuss their drafts to help them revise their work before submitting a final product, and to help the teacher assess student understanding and modify instruction as needed.
Chronological order an organizational approach that follows an orderly progression of events based in time. Chronological order an organizational approach that follows an orderly progression of events based in time.
Complex sentence an independent clause and a dependent clause. Example since you're going to the store, can you buy some milk. Complex sentence an independent clause and a dependent clause. Example since you're going to the store, can you buy some milk.
Compare and contrast an organizational approach where the author provides similarities and differences about two ideas. Compare and contrast an organizational approach where the author provides similarities and differences about two ideas.
Writing process the steps a writer goes through to compose a finished, polished text. Example prewriting, drafting, revising, editing, publishing. Writing process the steps a writer goes through to compose a finished, polished text. Example prewriting, drafting, revising, editing, publishing.
Precise (writing) in writing, a sentence that contains specific details and avoids wordy descriptions. Example turquoise instead of light bluish green. Precise (writing) in writing, a sentence that contains specific details and avoids wordy descriptions. Example turquoise instead of light bluish green.
Dependent subordinate clause clause that begins with a subordinating conjunction but cannot stand alone as a sentence even though it contains a subject and verb. Example while we were shopping, she spent her whole paycheck. Dependent subordinate clause clause that begins with a subordinating conjunction but cannot stand alone as a sentence even though it contains a subject and verb. Example while we were shopping, she spent her whole paycheck.
Revising reviewing the draft and making necessary corrections for sentence usage, organization, coherence, and audience. Revising reviewing the draft and making necessary corrections for sentence usage, organization, coherence, and audience.
Transition words phrases and words used to link sentences, paragraphs, and ideas together. Example first, next, last, on the other hand. Transition words phrases and words used to link sentences, paragraphs, and ideas together. Example first, next, last, on the other hand.
Expository writing a writing style in which students investigate an idea, evaluate evidence, and develop a clear argument. Example newspaper articles, how to manuals, and assembly instructions are examples of expository writing. Expository writing a writing style in which students investigate an idea, evaluate evidence, and develop a clear argument. Example newspaper articles, how to manuals, and assembly instructions are examples of expository writing.
Drafting the second step in the writing process where the writer brings together similar ideas and organizes them into paragraphs. Drafting the second step in the writing process where the writer brings together similar ideas and organizes them into paragraphs.
Prewriting the first step in the writing process when the writer decides on a central idea topic for writing and formulates a thesis or main idea statement. Prewriting the first step in the writing process when the writer decides on a central idea topic for writing and formulates a thesis or main idea statement.
Cause and effect a writing method in which the author explains reasons why something happened or the effects of something that has happened. Example a politician's speech in which all of the bad actions of an opponent are listed to argue that the politician should be elected instead. Cause and effect a writing method in which the author explains reasons why something happened or the effects of something that has happened. Example a politician's speech in which all of the bad actions of an opponent are listed to argue that the politician should be elected instead.
Sensory details descriptive language that appeals to the five senses to help the reader vividly imagine the text. Example the aroma of roasted chicken burst out of the oven and drifted temptingly towards my nostrils. Sensory details descriptive language that appeals to the five senses to help the reader vividly imagine the text. Example the aroma of roasted chicken burst out of the oven and drifted temptingly towards my nostrils.
Simple sentence a sentence containing one subject and one verb or one independent clause. Example the dolphin lives in the ocean. Simple sentence a sentence containing one subject and one verb or one independent clause. Example the dolphin lives in the ocean.
Publishing the final step in the writing process where the writer ensures the neatness and understanding of the final product. Publishing the final step in the writing process where the writer ensures the neatness and understanding of the final product.
Argumentative writing writing meant to persuade the reader to agree with the conclusions of the author. Argumentative writing writing meant to persuade the reader to agree with the conclusions of the author.
Clause a phrase that contains a subject and a verb. Clause a phrase that contains a subject and a verb.
Recursive repeated application of a process, such as writing. Recursive repeated application of a process, such as writing.
Descriptive writing used to create detailed descriptions of people, places, and things. Descriptive writing also develops the mood and atmosphere of the text. Descriptive writing used to create detailed descriptions of people, places, and things. Descriptive writing also develops the mood and atmosphere of the text.
Modeling an instructional strategy in which the teacher demonstrates a concept or skill and students learn by observing. Example when a teacher encounters a difficult word in a text, she thinks aloud to model how she can use the context clues to discover the meaning. Modeling an instructional strategy in which the teacher demonstrates a concept or skill and students learn by observing. Example when a teacher encounters a difficult word in a text, she thinks aloud to model how she can use the context clues to discover the meaning.
Narrative text fictional stories, plays, and poems usually contain some element of plot or conflict. Example Peter Pan, Romeo and Juliet. Narrative text fictional stories, plays, and poems usually contain some element of plot or conflict. Example Peter Pan, Romeo and Juliet.
Compound sentence two independent clauses joined by a comma and coordinating conjunction. Example dogs are mammals, but lizards are reptiles. Compound sentence two independent clauses joined by a comma and coordinating conjunction. Example dogs are mammals, but lizards are reptiles.
Portfolio collection of student's work and achievements that is used to assess past accomplishments and future potential can include finished work in a variety of media and can contain materials from several courses over time. Portfolio collection of student's work and achievements that is used to assess past accomplishments and future potential can include finished work in a variety of media and can contain materials from several courses over time.
Compound complex sentence two independent clauses and at least one dependent clause. Example while we are in town, we should stop at the hardware store, and you can buy a new hammer. Compound complex sentence two independent clauses and at least one dependent clause. Example while we are in town, we should stop at the hardware store, and you can buy a new hammer.
Subordinating conjunction a conjunction used at the beginning of a subordinate clause. Example because, although, even though, since. Subordinating conjunction a conjunction used at the beginning of a subordinate clause. Example because, although, even though, since.
Informative explanatory writing a writing style which demonstrates comprehension of a topic or process. Example in a science class, students write about a procedure that they performed and the results that they achieved. Informative explanatory writing a writing style which demonstrates comprehension of a topic or process. Example in a science class, students write about a procedure that they performed and the results that they achieved.
Voice the unique outlook and expressed personality of an author. Example Hemingway had a macho sensibility that infused his writing voice. Voice the unique outlook and expressed personality of an author. Example Hemingway had a macho sensibility that infused his writing voice.
Persuasive writing writing intended to convince its audience to embrace a particular idea or opinion and possibly take action. Persuasive writing writing intended to convince its audience to embrace a particular idea or opinion and possibly take action.
Rubric assessment tool that outlines specific criteria and performance levels for evaluating student work, providing clear guidelines and standards for both instructors and students to ensure consistent and objective grading. Rubric assessment tool that outlines specific criteria and performance levels for evaluating student work, providing clear guidelines and standards for both instructors and students to ensure consistent and objective grading.
Problem and solution an organizational approach where the author presents a problem and possible solution. Problem and solution an organizational approach where the author presents a problem and possible solution.
Independent main clause clause that can stand alone as a complete sentence. Example I went shopping last weekend. Independent main clause clause that can stand alone as a complete sentence. Example I went shopping last weekend.
Coordinating conjunction connects two clauses. Example for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so. Coordinating conjunction connects two clauses. Example for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so.
Style (writing) the technical preferences of an author's writing. Example Hemingway wrote prose in short sentences that distinguished his writing style. Style (writing) the technical preferences of an author's writing. Example Hemingway wrote prose in short sentences that distinguished his writing style.
Thesis statement a statement included in the introduction of a paper which makes a specific claim and provides a preview as to what will follow in the paper. Example a science student writes the following thesis statement in response to the question, is global warming a problem environmentalists agree that global climate change is an issue that needs to be addressed immediately. Thesis statement a statement included in the introduction of a paper which makes a specific claim and provides a preview as to what will follow in the paper. Example a science student writes the following thesis statement in response to the question, is global warming a problem environmentalists agree that global climate change is an issue that needs to be addressed immediately.