Normalized Text
E L A R four inquiry and research. E L A R four inquiry and research.
Teaching the research and writing process. Teaching the research and writing process.
Research lends itself to inquiry based instruction, which promotes active engagement since students form questions, conduct research, and develop conclusions. Like other skills, research and inquiry must be taught directly and explicitly and repeatedly modeled. Teaching the research and writing process provides numerous opportunities for such instruction and modeling. Research lends itself to inquiry based instruction, which promotes active engagement since students form questions, conduct research, and develop conclusions. Like other skills, research and inquiry must be taught directly and explicitly and repeatedly modeled. Teaching the research and writing process provides numerous opportunities for such instruction and modeling.
Providing a variety of examples is critical. Utilize diagrams or models and provide hands on activities. For example, teach and repeatedly model how to develop a topic sentence, how to summarize or paraphrase material, and how to support answers to research and inquiry questions. Provide model texts and show students how the research supports the topic sentences in these texts. Then, have students practice these tasks independently with an opportunity for feedback and revision. Providing a variety of examples is critical. Utilize diagrams or models and provide hands on activities. For example, teach and repeatedly model how to develop a topic sentence, how to summarize or paraphrase material, and how to support answers to research and inquiry questions. Provide model texts and show students how the research supports the topic sentences in these texts. Then, have students practice these tasks independently with an opportunity for feedback and revision.
Teach students to work through the process by completing projects in stages. Work with students to create reasonable timelines for their research process. Include teacher and self checks to ensure the research progresses and stays on track. Teach students to work through the process by completing projects in stages. Work with students to create reasonable timelines for their research process. Include teacher and self checks to ensure the research progresses and stays on track.
The research process. The research process.
Develop a research question or questions. Develop a research question or questions.
In the earliest stages of the process, students should start with open ended questions that focus on students' points of interest within the assignment's parameters. Students may develop a main research question and sub questions to support it. In the earliest stages of the process, students should start with open ended questions that focus on students' points of interest within the assignment's parameters. Students may develop a main research question and sub questions to support it.
As questions are developed, feedback should be given to help narrow or broaden the scope of their research. As questions are developed, feedback should be given to help narrow or broaden the scope of their research.
Research questions should be multi leveled and not simple yes no questions. Research questions should be multi leveled and not simple yes no questions.
Teach and post relevant questions for inquiry investigation, such as why did, what do, what is the difference between and, and what are. Teach and post relevant questions for inquiry investigation, such as why did, what do, what is the difference between and, and what are.
Locate reliable sources with information to answer the research questions. Locate reliable sources with information to answer the research questions.
Model evaluating sources by providing examples of reliable and unreliable sources to compare and contrast. Model evaluating sources by providing examples of reliable and unreliable sources to compare and contrast.
Demonstrate the importance of identifying the document's author, recognizing formal tone and presentation, and using documentation for facts in the text. Demonstrate the importance of identifying the document's author, recognizing formal tone and presentation, and using documentation for facts in the text.
Model for students how to find information in many places, such as various texts, reference sources in the library, technology, and other people. Model for students how to find information in many places, such as various texts, reference sources in the library, technology, and other people.
Teach students to use relevant search terms. Model brainstorming keywords related to their topic and provide examples of how to refine their searches using search enhancing operators like and, or, and not. Teach students to use relevant search terms. Model brainstorming keywords related to their topic and provide examples of how to refine their searches using search enhancing operators like and, or, and not.
Model how students can decide if information is relevant or irrelevant to their question. Model how students can decide if information is relevant or irrelevant to their question.
Create notes with paraphrased and summarized information from the research. Create notes with paraphrased and summarized information from the research.
Show many examples of bibliographies and precisely what they represent, especially in upper grades. Model and teach about the development of bibliographies to record sources of information for inquiry and research. Show many examples of bibliographies and precisely what they represent, especially in upper grades. Model and teach about the development of bibliographies to record sources of information for inquiry and research.
Model how to take notes from one or multiple sources and summarize information from text, pictures, or graphic sources. Model how to take notes from one or multiple sources and summarize information from text, pictures, or graphic sources.
Teach students that paraphrasing a source still means giving credit to the author somehow, either through a parenthetical citation or by mentioning the source in an introductory clause. Teach students that paraphrasing a source still means giving credit to the author somehow, either through a parenthetical citation or by mentioning the source in an introductory clause.
Organize the well documented information into graphic organizers or another visual representation. Organize the well documented information into graphic organizers or another visual representation.
An I chart is a graphic organizer used for inquiry and research. An I chart is a graphic organizer used for inquiry and research.
Outline the essay. Outline the essay.
Generally, this essay style is a five paragraph essay, including the introduction and thesis statement research question, three paragraphs of supporting evidence and details, and a conclusion paragraph. Generally, this essay style is a five paragraph essay, including the introduction and thesis statement research question, three paragraphs of supporting evidence and details, and a conclusion paragraph.
Synthesize research. Synthesize research.
Supporting claims with evidence from multiple sources will strengthen research complexity and more effective persuasion when applicable. Supporting claims with evidence from multiple sources will strengthen research complexity and more effective persuasion when applicable.
Cite sources. Cite sources.
Model how to embed direct quotes or paraphrased research into their writing and cite appropriately. Model how to embed direct quotes or paraphrased research into their writing and cite appropriately.
Draft and revise. Draft and revise.
Instruct students on using transitions to help move their readers from point to point within the essay and paragraphs. Instruct students on using transitions to help move their readers from point to point within the essay and paragraphs.
Students should pay special attention to maintaining a formal style. Students should pay special attention to maintaining a formal style.
Proper grammatical conventions and academic language should be used. Proper grammatical conventions and academic language should be used.
Types of sources. Types of sources.
Primary sources are documents created at the time under study and are often defined as first hand accounts of events. Examples include autobiographies, letters, diary entries, interviews, news film footage, speeches, and official records. Physical artifacts such as historical maps, art, or photographs are also considered primary sources. Primary sources are the preferred starting source for researchers because they typically provide a unique insight into the period or event in question. Primary sources are documents created at the time under study and are often defined as first hand accounts of events. Examples include autobiographies, letters, diary entries, interviews, news film footage, speeches, and official records. Physical artifacts such as historical maps, art, or photographs are also considered primary sources. Primary sources are the preferred starting source for researchers because they typically provide a unique insight into the period or event in question.
Primary sources avoid bias from secondary researchers, but they likely include bias from the original author. Primary sources avoid bias from secondary researchers, but they likely include bias from the original author.
Secondary sources are documents created after the time under study. Examples include textbooks, scholarly articles, biographies, and historical critiques. Artifact replicas are also considered secondary sources. Secondary sources typically include the author's analysis of an event based on primary source documents. Secondary sources are documents created after the time under study. Examples include textbooks, scholarly articles, biographies, and historical critiques. Artifact replicas are also considered secondary sources. Secondary sources typically include the author's analysis of an event based on primary source documents.
Primary versus secondary sources. Primary versus secondary sources.
Which type of source is the best to use? It depends on the specific research or the teacher's pedagogical goal. Which type of source is the best to use? It depends on the specific research or the teacher's pedagogical goal.
Advantages primary sources establish a human perspective or experience of the historical context. Provide historical context for the lesson's content, including examples of opinions or biases held by those involved. Offer insight into the perspective of a particular individual at a given moment in time. Advantages primary sources establish a human perspective or experience of the historical context. Provide historical context for the lesson's content, including examples of opinions or biases held by those involved. Offer insight into the perspective of a particular individual at a given moment in time.
Disadvantages primary sources do not provide a complete overview of the period. Are likely written solely from the author's point of view. Are likely to present a biased perspective that must be analyzed and clarified for students. Disadvantages primary sources do not provide a complete overview of the period. Are likely written solely from the author's point of view. Are likely to present a biased perspective that must be analyzed and clarified for students.
Advantages secondary sources provide an interpretation and combination of multiple perspectives. Provide the big picture of an event. Help establish the causes and effects of an event. Advantages secondary sources provide an interpretation and combination of multiple perspectives. Provide the big picture of an event. Help establish the causes and effects of an event.
Disadvantages secondary sources lack human or personal element. May be more difficult for students to relate to. Can provide biased interpretation or a narrative view of historical events. Disadvantages secondary sources lack human or personal element. May be more difficult for students to relate to. Can provide biased interpretation or a narrative view of historical events.
Example question. Example question.
Which of the following would be a primary source for a secondary student researching the attack on Pearl Harbor? Which of the following would be a primary source for a secondary student researching the attack on Pearl Harbor?
A a documentary featuring interviews with survivors. A a documentary featuring interviews with survivors.
B a letter written by a sailor of the U S S Arizona during the attack. B a letter written by a sailor of the U S S Arizona during the attack.
C a historical fiction novel set during world war two that follows sailors' experiences. C a historical fiction novel set during world war two that follows sailors' experiences.
D a government report from nineteen forty two analyzing the military response to the attack. D a government report from nineteen forty two analyzing the military response to the attack.
Answer choice explanations. Answer choice explanations.
Choice A is incorrect because a documentary is a compilation and interpretation of multiple primary sources, created after the event. Choice A is incorrect because a documentary is a compilation and interpretation of multiple primary sources, created after the event.
Choice C is incorrect because fiction is not a factual firsthand account and cannot be considered a primary source. Choice C is incorrect because fiction is not a factual firsthand account and cannot be considered a primary source.
Choice D is incorrect because, while it is a historical document, a government report is a secondary source that provides an analysis of the event rather than a firsthand account. Choice D is incorrect because, while it is a historical document, a government report is a secondary source that provides an analysis of the event rather than a firsthand account.
Choice B is the correct answer because a letter written by someone who experienced the attack is an authentic firsthand account. Choice B is the correct answer because a letter written by someone who experienced the attack is an authentic firsthand account.
Credible sources. Credible sources.
Credible sources are ones that the reader can trust. The information presented in them can be backed up with evidence. Credible sources are ones that the reader can trust. The information presented in them can be backed up with evidence.
To determine whether or not a source is credible, ask who, what, where, and when. To determine whether or not a source is credible, ask who, what, where, and when.
Who wrote it? Who wrote it?
Determine whether or not the author has a known agenda or bias. Determine whether or not the author has a known agenda or bias.
What are the key claims? What are the key claims?
Make sure there is evidence provided to support them. Make sure there is evidence provided to support them.
Where is the source from? Where is the source from?
Credible sources are typically from well known, reputable publications. Credible sources are typically from well known, reputable publications.
When was it written? When was it written?
The information could potentially be outdated by more current research. The information could potentially be outdated by more current research.
Types of sources. Types of sources.
Primary sources documents created at the time under study and are often defined as first hand accounts of events. They are the preferred sources for researchers because they provide unique insight into the period or event. Primary sources documents created at the time under study and are often defined as first hand accounts of events. They are the preferred sources for researchers because they provide unique insight into the period or event.
Secondary sources documents created after the time under study. Secondary sources typically include the author's analysis of an event based on primary source documents. Secondary sources documents created after the time under study. Secondary sources typically include the author's analysis of an event based on primary source documents.
Peer reviewed publications documents reviewed by other experts in the field before they are published. This process ensures the quality and validity of the source. Peer reviewed publications documents reviewed by other experts in the field before they are published. This process ensures the quality and validity of the source.
Websites there are even more factors to consider when determining the credibility of an online resource. Websites there are even more factors to consider when determining the credibility of an online resource.
Check the source of information. Credible online resources will cite their sources. Check the source of information. Credible online resources will cite their sources.
Check for the U R L extension, the notation at the end of a web address that categorizes the website type. Check for the U R L extension, the notation at the end of a web address that categorizes the website type.
The most credible online sources often end in dot e d u for an educational institution or dot g o v for a government resource. U R L extensions like dot c o m, dot o r g, and dot n e t can provide credible information, but they must be evaluated carefully since they often belong to entities for profit or promotion. The most credible online sources often end in dot e d u for an educational institution or dot g o v for a government resource. U R L extensions like dot c o m, dot o r g, and dot n e t can provide credible information, but they must be evaluated carefully since they often belong to entities for profit or promotion.
Check for the domain address, which is the name of the website. For research purposes, do not cite websites where anyone can post or edit the information, like Wikipedia, blogs, or social media. Check for the domain address, which is the name of the website. For research purposes, do not cite websites where anyone can post or edit the information, like Wikipedia, blogs, or social media.
Check for a published author. Anonymous sources are typically less reliable. Also, look into the author's credentials to determine whether or not they are a trustworthy source. Check for a published author. Anonymous sources are typically less reliable. Also, look into the author's credentials to determine whether or not they are a trustworthy source.
Skill box cite sources. Skill box cite sources.
Let's give credit where credit is due. Understanding how to create a citation is important to avoid plagiarism. Let's give credit where credit is due. Understanding how to create a citation is important to avoid plagiarism.
Elements of a citation. Elements of a citation.
Different associations have unique rules for how to properly structure a citation. In general, follow the modern language association (M L A) guidelines when writing essays for English language arts purposes. Different associations have unique rules for how to properly structure a citation. In general, follow the modern language association (M L A) guidelines when writing essays for English language arts purposes.
M L A citation guidelines for commonly used sources include the following information in order from left to right. M L A citation guidelines for commonly used sources include the following information in order from left to right.
Type of source book. M L A required citation information and punctuation author's last name, first name. Title. City of publication (if published before nineteen hundred), publisher, publication date. Type of source book. M L A required citation information and punctuation author's last name, first name. Title. City of publication (if published before nineteen hundred), publisher, publication date.
Type of source newspaper or magazine article. M L A required citation information and punctuation author's last name, first name. Article title. Title of periodical, day month year, pages. Type of source newspaper or magazine article. M L A required citation information and punctuation author's last name, first name. Article title. Title of periodical, day month year, pages.
Type of source electronic source. M L A required citation information and punctuation author editor's last name, first name (if available). Article title. Title of website, version numbers or posting date, publisher information, page or paragraph number, D O I or U R L. Date of access. Type of source electronic source. M L A required citation information and punctuation author editor's last name, first name (if available). Article title. Title of website, version numbers or posting date, publisher information, page or paragraph number, D O I or U R L. Date of access.
Type of source image, painting, sculpture, photograph. M L A required citation information and punctuation artist's last name, first name. Title of work. Date of creation, current location of work. U R L (if accessed online). Date of access (if accessed online). Type of source image, painting, sculpture, photograph. M L A required citation information and punctuation artist's last name, first name. Title of work. Date of creation, current location of work. U R L (if accessed online). Date of access (if accessed online).
Citations of digital sources require the date they were accessed, while print source citations need the date of publication. Citations of digital sources require the date they were accessed, while print source citations need the date of publication.
A completed source for a novel would look like the following Tolkien, J R R. The book of lost tales. Houghton Mifflin company, nineteen eighty six. A completed source for a novel would look like the following Tolkien, J R R. The book of lost tales. Houghton Mifflin company, nineteen eighty six.
In text citations and paraphrasing. In text citations and paraphrasing.
Sources must be properly cited in the works cited and mentioned within the essay's body. There are a few ways to embed a citation fluidly into writing, but any evidence or direct quotations must include an in text citation near the information. Sources must be properly cited in the works cited and mentioned within the essay's body. There are a few ways to embed a citation fluidly into writing, but any evidence or direct quotations must include an in text citation near the information.
In text citations reference the listings in the works cited. Usually, they include the author's last name and the page number. The article title would be used if no author is listed, as in an online source. In text citations are easily identifiable to a reader because the citation information is set off from the writer's work with parentheses. Below is a short excerpt that properly uses an in text citation and paraphrasing, which is putting something that was read, heard, or viewed into your own words. In text citations reference the listings in the works cited. Usually, they include the author's last name and the page number. The article title would be used if no author is listed, as in an online source. In text citations are easily identifiable to a reader because the citation information is set off from the writer's work with parentheses. Below is a short excerpt that properly uses an in text citation and paraphrasing, which is putting something that was read, heard, or viewed into your own words.
The Gettysburg address was a significant speech given by Abraham Lincoln during the civil war. He addressed the nation, desiring that the soldiers who gave the last full measure of devotion should not have died in vain (Lincoln). The Gettysburg address was a significant speech given by Abraham Lincoln during the civil war. He addressed the nation, desiring that the soldiers who gave the last full measure of devotion should not have died in vain (Lincoln).
The source and speaker are credited. Most of the excerpt is paraphrased, and the direct quote is indicated with quotation marks. The source and speaker are credited. Most of the excerpt is paraphrased, and the direct quote is indicated with quotation marks.
Just like citation entries, in text citation rules vary depending on the source type. The easiest way to avoid plagiarism is to include an in text citation whenever a source is referenced. In text citations can be skipped if the information is considered common knowledge, such as the distance of earth from the sun or that Einstein conceived E equals m c squared. Just like citation entries, in text citation rules vary depending on the source type. The easiest way to avoid plagiarism is to include an in text citation whenever a source is referenced. In text citations can be skipped if the information is considered common knowledge, such as the distance of earth from the sun or that Einstein conceived E equals m c squared.
Cite sources recognize it. Cite sources recognize it.
Questions will have an example of a citation entry for a works cited or an in text citation embedded in a paragraph. You may be asked to identify the source type or individual citation pieces. There may also be errors in the citation or paraphrasing technique you need to identify or revise. Questions will have an example of a citation entry for a works cited or an in text citation embedded in a paragraph. You may be asked to identify the source type or individual citation pieces. There may also be errors in the citation or paraphrasing technique you need to identify or revise.
X in the citation indicates that the type of source is. X in the citation indicates that the type of source is.
What would be included in X type of citation. What would be included in X type of citation.
According to the M L A citation and style guide. According to the M L A citation and style guide.
Cite sources tips. Cite sources tips.
Remember the order in which citation information is presented. Remember the order in which citation information is presented.
Look for clues in the citation style to indicate the type of source. Look for clues in the citation style to indicate the type of source.
Example question. Example question.
Jackson, Tim. A calm quiet. The great outdoorsman's guide, tenth March twenty sixteen, fifty six to sixty. Jackson, Tim. A calm quiet. The great outdoorsman's guide, tenth March twenty sixteen, fifty six to sixty.
Based on the information in the citation, this source is most likely A a chapter in a novel. B an article in a magazine. C an online article. D a personal interview with Tim Jackson. Based on the information in the citation, this source is most likely A a chapter in a novel. B an article in a magazine. C an online article. D a personal interview with Tim Jackson.
This citation contains both an article title (a calm quiet) and an italicized title (the great outdoorsman's guide). Those two pieces would indicate that the source is most likely choice B, an article in a magazine. Novel citations do not include the names of individual chapters. An online article would require more information, such as a U R L. A personal interview citation would not include any italicized titles. This citation contains both an article title (a calm quiet) and an italicized title (the great outdoorsman's guide). Those two pieces would indicate that the source is most likely choice B, an article in a magazine. Novel citations do not include the names of individual chapters. An online article would require more information, such as a U R L. A personal interview citation would not include any italicized titles.
Logical fallacies. Logical fallacies.
A fallacy is an illegitimate argument or irrelevant point without evidence to support its claims. Similarly, a logical fallacy is an error in reasoning that undermines an argument. A fallacy is an illegitimate argument or irrelevant point without evidence to support its claims. Similarly, a logical fallacy is an error in reasoning that undermines an argument.
Logical fallacies are commonly seen in argumentative writing when not enough evidence is present. In argumentative writing, the author presents the arguments on both sides of an issue by using evidence and facts to support a thesis. The author uses logical fallacies when they want to skip over the steps and evidence required for a logical argument and win it in the quickest way possible. Logical fallacies are commonly seen in argumentative writing when not enough evidence is present. In argumentative writing, the author presents the arguments on both sides of an issue by using evidence and facts to support a thesis. The author uses logical fallacies when they want to skip over the steps and evidence required for a logical argument and win it in the quickest way possible.
Logical fallacy ad hominem. Definition attacking the person making the argument instead of addressing the argument itself. Example don't listen to her argument on healthy eating because she eats fast food all the time. Logical fallacy ad hominem. Definition attacking the person making the argument instead of addressing the argument itself. Example don't listen to her argument on healthy eating because she eats fast food all the time.
Logical fallacy straw man. Definition misrepresenting or oversimplifying someone's argument to make it easier to attack. Example he wants to reduce the military budget, so he must think national defense isn't important. Logical fallacy straw man. Definition misrepresenting or oversimplifying someone's argument to make it easier to attack. Example he wants to reduce the military budget, so he must think national defense isn't important.
Logical fallacy appeal to authority. Definition claiming something is true because an authority or expert says so without providing further evidence. Example Kim Kardashian endorsed this hamburger, so it must be the best. Logical fallacy appeal to authority. Definition claiming something is true because an authority or expert says so without providing further evidence. Example Kim Kardashian endorsed this hamburger, so it must be the best.
Logical fallacy false dilemma (either or). Definition presenting two options as the only possibilities when more exist. Example you're either with us or against us. Logical fallacy false dilemma (either or). Definition presenting two options as the only possibilities when more exist. Example you're either with us or against us.
Logical fallacy slippery slope. Definition arguing that one event will inevitably lead to a chain of related and undesirable events. Example if we allow students to use calculators on exams, they won't bother learning basic math, and eventually, they'll forget how to add or subtract. Logical fallacy slippery slope. Definition arguing that one event will inevitably lead to a chain of related and undesirable events. Example if we allow students to use calculators on exams, they won't bother learning basic math, and eventually, they'll forget how to add or subtract.
Logical fallacy circular reasoning. Definition using the conclusion as evidence for the argument, creating a loop without proof. Example he's a great leader because he leads well. Logical fallacy circular reasoning. Definition using the conclusion as evidence for the argument, creating a loop without proof. Example he's a great leader because he leads well.
Logical fallacy hasty generalization. Definition making a broad conclusion based on insufficient or unrepresentative evidence. Example my friend got into a car accident the first day he started driving, so all new drivers must be terrible at driving. Logical fallacy hasty generalization. Definition making a broad conclusion based on insufficient or unrepresentative evidence. Example my friend got into a car accident the first day he started driving, so all new drivers must be terrible at driving.
Logical fallacy post hoc (false cause). Definition assuming that because one event followed another, the first caused the second. Example since I bought these new shoes, my basketball team has won every game, so we're winning because of my shoes. Logical fallacy post hoc (false cause). Definition assuming that because one event followed another, the first caused the second. Example since I bought these new shoes, my basketball team has won every game, so we're winning because of my shoes.
Logical fallacy red herring. Definition introducing irrelevant information to distract from the main argument. Example why worry about the environment when unemployment is still an issue. Logical fallacy red herring. Definition introducing irrelevant information to distract from the main argument. Example why worry about the environment when unemployment is still an issue.
Logical fallacy bandwagon. Definition claiming something is true or good because it's popular or widely accepted. Example everyone uses this phone brand, so it must be the best. Logical fallacy bandwagon. Definition claiming something is true or good because it's popular or widely accepted. Example everyone uses this phone brand, so it must be the best.
Logical fallacy false equivalence. Definition claiming two things are equivalent when they are not. Example failing to recycle is just as harmful as dumping toxic waste into a river. Logical fallacy false equivalence. Definition claiming two things are equivalent when they are not. Example failing to recycle is just as harmful as dumping toxic waste into a river.
Example question. Example question.
A student running for class president uses the following argument in her speech I am the best person for this role because I am the ideal candidate. A student running for class president uses the following argument in her speech I am the best person for this role because I am the ideal candidate.
Which type of logical fallacy is this an example of? Which type of logical fallacy is this an example of?
A strawman. A strawman.
B hasty generalization. B hasty generalization.
C appeal to authority. C appeal to authority.
D circular reasoning. D circular reasoning.
Answer choice explanations. Answer choice explanations.
Strawman arguments, choice A, misrepresent someone else's argument, which does not occur in this scenario. Strawman arguments, choice A, misrepresent someone else's argument, which does not occur in this scenario.
Hasty generalizations, choice B, involve broad conclusions based on insufficient evidence. In this example, the student provides no evidence, not limited evidence. A different type of logical fallacy is used. Hasty generalizations, choice B, involve broad conclusions based on insufficient evidence. In this example, the student provides no evidence, not limited evidence. A different type of logical fallacy is used.
Appeals to authority, choice C, use an expert's, celebrity's, or authority's opinion as proof. This does not occur in this scenario. Appeals to authority, choice C, use an expert's, celebrity's, or authority's opinion as proof. This does not occur in this scenario.
Circular reasoning, choice D, happens when an argument is supported by a restatement of the claim, rather than by actual evidence. In this scenario, the student argues that they are the best person for the role, but their reasoning is that they are the ideal candidate. These two statements (I am the best person for the role and I am the ideal candidate) mean the same thing, and no additional evidence or support is provided. This is an example of circular reasoning. Circular reasoning, choice D, happens when an argument is supported by a restatement of the claim, rather than by actual evidence. In this scenario, the student argues that they are the best person for the role, but their reasoning is that they are the ideal candidate. These two statements (I am the best person for the role and I am the ideal candidate) mean the same thing, and no additional evidence or support is provided. This is an example of circular reasoning.
T E K S benchmarking inquiry and research (seven to twelve). T E K S benchmarking inquiry and research (seven to twelve).
This guide explores research based strategies for using the T E K S outlined development of inquiry and research skills (grades seven to twelve) to guide instruction. This guide explores research based strategies for using the T E K S outlined development of inquiry and research skills (grades seven to twelve) to guide instruction.
T E K S and research development. T E K S and research development.
T E K S scaffold skills the T E K S provide a framework for developing students' research skills across grades seven to twelve, emphasizing increasingly complex research tasks. T E K S scaffold skills the T E K S provide a framework for developing students' research skills across grades seven to twelve, emphasizing increasingly complex research tasks.
Instructional roadmap by understanding T E K S expectations, instruction can be tailored to effectively develop students' research abilities. Instructional roadmap by understanding T E K S expectations, instruction can be tailored to effectively develop students' research abilities.
T E K S and the research process. T E K S and the research process.
Focus on inquiry encourage students to develop research questions driven by curiosity and a desire for deeper understanding. Focus on inquiry encourage students to develop research questions driven by curiosity and a desire for deeper understanding.
Refined research students progress from basic research questions to more focused, well defined thesis statements in higher grades. Refined research students progress from basic research questions to more focused, well defined thesis statements in higher grades.
Credible sources students learn to identify, evaluate, and utilize credible sources of information from various formats (print and digital). Credible sources students learn to identify, evaluate, and utilize credible sources of information from various formats (print and digital).
Effective communication students present their research findings in various formats tailored to the audience and purpose. Effective communication students present their research findings in various formats tailored to the audience and purpose.
Skill inquiry and research. Skill inquiry and research.
Grade seven student expectations. Grade seven student expectations.
Generate student selected and teacher guided questions for formal and informal inquiry. Generate student selected and teacher guided questions for formal and informal inquiry.
Develop and revise a plan. Develop and revise a plan.
Refine the major research question, if necessary, guided by the answers to a secondary set of questions. Refine the major research question, if necessary, guided by the answers to a secondary set of questions.
Identify and gather relevant information from various sources. Identify and gather relevant information from various sources.
Differentiate between primary and secondary sources. Differentiate between primary and secondary sources.
Synthesize information from various sources. Synthesize information from various sources.
Differentiate between paraphrasing and plagiarism when using source materials. Differentiate between paraphrasing and plagiarism when using source materials.
Examine sources for reliability, credibility, and bias and faulty reasoning, such as hyperbole, emotional appeals, and stereotype. Examine sources for reliability, credibility, and bias and faulty reasoning, such as hyperbole, emotional appeals, and stereotype.
Display academic citations and use source materials ethically. Display academic citations and use source materials ethically.
Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal. Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal.
Grade eight student expectations. Grade eight student expectations.
Generate student selected and teacher guided questions for formal and informal inquiry. Generate student selected and teacher guided questions for formal and informal inquiry.
Develop and revise a plan. Develop and revise a plan.
Refine the major research question, if necessary, guided by the answers to a secondary set of questions. Refine the major research question, if necessary, guided by the answers to a secondary set of questions.
Identify and gather relevant information from various sources. Identify and gather relevant information from various sources.
Differentiate between primary and secondary sources. Differentiate between primary and secondary sources.
Synthesize information from various sources. Synthesize information from various sources.
Differentiate between paraphrasing and plagiarism when using source materials. Differentiate between paraphrasing and plagiarism when using source materials.
Examine sources for reliability, credibility, and bias, including omission and faulty reasoning, such as bandwagon appeals, repetition, and loaded language. Examine sources for reliability, credibility, and bias, including omission and faulty reasoning, such as bandwagon appeals, repetition, and loaded language.
Display academic citations and use source materials ethically. Display academic citations and use source materials ethically.
Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal. Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal.
English one student expectations. English one student expectations.
Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry. Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry.
Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified. Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified.
Develop and revise a plan. Develop and revise a plan.
Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan. Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan.
Locate relevant sources. Locate relevant sources.
Synthesize information from various sources. Synthesize information from various sources.
Examine sources for credibility and bias, including omission and faulty reasoning, such as ad hominem, loaded language, and slippery slope. Examine sources for credibility and bias, including omission and faulty reasoning, such as ad hominem, loaded language, and slippery slope.
Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism. Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism.
Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal. Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal.
English two student expectations. English two student expectations.
Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry. Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry.
Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified. Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified.
Develop and revise a plan. Develop and revise a plan.
Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan. Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan.
Locate relevant sources. Locate relevant sources.
Synthesize information from various sources. Synthesize information from various sources.
Examine sources for credibility and bias, including omission and faulty reasoning, such as incorrect premise, hasty generalizations, and either or fallacies. Examine sources for credibility and bias, including omission and faulty reasoning, such as incorrect premise, hasty generalizations, and either or fallacies.
Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism. Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism.
Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal. Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal.
English three student expectations. English three student expectations.
Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry. Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry.
Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified. Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified.
Develop and revise a plan. Develop and revise a plan.
Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan. Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan.
Locate relevant sources. Locate relevant sources.
Synthesize information from various sources. Synthesize information from various sources.
Examine sources for credibility, bias, and accuracy and faulty reasoning, such as post hoc ad hoc, circular reasoning, red herring, and assumptions. Examine sources for credibility, bias, and accuracy and faulty reasoning, such as post hoc ad hoc, circular reasoning, red herring, and assumptions.
Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism. Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism.
Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal. Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal.
English four student expectations. English four student expectations.
Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry. Develop questions for formal and informal inquiry.
Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified. Critique the research process at each step to implement changes as needs occur and are identified.
Develop and revise a plan. Develop and revise a plan.
Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan. Modify the major research question as necessary to refocus the research plan.
Locate relevant sources. Locate relevant sources.
Synthesize information from various sources. Synthesize information from various sources.
Examine sources for credibility, bias, and accuracy and faulty reasoning, such as straw man, false dilemma, faulty analogies, and non sequitur. Examine sources for credibility, bias, and accuracy and faulty reasoning, such as straw man, false dilemma, faulty analogies, and non sequitur.
Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism. Display academic citations, including for paraphrased and quoted text, and use source materials ethically to avoid plagiarism.
Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal. Present results using an appropriate mode of delivery, whether written, oral, or multimodal.
Remember. Remember.
T E K S as a guide use the T E K S to guide instruction, ensuring students develop a strong foundation in the research process and the ability to conduct high quality research. T E K S as a guide use the T E K S to guide instruction, ensuring students develop a strong foundation in the research process and the ability to conduct high quality research.
Inquiry driven learning foster a culture of curiosity and critical thinking by encouraging students to ask questions that drive their research. Inquiry driven learning foster a culture of curiosity and critical thinking by encouraging students to ask questions that drive their research.
Source evaluation skills equip students with the skills to assess the credibility and relevance of information sources. Source evaluation skills equip students with the skills to assess the credibility and relevance of information sources.
Varied communication provide opportunities for students to present their research findings in different formats (written reports, presentations, and multimedia projects) to diverse audiences. Varied communication provide opportunities for students to present their research findings in different formats (written reports, presentations, and multimedia projects) to diverse audiences.
Bandwagon fallacy appeals to popularity, suggest that the majority's opinion or preference is valid. Example four out of five people prefer lemon lime soap. Bandwagon fallacy appeals to popularity, suggest that the majority's opinion or preference is valid. Example four out of five people prefer lemon lime soap.
Red herring fallacy irrelevant point placed into an argument to throw off the reader or viewer. Example I get good grades. The umpire should have called me safe at the plate. Red herring fallacy irrelevant point placed into an argument to throw off the reader or viewer. Example I get good grades. The umpire should have called me safe at the plate.
False equivalence fallacy claiming two things are equivalent when they are not. Example failing to recycle is just as harmful as dumping toxic waste into a river. False equivalence fallacy claiming two things are equivalent when they are not. Example failing to recycle is just as harmful as dumping toxic waste into a river.
M L A citation style the citation style most commonly used in the humanities. M L A citation style the citation style most commonly used in the humanities.
U R L extension the notation at the end of a web address that categorizes the website type. Example dot e d u (extension for websites certified to be managed by an educational institution). U R L extension the notation at the end of a web address that categorizes the website type. Example dot e d u (extension for websites certified to be managed by an educational institution).
Straw man fallacy when someone undercuts another person's argument, but they didn't make that argument. Example a film critic says, I'm tired of people treated star wars movies like Shakespeare. They're childish. (They may be childish, but nobody claimed they were as good as Shakespeare. )
Biography a non fiction text that an author writes about a different person's life. Biography a non fiction text that an author writes about a different person's life.
Post hoc fallacy (false cause) when someone argues that something happened as a consequence of another event. Example my basketball team was losing before I bought new shoes. Since I bought them, we have won every game. Post hoc fallacy (false cause) when someone argues that something happened as a consequence of another event. Example my basketball team was losing before I bought new shoes. Since I bought them, we have won every game.
Equivocation occurs when two different things are called the same name. Example a candy company says, sugar is a necessary part of the human body. (Everyone has blood sugar (glucose), but cane sugar is not part of the body. )
False dilemma (either or) fallacy presenting two options as the only possibilities when more exist. Example if we don't ban social media, everyone will become addicted to their phones. False dilemma (either or) fallacy presenting two options as the only possibilities when more exist. Example if we don't ban social media, everyone will become addicted to their phones.
Primary source the first hand eye witness accounts of an event. Example a letter written by George Washington about a battle he fought in. Primary source the first hand eye witness accounts of an event. Example a letter written by George Washington about a battle he fought in.
Bibliography a list of all the sources explored in the research process. Bibliography a list of all the sources explored in the research process.
Paraphrased quotation the author is conveying the meaning of what was said without necessarily repeating the exact words of the speaker. Example the president said he would pay teachers more. Paraphrased quotation the author is conveying the meaning of what was said without necessarily repeating the exact words of the speaker. Example the president said he would pay teachers more.
Paraphrase to express the meaning of a text in different words, often used in research writing. Paraphrase to express the meaning of a text in different words, often used in research writing.
Argumentative writing writing meant to persuade the reader to agree with the conclusions of the author. Argumentative writing writing meant to persuade the reader to agree with the conclusions of the author.
Slippery slope fallacy when someone insists a minor action or event is responsible for a long chain of events. Example if we add fresh vegetables to the cafeteria menu, soon you'll want expensive gourmet meals. Slippery slope fallacy when someone insists a minor action or event is responsible for a long chain of events. Example if we add fresh vegetables to the cafeteria menu, soon you'll want expensive gourmet meals.
Reliable source credible source information presented in a professional way, with a formal tone, includes source documentation, and author and or publisher information. Example a textbook. Reliable source credible source information presented in a professional way, with a formal tone, includes source documentation, and author and or publisher information. Example a textbook.
Appeal to authority fallacy claiming something is true because an authority or expert says so without providing further evidence. Example Kim Kardashian endorsed this hamburger, so it must be the best. Appeal to authority fallacy claiming something is true because an authority or expert says so without providing further evidence. Example Kim Kardashian endorsed this hamburger, so it must be the best.
I chart type of graphic organizer used for inquiry and research organizes information by planning, interacting, and integrating evaluating. I chart type of graphic organizer used for inquiry and research organizes information by planning, interacting, and integrating evaluating.
Hasty generalization fallacy when a broad claim is made based on too few observations. Example I stopped in China for a day. It is the greatest nation on earth. Hasty generalization fallacy when a broad claim is made based on too few observations. Example I stopped in China for a day. It is the greatest nation on earth.
Keyword (research) specific, relevant search terms. Keyword (research) specific, relevant search terms.
Ad hominem fallacy when an argument is directed toward a person's character instead of the person. Example in a political debate, the moderator poses the following question to a candidate can you describe your plans for healthcare reform. In response, the candidate says, well, you don't look like you have taken care of your health lately. Ad hominem fallacy when an argument is directed toward a person's character instead of the person. Example in a political debate, the moderator poses the following question to a candidate can you describe your plans for healthcare reform. In response, the candidate says, well, you don't look like you have taken care of your health lately.
Unreliable source information presented in an informal way without documentation, and no author publisher information. Example anonymous blog article. Unreliable source information presented in an informal way without documentation, and no author publisher information. Example anonymous blog article.
Peer reviewed journal a high quality source of information which uses experts to screen each article submitted to the publication. Example the new England journal of medicine. Peer reviewed journal a high quality source of information which uses experts to screen each article submitted to the publication. Example the new England journal of medicine.
Graphic organizer a visual display of the relationships between facts and ideas. Example graphic organizers, such as story maps, timelines, venn diagrams and K W L charts, help students organize information. Graphic organizer a visual display of the relationships between facts and ideas. Example graphic organizers, such as story maps, timelines, venn diagrams and K W L charts, help students organize information.
Citation style a set of guidelines for citing the basic information required to identify and locate a specific publication within a written work. Citation style a set of guidelines for citing the basic information required to identify and locate a specific publication within a written work.
Autobiography a non fiction text that an author writes about their own life. Autobiography a non fiction text that an author writes about their own life.
False analogy false causation is when it is assumed that because two things happened together, one caused the other. Example the local private school has better teachers than the local public school because one hundred percent of the students in the private school get into college. False analogy false causation is when it is assumed that because two things happened together, one caused the other. Example the local private school has better teachers than the local public school because one hundred percent of the students in the private school get into college.
Ergo propter hoc when a conclusion is made that lacks a basis in facts. Example children with a larger shoe size have better penmanship. (The older a kid gets, the more refined his or her writing will be because it develops with maturity. )
Fallacy illegitimate argument or irrelevant point that doesn't have evidence. Fallacy illegitimate argument or irrelevant point that doesn't have evidence.
Logical fallacy an error in reasoning that undermines an argument. Example a slippery slope fallacy. Logical fallacy an error in reasoning that undermines an argument. Example a slippery slope fallacy.
Secondary source these resources are used to interpret the primary sources in order to determine their validity written about the primary sources. Example a textbook explaining a battle. Secondary source these resources are used to interpret the primary sources in order to determine their validity written about the primary sources. Example a textbook explaining a battle.
Domain address the official name of a website. Example w w w dot s i dot e d u is the domain address for the Smithsonian institute. Domain address the official name of a website. Example w w w dot s i dot e d u is the domain address for the Smithsonian institute.
Circular reasoning fallacy using the conclusion as evidence for the argument, creating a loop without proof. Example he's a great leader because he leads well. Circular reasoning fallacy using the conclusion as evidence for the argument, creating a loop without proof. Example he's a great leader because he leads well.