Normalized Text
E L A R ten vocabulary development. E L A R ten vocabulary development.
Skill deeper meanings. Skill deeper meanings.
You may need to draw a deeper meaning from the text. While denotation is a literal dictionary meaning, these questions might require examining the connotation, the idea or feeling behind the word or phrase. You may need to draw a deeper meaning from the text. While denotation is a literal dictionary meaning, these questions might require examining the connotation, the idea or feeling behind the word or phrase.
Core concepts. Core concepts.
Foreshadowing the narrator or character hints at a future plot point. Foreshadowing the narrator or character hints at a future plot point.
Symbolism when an object stands for something larger than itself. Symbolism when an object stands for something larger than itself.
Recurring theme the repetition of a theme image throughout the story to symbolize the meaning. Recurring theme the repetition of a theme image throughout the story to symbolize the meaning.
For example, in Disney's Frozen, the closed shut door is repeated throughout the movie in various scenes. For example, in Disney's Frozen, the closed shut door is repeated throughout the movie in various scenes.
Satire the use of humor or exaggeration to critique human nature or a character. Satire the use of humor or exaggeration to critique human nature or a character.
Irony an incongruity between what the reader expects the author to mean and what they actually mean. Irony an incongruity between what the reader expects the author to mean and what they actually mean.
There are people who think that honesty is always the best policy. This is a superstition there are times when the appearance of it is worth six of it. Mark Twain uses a common expression but uses it as a set up to debunk the expression. There are people who think that honesty is always the best policy. This is a superstition there are times when the appearance of it is worth six of it. Mark Twain uses a common expression but uses it as a set up to debunk the expression.
There are three types of irony verbal irony the contrast between what is said and what is meant. Situational irony discrepancy between what happens and what the reader expects to happen. Dramatic irony the contrast between what a character sees or says and what the reader understands to be true. There are three types of irony verbal irony the contrast between what is said and what is meant. Situational irony discrepancy between what happens and what the reader expects to happen. Dramatic irony the contrast between what a character sees or says and what the reader understands to be true.
Irony is tricky to spot and is often confused. Make sure the other choices are wrong before picking this. Irony is tricky to spot and is often confused. Make sure the other choices are wrong before picking this.
Understatement when the author minimizes a significant point for effect. Understatement when the author minimizes a significant point for effect.
Strategies for success. Strategies for success.
Use the process of elimination when choosing the correct figurative rhetorical device. Use the process of elimination when choosing the correct figurative rhetorical device.
Maintain the author's tone and purpose when choosing the proper connotation of a word. Maintain the author's tone and purpose when choosing the proper connotation of a word.
Remember, connotation is how the word feels, not necessarily what it means. Remember, connotation is how the word feels, not necessarily what it means.
Example question one. Example question one.
Read this excerpt from Robinson Crusoe by Daniel Defoe before answering the question that follows. Read this excerpt from Robinson Crusoe by Daniel Defoe before answering the question that follows.
Being the third son of the family and not bred to any trade, my head began to be filled very early with rambling thoughts. My father, who was very ancient, had given me a competent share of learning, as far as house education and a country free school generally go, and designed me for the law but I would be satisfied with nothing but going to sea and my inclination to this led me so strongly against the will, nay, the commands of my father, and against all the entreaties and persuasions of my mother and other friends, that there seemed to be something fatal in that propensity of nature, tending directly to the life of misery which was to befall me. Being the third son of the family and not bred to any trade, my head began to be filled very early with rambling thoughts. My father, who was very ancient, had given me a competent share of learning, as far as house education and a country free school generally go, and designed me for the law but I would be satisfied with nothing but going to sea and my inclination to this led me so strongly against the will, nay, the commands of my father, and against all the entreaties and persuasions of my mother and other friends, that there seemed to be something fatal in that propensity of nature, tending directly to the life of misery which was to befall me.
Which literary device is used at the end of the paragraph. Which literary device is used at the end of the paragraph.
A satire. A satire.
B understatement. B understatement.
C foreshadowing. C foreshadowing.
D irony. D irony.
Answer choice explanations. Answer choice explanations.
This question directs you to focus on the end of the paragraph to choose the correct literary device. Using the process of elimination, foreshadowing (choice C) is the best choice. The narrator hints at what is coming in the rest of the novel by mentioning the life and misery which was to befall me. This question directs you to focus on the end of the paragraph to choose the correct literary device. Using the process of elimination, foreshadowing (choice C) is the best choice. The narrator hints at what is coming in the rest of the novel by mentioning the life and misery which was to befall me.
This paragraph doesn't critique human nature at the end, so choice A doesn't work. This paragraph doesn't critique human nature at the end, so choice A doesn't work.
There is no minimization of the problem or description, so choice B doesn't work. There is no minimization of the problem or description, so choice B doesn't work.
Choice D is not a good choice because the reader's expectations are not set up against what occurs in the paragraph. Choice D is not a good choice because the reader's expectations are not set up against what occurs in the paragraph.
Example question two. Example question two.
Which word in the passage has a negative connotation. Which word in the passage has a negative connotation.
A competent. A competent.
B designed. B designed.
C inclination. C inclination.
D entreaties. D entreaties.
Answer choice explanations. Answer choice explanations.
To answer this question, consider the passage's word choices and how they feel. Look at each option and consider whether the word is used with a negative or positive implication. You might also consider how the narrator feels about the topic and what is being described. The most negative term would be choice D, entreaties. The reader can imagine the nagging and annoying nature of the mother's pleas for the narrator not to go to sea. To answer this question, consider the passage's word choices and how they feel. Look at each option and consider whether the word is used with a negative or positive implication. You might also consider how the narrator feels about the topic and what is being described. The most negative term would be choice D, entreaties. The reader can imagine the nagging and annoying nature of the mother's pleas for the narrator not to go to sea.
The other options have either positive or neutral connotations. The other options have either positive or neutral connotations.
In choice A, while not exceptional, a competent share of learning would lead the narrator to a successful life. In choice A, while not exceptional, a competent share of learning would lead the narrator to a successful life.
In choice B, while the narrator chooses to go to sea instead of law, it would have been normal for parents to hope for their children's career or life path. In choice B, while the narrator chooses to go to sea instead of law, it would have been normal for parents to hope for their children's career or life path.
In choice C, an inclination means someone's preference or desire, which would be a more positive connotation. In choice C, an inclination means someone's preference or desire, which would be a more positive connotation.
Word formation. Word formation.
Word formation is the production of new words. Word formation is the production of new words.
Compounding is combining two free morphemes to make a compound word. The meaning of some compound words can be derived from the words they're made from (e g, doghouse), while other compound words have different meanings than those they're made from (rainbow). Compounding is combining two free morphemes to make a compound word. The meaning of some compound words can be derived from the words they're made from (e g, doghouse), while other compound words have different meanings than those they're made from (rainbow).
Dog plus house equals doghouse. Dog plus house equals doghouse.
Rain plus bow equals rainbow. Rain plus bow equals rainbow.
Blending is joining parts of two or more words to make a new word. The meaning is usually a combination of the words that were blended together. Blending is joining parts of two or more words to make a new word. The meaning is usually a combination of the words that were blended together.
Breakfast plus lunch equals brunch. Breakfast plus lunch equals brunch.
Smoke plus fog equals smog. Smoke plus fog equals smog.
Derivation is creating a new word from another word, typically by adding an affix (prefix or suffix) to a base word. This often changes the word's part of speech. Derivation is creating a new word from another word, typically by adding an affix (prefix or suffix) to a base word. This often changes the word's part of speech.
Help (verb) plus ful (suffix) equals helpful (adjective). Help (verb) plus ful (suffix) equals helpful (adjective).
Happy (adjective) plus ness (suffix) equals happiness (noun). Happy (adjective) plus ness (suffix) equals happiness (noun).
Back formation is the creation of a new word by removing an affix. Back formation is the creation of a new word by removing an affix.
Edit is back formed from editor. Edit is back formed from editor.
Diagnose is back formed from diagnosis. Diagnose is back formed from diagnosis.
An acronym is a word made by pronouncing the initials of a phrase as its own word. An acronym is a word made by pronouncing the initials of a phrase as its own word.
P I N personal identification number. P I N personal identification number.
A W O L absent without leave. A W O L absent without leave.
A calque is an expression that becomes part of a language by translating it word for word from another language. A calque is an expression that becomes part of a language by translating it word for word from another language.
Point of view in English calques point de vue in French. Point of view in English calques point de vue in French.
Standpoint in English calques standpunkt in German. Standpoint in English calques standpunkt in German.
A neologism is a newly used word or phrase that is not yet formally accepted into a language. Neologisms often reflect current cultural trends. A neologism is a newly used word or phrase that is not yet formally accepted into a language. Neologisms often reflect current cultural trends.
Staycation. Staycation.
Chillax. Chillax.
Word analysis. Word analysis.
You can learn a lot about words by breaking them up and analyzing the parts. Morphology is the study of word form in a language. Words are formed with morphemes, which are the smallest meaningful units in a language. You can learn a lot about words by breaking them up and analyzing the parts. Morphology is the study of word form in a language. Words are formed with morphemes, which are the smallest meaningful units in a language.
Roots and affixes. Roots and affixes.
Morphemes are categorized as roots and affixes. Morphemes are categorized as roots and affixes.
Roots are the bases to which affixes may be attached. They provide the core meaning of a word. Roots are the bases to which affixes may be attached. They provide the core meaning of a word.
A root may be free, meaning it can stand alone as its own word, or bound, meaning it cannot stand alone. A root may be free, meaning it can stand alone as its own word, or bound, meaning it cannot stand alone.
Examples of roots that can stand alone include those derived from the Anglo Saxon language. Examples include help. Love. Friend. Examples of roots that can stand alone include those derived from the Anglo Saxon language. Examples include help. Love. Friend.
Examples of roots that cannot stand alone include Greek and Latin. Examples include geo (Greek), meaning earth, which can be found in words such as geography and geology. Omni (Latin), meaning all, which is part of words like omniscient and omnivore. Examples of roots that cannot stand alone include Greek and Latin. Examples include geo (Greek), meaning earth, which can be found in words such as geography and geology. Omni (Latin), meaning all, which is part of words like omniscient and omnivore.
Affixes are morphemes that can be attached to roots to modify them somehow. An affix cannot stand alone as its own word. Affixes are morphemes that can be attached to roots to modify them somehow. An affix cannot stand alone as its own word.
Affixes can be categorized as prefixes and suffixes. Affixes can be categorized as prefixes and suffixes.
A prefix comes before the root of a word. Examples include un. Re. Dis. A prefix comes before the root of a word. Examples include un. Re. Dis.
A suffix comes after the root of a word. Examples include ed. Ful. Ing. A suffix comes after the root of a word. Examples include ed. Ful. Ing.
Derivational and inflectional affixes. Derivational and inflectional affixes.
Derivational affix alters the meaning or part of speech of a word. Derivational affix alters the meaning or part of speech of a word.
When the prefix re is added to do to form redo, it changes the meaning to to do again. When the prefix re is added to do to form redo, it changes the meaning to to do again.
When the suffix ful is added to the noun joy, it becomes the adjective joyful. When the suffix ful is added to the noun joy, it becomes the adjective joyful.
Inflectional affix alters the form of the word typically does not change the part of speech. Inflectional affix alters the form of the word typically does not change the part of speech.
Loud, louder, and loudest can all be used as either adjectives or adverbs. Loud, louder, and loudest can all be used as either adjectives or adverbs.
Jump, jumps, jumped, and jumping are all verbs, but they are in different tenses. Jump, jumps, jumped, and jumping are all verbs, but they are in different tenses.
Derivational affixes can be prefixes and suffixes, while inflectional affixes are usually only suffixes in the English language. Derivational affixes can be prefixes and suffixes, while inflectional affixes are usually only suffixes in the English language.
Let's analyze the word unacceptable the root is accept, which is a verb that means to agree or take something that is offered. Along with the root, unacceptable contains both a prefix and a suffix. The prefix un means not or changes the root to its opposite meaning. The suffix able means capable of and also changes the root from a verb to an adjective. So the word unacceptable is an adjective describing something offered that someone cannot or does not want to take. Let's analyze the word unacceptable the root is accept, which is a verb that means to agree or take something that is offered. Along with the root, unacceptable contains both a prefix and a suffix. The prefix un means not or changes the root to its opposite meaning. The suffix able means capable of and also changes the root from a verb to an adjective. So the word unacceptable is an adjective describing something offered that someone cannot or does not want to take.
Both the root on its own, accept, and the full word, unacceptable, can be used meaningfully in a sentence, such as I will accept the fifty dollar reward, but my brother finds monetary gifts unacceptable and will not. Both the root on its own, accept, and the full word, unacceptable, can be used meaningfully in a sentence, such as I will accept the fifty dollar reward, but my brother finds monetary gifts unacceptable and will not.
Spelling rules. Spelling rules.
Adding a prefix does not change the spelling of a root, but in some cases, adding a suffix does impact spelling. The following table describes the basic rules and their exceptions for the addition of a suffix change y to i when the root word ends with a y, you will often change the y to an i worry to worrier. You will usually keep the y if the preceding letter is a vowel (annoyance) and when the suffix begins with i (worrying). Double the consonant if a root ends in a short vowel followed by a consonant, you will double the consonant bat to batter. This rule does not apply to words ending in the consonants w, x, or y. Drop the e drop the e off of the end of a root word if the suffix begins with a vowel slide to sliding. If a root ends in c e or g e and the suffix begins with a or o. I e to y when the root word ends in i e, you will change it to y if the suffix begins with i lie to lying. Adding a prefix does not change the spelling of a root, but in some cases, adding a suffix does impact spelling. The following table describes the basic rules and their exceptions for the addition of a suffix change y to i when the root word ends with a y, you will often change the y to an i worry to worrier. You will usually keep the y if the preceding letter is a vowel (annoyance) and when the suffix begins with i (worrying). Double the consonant if a root ends in a short vowel followed by a consonant, you will double the consonant bat to batter. This rule does not apply to words ending in the consonants w, x, or y. Drop the e drop the e off of the end of a root word if the suffix begins with a vowel slide to sliding. If a root ends in c e or g e and the suffix begins with a or o. I e to y when the root word ends in i e, you will change it to y if the suffix begins with i lie to lying.
Tiers of vocabulary. Tiers of vocabulary.
Tier one basic vocabulary common words that are already familiar to students when they enter school. These words do not need to be taught in a classroom setting. Tier one basic vocabulary common words that are already familiar to students when they enter school. These words do not need to be taught in a classroom setting.
Examples ball, shoe, run, stop. Examples ball, shoe, run, stop.
Tier two high frequency academic words words that students will encounter frequently in multiple content areas. Many of these are process words that commonly appear in assessments. Tier two high frequency academic words words that students will encounter frequently in multiple content areas. Many of these are process words that commonly appear in assessments.
Examples describe, explain, analyze, evaluate. Examples describe, explain, analyze, evaluate.
Tier three low frequency, domain specific words academic words that are specific to a particular content area or discipline. These are words that would appear in a subject specific textbook or in the glossary of an informational text. Tier three low frequency, domain specific words academic words that are specific to a particular content area or discipline. These are words that would appear in a subject specific textbook or in the glossary of an informational text.
Examples photosynthesis, catalyst, division, square root, economy, politics. Examples photosynthesis, catalyst, division, square root, economy, politics.
A triangular diagram divided into three tiers. The top tier is orange, labeled tier three, and describes domain specific language. The middle tier is green, labeled tier two, and describes high frequency academic language. The bottom tier is yellow, labeled tier one, and describes familiar, everyday language. A triangular diagram divided into three tiers. The top tier is orange, labeled tier three, and describes domain specific language. The middle tier is green, labeled tier two, and describes high frequency academic language. The bottom tier is yellow, labeled tier one, and describes familiar, everyday language.
Determining the meaning of words. Determining the meaning of words.
There is a time and place for direct vocabulary instruction in the classroom. However, indirect vocabulary instruction is common. So, strong readers also need strategies for determining the meaning of unknown words they come across in text. Morphemic analysis and contextual analysis are two such strategies. There is a time and place for direct vocabulary instruction in the classroom. However, indirect vocabulary instruction is common. So, strong readers also need strategies for determining the meaning of unknown words they come across in text. Morphemic analysis and contextual analysis are two such strategies.
Morphemic analysis. Morphemic analysis.
Morphemic analysis, also known as structural analysis or simply word analysis, uses meaningful word parts, known as morphemes, as clues to determine a word's meaning. Morphemic analysis, also known as structural analysis or simply word analysis, uses meaningful word parts, known as morphemes, as clues to determine a word's meaning.
Morphemes are categorized as roots and affixes. Morphemes are categorized as roots and affixes.
Roots are the bases to which affixes may be attached. They provide the core meaning of a word. Roots are the bases to which affixes may be attached. They provide the core meaning of a word.
A root may be free, meaning it can stand alone as its own word, or bound, meaning it cannot stand alone. A root may be free, meaning it can stand alone as its own word, or bound, meaning it cannot stand alone.
Examples of roots that can stand alone include those derived from the Anglo Saxon language. Examples include help. Love. Friend. Examples of roots that can stand alone include those derived from the Anglo Saxon language. Examples include help. Love. Friend.
Examples of roots that cannot stand alone include Greek and Latin. Examples include geo (Greek), meaning earth, which can be found in words such as geography and geology. Omni (Latin), meaning all, which is part of words like omniscient and omnivore. Examples of roots that cannot stand alone include Greek and Latin. Examples include geo (Greek), meaning earth, which can be found in words such as geography and geology. Omni (Latin), meaning all, which is part of words like omniscient and omnivore.
Affixes are morphemes that can be attached to roots to modify them somehow. An affix cannot stand alone as its own word. Affixes are morphemes that can be attached to roots to modify them somehow. An affix cannot stand alone as its own word.
Affixes can be categorized as prefixes and suffixes. Affixes can be categorized as prefixes and suffixes.
A prefix comes before the root of a word. Examples include un. Re. Dis. A prefix comes before the root of a word. Examples include un. Re. Dis.
A suffix comes after the root of a word. Examples include ed. Ful. Ing. A suffix comes after the root of a word. Examples include ed. Ful. Ing.
When readers break words into meaningful parts, determine what those parts mean, and put them back together to determine the meaning of the whole word, they are using morphemic analysis. Let's use the word unexpectedly as an example the prefix un means not. The root expected means likely. The suffix ly means like. All the morphemes together mean in a way that is not likely, which is the definition of unexpectedly. When readers break words into meaningful parts, determine what those parts mean, and put them back together to determine the meaning of the whole word, they are using morphemic analysis. Let's use the word unexpectedly as an example the prefix un means not. The root expected means likely. The suffix ly means like. All the morphemes together mean in a way that is not likely, which is the definition of unexpectedly.
While morphemic analysis is a useful strategy, it doesn't always work. For example, some word parts that appear to be affixes are really just part of the word as a whole. While morphemic analysis is a useful strategy, it doesn't always work. For example, some word parts that appear to be affixes are really just part of the word as a whole.
For example, ing is a suffix commonly used at the end of present tense verbs. However, here, it is part of the noun ceiling. For example, ing is a suffix commonly used at the end of present tense verbs. However, here, it is part of the noun ceiling.
Contextual analysis. Contextual analysis.
Strong readers should also be able to use contextual analysis. Contextual analysis involves using the surrounding text to determine the meaning of a word. Text that is helpful in determining the meaning of an unknown word is known as a context clue. Strong readers should also be able to use contextual analysis. Contextual analysis involves using the surrounding text to determine the meaning of a word. Text that is helpful in determining the meaning of an unknown word is known as a context clue.
Following, you will see five different types of context clues. In the examples, the context clue is italicized. Following, you will see five different types of context clues. In the examples, the context clue is italicized.
Definition an unknown word is defined in a sentence. Definition an unknown word is defined in a sentence.
Unknown word buche de noel. Unknown word buche de noel.
Direct a buche de noel is a filled cake rolled and decorated like a log. Direct a buche de noel is a filled cake rolled and decorated like a log.
Appositive a buche de noel, or a filled cake rolled and decorated like a log, is my favorite Christmas dessert. Appositive a buche de noel, or a filled cake rolled and decorated like a log, is my favorite Christmas dessert.
Example an example of the unknown word is provided. Example an example of the unknown word is provided.
Unknown word biomes. Unknown word biomes.
In geography, we are learning about biomes, such as deserts. In geography, we are learning about biomes, such as deserts.
Synonym a word that is similar to the unknown word is provided. Synonym a word that is similar to the unknown word is provided.
Unknown word timid. Unknown word timid.
The new student acted timid and shy on his first day. The new student acted timid and shy on his first day.
Antonym a word that is opposite in meaning to the unknown word is provided. Antonym a word that is opposite in meaning to the unknown word is provided.
Unknown word crotchety. Unknown word crotchety.
Unlike my dog, who is friendly, my neighbor's dog is crotchety. Unlike my dog, who is friendly, my neighbor's dog is crotchety.
Inference the definition of an unknown word is implied by the situation or other clues. Inference the definition of an unknown word is implied by the situation or other clues.
Unknown word fatigued. Unknown word fatigued.
Alice was so fatigued that she could barely keep her eyes open. Alice was so fatigued that she could barely keep her eyes open.
Beyond literal (or denotative) meanings, readers must also be able to identify figurative and connotative meanings of words. Context clue strategies can be very helpful in determining these, as well as the appropriate definition for multiple meaning words. Beyond literal (or denotative) meanings, readers must also be able to identify figurative and connotative meanings of words. Context clue strategies can be very helpful in determining these, as well as the appropriate definition for multiple meaning words.
Analyzing compound words. Analyzing compound words.
Compound words are two complete words that have joined together as one word with a new meaning. Compound words are two complete words that have joined together as one word with a new meaning.
For example bed plus time equals bedtime. For example bed plus time equals bedtime.
The meaning of each individual word can be analyzed to understand the meaning of the new compound word. In the example above, bedtime is the time for bed. The meaning of each individual word can be analyzed to understand the meaning of the new compound word. In the example above, bedtime is the time for bed.
Jargon and homographs. Jargon and homographs.
Jargon is unique words or expressions that are used in a particular profession or setting so use contextual clues to define these words that are not a part of our everyday vocabulary. Jargon is unique words or expressions that are used in a particular profession or setting so use contextual clues to define these words that are not a part of our everyday vocabulary.
Business jargon sweat equity claiming partial ownership of a business versus getting paid. The nine to five a typical workday. Business jargon sweat equity claiming partial ownership of a business versus getting paid. The nine to five a typical workday.
Medical jargon script common slang for a prescription. Bagging to assist a patient's breathing with a handheld squeeze bag and face mask. Medical jargon script common slang for a prescription. Bagging to assist a patient's breathing with a handheld squeeze bag and face mask.
Readers must also be aware of homographs when determining the meaning of unknown words. Homographs are words that are spelled the same but have different meanings, and sometimes pronunciations too. Readers must also be aware of homographs when determining the meaning of unknown words. Homographs are words that are spelled the same but have different meanings, and sometimes pronunciations too.
A reader might be confused if they think of the dialogue, I object in a dramatic courtroom scene as an object you can hold in your hand. Context is key. A reader might be confused if they think of the dialogue, I object in a dramatic courtroom scene as an object you can hold in your hand. Context is key.
When to use a dictionary. When to use a dictionary.
Use a print or digital dictionary when context clues and structural analysis fail. Dictionary use should not be the first step but a strategic choice when no helpful context clues are present, the word cannot be broken into recognizable parts, and the word is critical to understanding the sentence or passage. Use a print or digital dictionary when context clues and structural analysis fail. Dictionary use should not be the first step but a strategic choice when no helpful context clues are present, the word cannot be broken into recognizable parts, and the word is critical to understanding the sentence or passage.
Select the correct definition by matching it to the word's part of speech and context. Check multiple meanings and confirm which one fits. Select the correct definition by matching it to the word's part of speech and context. Check multiple meanings and confirm which one fits.
Connotation and denotation. Connotation and denotation.
Many words in the English language are loaded with meaning beyond their surface definitions. When comparing a word's emotional meaning with its dictionary definition, a reader compares its connotation with its denotation. Many words in the English language are loaded with meaning beyond their surface definitions. When comparing a word's emotional meaning with its dictionary definition, a reader compares its connotation with its denotation.
Connotation is a term that refers to the way the word makes you feel its emotional or cultural associations. A word can have a positive or negative connotation or emotional charge. Connotation is a term that refers to the way the word makes you feel its emotional or cultural associations. A word can have a positive or negative connotation or emotional charge.
For example, inexpensive has a positive connotation compared to cheap, which has a negative connotation. For example, inexpensive has a positive connotation compared to cheap, which has a negative connotation.
Denotation is a term that refers to the literal dictionary definition of a word. Denotation is a term that refers to the literal dictionary definition of a word.
For example, inexpensive means an object that does not cost much, with the word cheap listed as a synonym. Therefore, while inexpensive and cheap have the same denotation, they each have a different connotation. For example, inexpensive means an object that does not cost much, with the word cheap listed as a synonym. Therefore, while inexpensive and cheap have the same denotation, they each have a different connotation.
Understanding connotation and denotation is vital, especially in the context of vocabulary development and analyzing word meanings. Grasping these concepts empowers educators to effectively teach vocabulary while fostering students' capacity to understand the nuances of language. Understanding connotation and denotation is vital, especially in the context of vocabulary development and analyzing word meanings. Grasping these concepts empowers educators to effectively teach vocabulary while fostering students' capacity to understand the nuances of language.
Importance in vocabulary development. Importance in vocabulary development.
Precision in communication understanding denotation encourages clear and precise communication, helping students use words accurately in writing and speaking while avoiding ambiguity. Precision in communication understanding denotation encourages clear and precise communication, helping students use words accurately in writing and speaking while avoiding ambiguity.
Depth of understanding understanding connotation allows students to appreciate words beyond their literal definitions. It lets them value the subtleties and nuances of language, leading to more sophisticated communication skills. Depth of understanding understanding connotation allows students to appreciate words beyond their literal definitions. It lets them value the subtleties and nuances of language, leading to more sophisticated communication skills.
Cultural and emotional awareness connotations often carry cultural and emotional significance, influencing the perception and interpretation of words. Teaching connotation fosters cultural and emotional awareness while encouraging empathy and effective communication in varied contexts. Cultural and emotional awareness connotations often carry cultural and emotional significance, influencing the perception and interpretation of words. Teaching connotation fosters cultural and emotional awareness while encouraging empathy and effective communication in varied contexts.
Analysis of word meaning. Analysis of word meaning.
Multiple meaning words many words have multiple meanings, each with its own connotations. Analyzing both denotation and connotation helps students grasp the intended meaning in different contexts, enhancing their comprehension skills. Multiple meaning words many words have multiple meanings, each with its own connotations. Analyzing both denotation and connotation helps students grasp the intended meaning in different contexts, enhancing their comprehension skills.
Interpreting texts in textual analysis, recognizing connotations enables students to uncover deeper layers of meaning and understand the author's intent. Such recognition promotes critical thinking by encouraging students to consider the nuances of word choice. Interpreting texts in textual analysis, recognizing connotations enables students to uncover deeper layers of meaning and understand the author's intent. Such recognition promotes critical thinking by encouraging students to consider the nuances of word choice.
Instructional applications. Instructional applications.
Semantic mapping encourage students to create semantic maps illustrating words' denotative and connotative meanings. Visual representation enhances understanding and retention while facilitating deeper vocabulary engagement. Semantic mapping encourage students to create semantic maps illustrating words' denotative and connotative meanings. Visual representation enhances understanding and retention while facilitating deeper vocabulary engagement.
Contextual analysis provide students with passages or sentences that have words with multiple meanings. Guide them through identifying and analyzing denotations and connotations in different contexts, helping them deepen their understanding of word usage. Contextual analysis provide students with passages or sentences that have words with multiple meanings. Guide them through identifying and analyzing denotations and connotations in different contexts, helping them deepen their understanding of word usage.
Vocabulary in literature incorporate excerpts showcasing rich and varied vocabulary usage. Engage students in discussions about the connotations of specific words, how they contribute to a text's overall tone and theme, and how they help students infer an author's purpose. Vocabulary in literature incorporate excerpts showcasing rich and varied vocabulary usage. Engage students in discussions about the connotations of specific words, how they contribute to a text's overall tone and theme, and how they help students infer an author's purpose.
Teaching tips to increase vocabulary. Teaching tips to increase vocabulary.
Vocabulary development refers to students' ability to effectively know and use words in their listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Research on how students learn to read demonstrates that effective vocabulary development promotes comprehension and reading overall. Vocabulary development refers to students' ability to effectively know and use words in their listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Research on how students learn to read demonstrates that effective vocabulary development promotes comprehension and reading overall.
When learning and using new vocabulary, students must be able to define and know when to use a word, use the term in multiple contexts, and recognize when it is misused. When learning and using new vocabulary, students must be able to define and know when to use a word, use the term in multiple contexts, and recognize when it is misused.
Students must be exposed to vocabulary repeatedly and in different contexts. This strategy will deepen their understanding of the vocabulary and its application. Students must be exposed to vocabulary repeatedly and in different contexts. This strategy will deepen their understanding of the vocabulary and its application.
Foundational vocabulary strategies. Foundational vocabulary strategies.
Structural or morphemic analysis students use word parts, known as morphemes (roots and affixes), to determine a word's meaning. Structural or morphemic analysis students use word parts, known as morphemes (roots and affixes), to determine a word's meaning.
Contextual analysis students treat the surrounding text as a clue, using it to determine the meaning of a word. Contextual analysis students treat the surrounding text as a clue, using it to determine the meaning of a word.
Connotation and denotation students understand that words have multiple meanings, including a literal meaning (denotation) and implied meanings (connotation). Connotation and denotation students understand that words have multiple meanings, including a literal meaning (denotation) and implied meanings (connotation).
Instructional strategies. Instructional strategies.
While foundational vocabulary strategies foster independent word learning, certain terms especially academic vocabulary require explicit instruction to ensure deep comprehension and long term retention. The following versatile, evidence based strategies are effective for directly teaching vocabulary in a structured and meaningful way pre teach vocabulary previewing a text to identify and explicitly teach challenging vocabulary sets students up for success. Introducing these words before reading builds schema and reduces cognitive load during reading. While foundational vocabulary strategies foster independent word learning, certain terms especially academic vocabulary require explicit instruction to ensure deep comprehension and long term retention. The following versatile, evidence based strategies are effective for directly teaching vocabulary in a structured and meaningful way pre teach vocabulary previewing a text to identify and explicitly teach challenging vocabulary sets students up for success. Introducing these words before reading builds schema and reduces cognitive load during reading.
Graphic organizers students visually connect and internalize word meanings. Graphic organizers students visually connect and internalize word meanings.
Semantic mapping students visually map relationships among related words and concepts, deepening their understanding of a word's meaning and connections. Semantic mapping students visually map relationships among related words and concepts, deepening their understanding of a word's meaning and connections.
Frayer models students explore vocabulary by defining the word, listing key characteristics, giving examples, and identifying non examples. Frayer models students explore vocabulary by defining the word, listing key characteristics, giving examples, and identifying non examples.
Frayer model diagram. The four squares, arranged two by two, with a circle in the middle. The center circle is labeled onomatopoeia. The top left square is titled directions. When a word sounds like the noise it describes. A word the imitates or evokes the sound it refers to. The top right box is titled examples. Buzz, crash, boom, splash, crackle, whoosh. The bottom left square is titled facts characteristics. Mimics natural or real world sounds. Often used in poems, stories, and comics. Helps create vivid imagery or sensory effects. The bottom right square is labeled non examples. Frayer model diagram. The four squares, arranged two by two, with a circle in the middle. The center circle is labeled onomatopoeia. The top left square is titled directions. When a word sounds like the noise it describes. A word the imitates or evokes the sound it refers to. The top right box is titled examples. Buzz, crash, boom, splash, crackle, whoosh. The bottom left square is titled facts characteristics. Mimics natural or real world sounds. Often used in poems, stories, and comics. Helps create vivid imagery or sensory effects. The bottom right square is labeled non examples.
Word webs before reading, students place each target word in the center of a web. As they encounter the word in context, they add associated ideas, phrases, or synonyms around it, reinforcing word meaning through contextual cues. Word webs before reading, students place each target word in the center of a web. As they encounter the word in context, they add associated ideas, phrases, or synonyms around it, reinforcing word meaning through contextual cues.
Word walls display high utility and subject specific vocabulary prominently in the classroom. Organize words thematically or categorically. Word walls display high utility and subject specific vocabulary prominently in the classroom. Organize words thematically or categorically.
Image of a word wall. Twenty six squares, each with an assigned letter. The letter a has the words alliteration and allusion. The letter h has the word hyperbole. The letter s has the word simile. Image of a word wall. Twenty six squares, each with an assigned letter. The letter a has the words alliteration and allusion. The letter h has the word hyperbole. The letter s has the word simile.
Vocabulary notebooks students maintain personal notebooks where they record new vocabulary, definitions in their own words, sample sentences, synonyms antonyms, and illustrations. Journals can make vocabulary learning more individualized and reflective. Vocabulary notebooks students maintain personal notebooks where they record new vocabulary, definitions in their own words, sample sentences, synonyms antonyms, and illustrations. Journals can make vocabulary learning more individualized and reflective.
Research has found that it is not effective for students to copy definitions from a reference source to learn new vocabulary. Context matters. Research has found that it is not effective for students to copy definitions from a reference source to learn new vocabulary. Context matters.
Implicit instruction. Implicit instruction.
Implicit vocabulary instruction occurs naturally through rich language experiences. These strategies support vocabulary acquisition through meaningful exposure rather than direct teaching foster rich oral language experiences create frequent opportunities for students to listen to and engage in conversations especially with adults and fluent speakers for authentic exposure to sophisticated language. Implicit vocabulary instruction occurs naturally through rich language experiences. These strategies support vocabulary acquisition through meaningful exposure rather than direct teaching foster rich oral language experiences create frequent opportunities for students to listen to and engage in conversations especially with adults and fluent speakers for authentic exposure to sophisticated language.
Read aloud regularly read aloud to students across all grade levels to model fluent reading and expose them to complex language. Pause periodically to discuss unfamiliar words and clarify meaning through context and discussion. Read aloud regularly read aloud to students across all grade levels to model fluent reading and expose them to complex language. Pause periodically to discuss unfamiliar words and clarify meaning through context and discussion.
Encourage independent reading provide students with access to high quality, appropriately leveled texts across a range of genres. Encourage independent reading provide students with access to high quality, appropriately leveled texts across a range of genres.
Assessment of vocabulary. Assessment of vocabulary.
Vocabulary knowledge directly supports reading comprehension, oral expression, and academic success across content areas. Students with strong vocabularies are better equipped to interpret complex texts, articulate their thoughts, and participate in academic discussions. Vocabulary knowledge directly supports reading comprehension, oral expression, and academic success across content areas. Students with strong vocabularies are better equipped to interpret complex texts, articulate their thoughts, and participate in academic discussions.
Effective vocabulary assessment does more than test whether students can memorize definitions. It focuses on how well students understand, use, and flexibly apply words in context. The goal is to assess vocabulary as it naturally appears so that instruction can build deeper, more functional word knowledge over time. Effective vocabulary assessment does more than test whether students can memorize definitions. It focuses on how well students understand, use, and flexibly apply words in context. The goal is to assess vocabulary as it naturally appears so that instruction can build deeper, more functional word knowledge over time.
Best practices in vocabulary assessment. Best practices in vocabulary assessment.
Effective vocabulary assessment reflects both depth and breadth of word knowledge. Depth refers to a student's ability to define and use a word precisely breadth refers to the number of words a student knows. Strong assessment practices do the following use direct tasks, like matching or defining, and contextual tasks, like using words in sentences or reading passages. Incorporate multiple formats, including oral, written, and performance based tasks. Are embedded in meaningful reading and writing, not isolated drills. Are administered formatively and summatively to monitor progress and adjust instruction. Effective vocabulary assessment reflects both depth and breadth of word knowledge. Depth refers to a student's ability to define and use a word precisely breadth refers to the number of words a student knows. Strong assessment practices do the following use direct tasks, like matching or defining, and contextual tasks, like using words in sentences or reading passages. Incorporate multiple formats, including oral, written, and performance based tasks. Are embedded in meaningful reading and writing, not isolated drills. Are administered formatively and summatively to monitor progress and adjust instruction.
Assessment strategies. Assessment strategies.
Effective vocabulary assessments measure how well students understand and apply words in context. Each targets a specific skill and aligns with a different stage in the instructional cycle. Teachers should select strategies based on their goals, whether to check understanding, monitor growth, or plan next steps. Effective vocabulary assessments measure how well students understand and apply words in context. Each targets a specific skill and aligns with a different stage in the instructional cycle. Teachers should select strategies based on their goals, whether to check understanding, monitor growth, or plan next steps.
Strategy vocabulary knowledge scale (V K S). What it measures word familiarity and self perception. When to use it beginning and end of unit (growth tracking). Strategy vocabulary knowledge scale (V K S). What it measures word familiarity and self perception. When to use it beginning and end of unit (growth tracking).
Matching or sorting tasks word recognition, meaning categorization, and surface level understanding quick checks during review or early in a unit. Matching or sorting tasks word recognition, meaning categorization, and surface level understanding quick checks during review or early in a unit.
Context clue tasks ability to infer word meaning from surrounding text during reading based vocabulary lessons. Context clue tasks ability to infer word meaning from surrounding text during reading based vocabulary lessons.
Cloze passages word meaning in context formative checks comprehension focus. Cloze passages word meaning in context formative checks comprehension focus.
Written usage tasks accurate, original application of vocabulary mid to late stage of a unit. Written usage tasks accurate, original application of vocabulary mid to late stage of a unit.
Word parts analysis knowledge of roots, prefixes, and suffixes, and the ability to infer word meaning during instruction on morphology or when students encounter unfamiliar academic vocabulary. Word parts analysis knowledge of roots, prefixes, and suffixes, and the ability to infer word meaning during instruction on morphology or when students encounter unfamiliar academic vocabulary.
Using assessment data to guide instruction. Using assessment data to guide instruction.
Assessment data should inform instruction by revealing what students know, what they partially understand, and their misconceptions. Teachers should look for patterns across tasks rather than focusing only on correct or incorrect answers. If a student struggles with context clue tasks but performs well in direct matching, that signals a need to practice flexible word use in reading. If a student rates themselves highly on a vocabulary knowledge scale but misuses words in writing, they may need support bridging recognition to application. Assessment data should inform instruction by revealing what students know, what they partially understand, and their misconceptions. Teachers should look for patterns across tasks rather than focusing only on correct or incorrect answers. If a student struggles with context clue tasks but performs well in direct matching, that signals a need to practice flexible word use in reading. If a student rates themselves highly on a vocabulary knowledge scale but misuses words in writing, they may need support bridging recognition to application.
Effective follow up includes activities like reteaching or re encountering words in new contexts. Grouping students for targeted vocabulary games or sentence building. Giving students frequent, low stakes chances to use and revisit words orally and in writing. Effective follow up includes activities like reteaching or re encountering words in new contexts. Grouping students for targeted vocabulary games or sentence building. Giving students frequent, low stakes chances to use and revisit words orally and in writing.
Factors affecting vocabulary development. Factors affecting vocabulary development.
A student's vocabulary consists of four categories that work together speaking, listening, writing, and reading vocabulary. A student's vocabulary consists of four categories that work together speaking, listening, writing, and reading vocabulary.
Listening vocabulary words understood when heard. Listening vocabulary words understood when heard.
Speaking vocabulary words known and used in speech. Speaking vocabulary words known and used in speech.
Reading vocabulary words encountered, recognized, and decoded while reading. Reading vocabulary words encountered, recognized, and decoded while reading.
Writing vocabulary words used in writing. Writing vocabulary words used in writing.
While these categories work together, they are developed at different rates. Consider how young children begin to understand the meaning behind simple words like dog, fork, or dada long before they can say, write, or read them. Secondary students may read and understand complex vocabulary long before they begin to confidently include it in their writing. Also, speaking vocabulary relies on gestures, facial expressions, and tone to communicate a message, while writing requires carefully selected diction to convey the same message. While these categories work together, they are developed at different rates. Consider how young children begin to understand the meaning behind simple words like dog, fork, or dada long before they can say, write, or read them. Secondary students may read and understand complex vocabulary long before they begin to confidently include it in their writing. Also, speaking vocabulary relies on gestures, facial expressions, and tone to communicate a message, while writing requires carefully selected diction to convey the same message.
The impact of reading. The impact of reading.
For young children, listening and speaking vocabulary increase as the student learns letters and primary phonics. These skills are developed through continuous reading, during which children can practice defining new vocabulary using decoding or contextual analysis. For young children, listening and speaking vocabulary increase as the student learns letters and primary phonics. These skills are developed through continuous reading, during which children can practice defining new vocabulary using decoding or contextual analysis.
The relative size of each vocabulary category changes as a child develops, but research shows the importance of reading in expanding a person's overall vocabulary. Books expose children to the greatest variety of words. The relative size of each vocabulary category changes as a child develops, but research shows the importance of reading in expanding a person's overall vocabulary. Books expose children to the greatest variety of words.
The Matthew effect refers to the theory that in certain areas of achievement, there is a tendency for initial success to make later success more likely, while an initial deficit may make continued progress increasingly more difficult. The Matthew effect refers to the theory that in certain areas of achievement, there is a tendency for initial success to make later success more likely, while an initial deficit may make continued progress increasingly more difficult.
When applied to reading, the theory implies that stronger readers will continue to build exponentially on their strengths while weaker readers will continue to struggle, thus widening the reading gap. Daily independent reading is immensely valuable for vocabulary development, critical thinking, concentration, and other essential skills at all grade levels. When applied to reading, the theory implies that stronger readers will continue to build exponentially on their strengths while weaker readers will continue to struggle, thus widening the reading gap. Daily independent reading is immensely valuable for vocabulary development, critical thinking, concentration, and other essential skills at all grade levels.
Other factors to consider. Other factors to consider.
New words must be used and encountered in different situations to become a working part of a child's vocabulary. Because of this, children's familial, cultural, educational, socioeconomic, linguistic, and developmental characteristics influence their ability to learn and retain new vocabulary. If new words are not used and encountered in other parts of students' lives, the words and their meanings are less likely to be retained. To support in class vocabulary instruction, teachers should look for opportunities to extend the use of new words outside of the classroom in all four vocabulary categories. New words must be used and encountered in different situations to become a working part of a child's vocabulary. Because of this, children's familial, cultural, educational, socioeconomic, linguistic, and developmental characteristics influence their ability to learn and retain new vocabulary. If new words are not used and encountered in other parts of students' lives, the words and their meanings are less likely to be retained. To support in class vocabulary instruction, teachers should look for opportunities to extend the use of new words outside of the classroom in all four vocabulary categories.
Common idioms and foreign phrases. Common idioms and foreign phrases.
Readers may encounter many irregular vocabulary words frequently while reading that cannot necessarily be defined using morphology or context clues. For these high frequency terms, teacher review and repetitive interaction with the words will best help students learn and navigate them in context. Otherwise, context clues are the best way to handle idioms and foreign phrases. Readers may encounter many irregular vocabulary words frequently while reading that cannot necessarily be defined using morphology or context clues. For these high frequency terms, teacher review and repetitive interaction with the words will best help students learn and navigate them in context. Otherwise, context clues are the best way to handle idioms and foreign phrases.
Idioms are common phrases or expressions with a figurative meaning, such as raining cats and dogs. Students may need help interpreting the author's meaning from context clues when encountering idioms. It may be helpful to ask students whether the phrase's literal meaning is the author's intended message and continue the discussion from there. This can be done as a whole group or with a partner. It may be overwhelming to introduce students to an entire list of idioms at one time. Focusing lessons on introducing one or two at a time will introduce the concepts and allow students to practice using and understanding idioms in small increments. Idioms are common phrases or expressions with a figurative meaning, such as raining cats and dogs. Students may need help interpreting the author's meaning from context clues when encountering idioms. It may be helpful to ask students whether the phrase's literal meaning is the author's intended message and continue the discussion from there. This can be done as a whole group or with a partner. It may be overwhelming to introduce students to an entire list of idioms at one time. Focusing lessons on introducing one or two at a time will introduce the concepts and allow students to practice using and understanding idioms in small increments.
Some foreign terms and phrases pop up frequently in English writing. Many Italian, French, and Latin phrases have become common in English texts. Some examples include ad hoc, ipso facto, or other Latin terms and phrases. Alfresco, al dente, or other French and Italian cooking terms. Je ne sais quoi I do not know what in French. Carte blanche blank paper in French, but means complete freedom. A capella Italian for in the chapel style but means sang without music. Haute couture French for high couture used in fashion primarily. Some foreign terms and phrases pop up frequently in English writing. Many Italian, French, and Latin phrases have become common in English texts. Some examples include ad hoc, ipso facto, or other Latin terms and phrases. Alfresco, al dente, or other French and Italian cooking terms. Je ne sais quoi I do not know what in French. Carte blanche blank paper in French, but means complete freedom. A capella Italian for in the chapel style but means sang without music. Haute couture French for high couture used in fashion primarily.
Reference materials. Reference materials.
During classroom writing assignments, students may sometimes need to access reference materials to complete the writing tasks. For example, a student may need to properly spell a word, access a definition, write in a standardized style, or locate a more suitable word for a sentence. In these situations, choosing the most appropriate print or digital reference materials for the job is important. During classroom writing assignments, students may sometimes need to access reference materials to complete the writing tasks. For example, a student may need to properly spell a word, access a definition, write in a standardized style, or locate a more suitable word for a sentence. In these situations, choosing the most appropriate print or digital reference materials for the job is important.
Choosing reference materials. Choosing reference materials.
Consider these questions as you decide which reference materials to utilize what type of text am I writing. What will a reference material help me to accomplish. Should I use print or digital reference material. Consider these questions as you decide which reference materials to utilize what type of text am I writing. What will a reference material help me to accomplish. Should I use print or digital reference material.
Print reference materials. Print reference materials.
Style manuals use when you want to write in a uniform style, create citations for a research paper, or write for a specialized discipline (such as medicine or law). Style manuals use when you want to write in a uniform style, create citations for a research paper, or write for a specialized discipline (such as medicine or law).
The modern language association (M L A) handbook. The modern language association (M L A) handbook.
The Chicago manual of style. The Chicago manual of style.
American psychological association (A P A) publication manual. American psychological association (A P A) publication manual.
The associated press (A P) stylebook. The associated press (A P) stylebook.
Dictionaries use when you need to define a word, determine its origin, or know the part of speech. Dictionaries use when you need to define a word, determine its origin, or know the part of speech.
The Oxford English dictionary. The Oxford English dictionary.
The random house dictionary of English language. The random house dictionary of English language.
Webster's new collegiate dictionary. Webster's new collegiate dictionary.
The Oxford picture dictionary. The Oxford picture dictionary.
Thesaurus use when you need to locate a more suitable synonym for a word that you want to use. Thesaurus use when you need to locate a more suitable synonym for a word that you want to use.
The Oxford American writer's thesaurus. The Oxford American writer's thesaurus.
Linguistic guides use when you need additional information about a language's history and how it is impacted by cultural changes. Linguistic guides use when you need additional information about a language's history and how it is impacted by cultural changes.
Baugh's history of the English language. Baugh's history of the English language.
Digital reference materials. Digital reference materials.
Spell checker use this to check your spelling as you complete a document using your computer's word processor. Be careful to review changes as sometimes the computer will suggest changes on unfamiliar words you have spelled correctly, such as technical terms or authors' names. Spell checker use this to check your spelling as you complete a document using your computer's word processor. Be careful to review changes as sometimes the computer will suggest changes on unfamiliar words you have spelled correctly, such as technical terms or authors' names.
Grammar checker use this to check your grammar as you complete a document using your computer's word processor. Be careful to review suggested changes as the computer occasionally suggests unnecessary changes. Grammar checker use this to check your grammar as you complete a document using your computer's word processor. Be careful to review suggested changes as the computer occasionally suggests unnecessary changes.
Dictionary an online dictionary can help with definitions and proper pronunciation. It may also contain more current words than a printed dictionary. Dictionary an online dictionary can help with definitions and proper pronunciation. It may also contain more current words than a printed dictionary.
Thesaurus an online thesaurus can provide synonyms for words, recorded pronunciations, and information on improving word choice. Thesaurus an online thesaurus can provide synonyms for words, recorded pronunciations, and information on improving word choice.
Citation generator an online citation generator can create proper citations for references in the style format you use (M L A, Chicago, and so on). These citations can be used inside the paper (in text citations) or at the end (bibliography or works cited page). Citation generator an online citation generator can create proper citations for references in the style format you use (M L A, Chicago, and so on). These citations can be used inside the paper (in text citations) or at the end (bibliography or works cited page).
Plagiarism checker when writing a research paper, using evidence appropriately is important. Plagiarism checkers scan the internet and compare what is in the document to what's online, noting heavily quoted sources or plagiarism. Plagiarism checker when writing a research paper, using evidence appropriately is important. Plagiarism checkers scan the internet and compare what is in the document to what's online, noting heavily quoted sources or plagiarism.
T E K S benchmarks for vocabulary development (seven to twelve). T E K S benchmarks for vocabulary development (seven to twelve).
This guide explores the continuum of vocabulary development as outlined in the T E K S for E L A R (grades seven to twelve), emphasizing the importance of repeated exposure and meaningful context. This guide explores the continuum of vocabulary development as outlined in the T E K S for E L A R (grades seven to twelve), emphasizing the importance of repeated exposure and meaningful context.
Key considerations for T E K S benchmarking. Key considerations for T E K S benchmarking.
T E K S focus on deeper understanding unlike in earlier grades, the teaching focus shifts from basic definitions to understanding nuances and synonyms and to using vocabulary in increasingly complex contexts. T E K S focus on deeper understanding unlike in earlier grades, the teaching focus shifts from basic definitions to understanding nuances and synonyms and to using vocabulary in increasingly complex contexts.
Analyze, synthesize, evaluate students are expected to analyze how vocabulary choices shape meaning in text, synthesize their knowledge of multiple words, and evaluate the effectiveness of word choice. Analyze, synthesize, evaluate students are expected to analyze how vocabulary choices shape meaning in text, synthesize their knowledge of multiple words, and evaluate the effectiveness of word choice.
Vocabulary in different contexts exposure to vocabulary goes beyond isolated words. Students encounter and use academic vocabulary across various genres (including literature and informational texts). Vocabulary in different contexts exposure to vocabulary goes beyond isolated words. Students encounter and use academic vocabulary across various genres (including literature and informational texts).
Below is a general table showing what is expected per student age. Some skills are consistent across grade levels, while changes between levels are indicated in bold. Below is a general table showing what is expected per student age. Some skills are consistent across grade levels, while changes between levels are indicated in bold.
Skill vocabulary development. Skill vocabulary development.
Grade seven student expectations. Grade seven student expectations.
Use print or digital resources to determine words' meaning, syllabication, pronunciation, origin, and part of speech. Use print or digital resources to determine words' meaning, syllabication, pronunciation, origin, and part of speech.
Use context such as contrast or cause and effect to clarify the meaning of words. Use context such as contrast or cause and effect to clarify the meaning of words.
Determine the meaning and usage of grade level academic English words derived from Greek and Latin roots, such as omni, log logue, gen, vid vis, phil, luc, and sens sent. Determine the meaning and usage of grade level academic English words derived from Greek and Latin roots, such as omni, log logue, gen, vid vis, phil, luc, and sens sent.
Grade eight student expectations. Grade eight student expectations.
Use print or digital resources to determine words' meaning, syllabication, pronunciation, origin, and part of speech. Use print or digital resources to determine words' meaning, syllabication, pronunciation, origin, and part of speech.
Use context within or beyond a paragraph to clarify the meaning of unfamiliar or ambiguous words. Use context within or beyond a paragraph to clarify the meaning of unfamiliar or ambiguous words.
Determine the meaning and usage of grade level academic English words derived from Greek and Latin roots, such as ast, qui, path, mand mend, and duc. Determine the meaning and usage of grade level academic English words derived from Greek and Latin roots, such as ast, qui, path, mand mend, and duc.
English one student expectations. English one student expectations.
Use print or digital resources, such as glossaries or technical dictionaries, to clarify and validate understanding of the precise and appropriate meaning of technical or discipline based vocabulary. Use print or digital resources, such as glossaries or technical dictionaries, to clarify and validate understanding of the precise and appropriate meaning of technical or discipline based vocabulary.
Analyze context to distinguish between the denotative and connotative meanings of words. Analyze context to distinguish between the denotative and connotative meanings of words.
Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as bona fide, caveat, carte blanche, tte  tte, bon apptit, and quid pro quo. Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as bona fide, caveat, carte blanche, tte  tte, bon apptit, and quid pro quo.
English two student expectations. English two student expectations.
Use print or digital resources, such as glossaries or technical dictionaries, to clarify and validate understanding of the precise and appropriate meaning of technical or discipline based vocabulary. Use print or digital resources, such as glossaries or technical dictionaries, to clarify and validate understanding of the precise and appropriate meaning of technical or discipline based vocabulary.
Analyze context to distinguish among denotative, connotative, and figurative meanings of words. Analyze context to distinguish among denotative, connotative, and figurative meanings of words.
Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as pas de deux, status quo, dj vu, avant garde, and coup d'tat. Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as pas de deux, status quo, dj vu, avant garde, and coup d'tat.
English three student expectations. English three student expectations.
Use print or digital resources to clarify and validate understanding of multiple meanings of advanced vocabulary. Use print or digital resources to clarify and validate understanding of multiple meanings of advanced vocabulary.
Analyze context to draw conclusions about nuanced meanings, such as in imagery. Analyze context to draw conclusions about nuanced meanings, such as in imagery.
Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as ad hoc, faux pas, non sequitur, and modus operandi. Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as ad hoc, faux pas, non sequitur, and modus operandi.
English four student expectations. English four student expectations.
Use print or digital resources to clarify and validate understanding of multiple meanings of advanced vocabulary. Use print or digital resources to clarify and validate understanding of multiple meanings of advanced vocabulary.
Analyze context to conclude nuanced meanings, such as in imagery. Analyze context to conclude nuanced meanings, such as in imagery.
Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as ad nauseam, in loco parentis, laissez faire, and caveat emptor. Determine the meaning of foreign words or phrases used frequently in English, such as ad nauseam, in loco parentis, laissez faire, and caveat emptor.
Remember. Remember.
Exposure and practice are key frequent encounters with new vocabulary in meaningful contexts are crucial for retention and application. Exposure and practice are key frequent encounters with new vocabulary in meaningful contexts are crucial for retention and application.
Move beyond definitions while definitions are important, go beyond rote memorization. Encourage students to analyze word choice, explore synonyms, and actively use new vocabulary. Move beyond definitions while definitions are important, go beyond rote memorization. Encourage students to analyze word choice, explore synonyms, and actively use new vocabulary.
Multiple contexts matter expose students to academic vocabulary across diverse reading materials (such as literature and informational texts) and encourage its use in various writing and speaking tasks. Multiple contexts matter expose students to academic vocabulary across diverse reading materials (such as literature and informational texts) and encourage its use in various writing and speaking tasks.
Tense words that indicate if a statement is referring to past time, present time, or future time. Example past she spoke. Present she speaks. Future she will speak. Tense words that indicate if a statement is referring to past time, present time, or future time. Example past she spoke. Present she speaks. Future she will speak.
Contextual analysis use of surrounding information in a text to help determine a word. Contextual analysis use of surrounding information in a text to help determine a word.
Listening vocabulary words a listener can recognize when heard. Example people typically have a larger listening vocabulary than writing vocabulary, as the meaning of words can be determined from the context. Listening vocabulary words a listener can recognize when heard. Example people typically have a larger listening vocabulary than writing vocabulary, as the meaning of words can be determined from the context.
Context clues contextual analysis using the words before and after an unknown word to determine its meaning. Example it was a beautiful day that made it idyllic for swimming. Context clues contextual analysis using the words before and after an unknown word to determine its meaning. Example it was a beautiful day that made it idyllic for swimming.
Affix a letter or letters that change a root word's meaning. Example prefixes or suffixes. Affix a letter or letters that change a root word's meaning. Example prefixes or suffixes.
Recurring theme the repetition of a theme image throughout the story to symbolize meaning. Recurring theme the repetition of a theme image throughout the story to symbolize meaning.
Tier two words academic words that students will encounter frequently and that are used in multiple content areas many of these are process words that commonly appear in assessment. Tier two words academic words that students will encounter frequently and that are used in multiple content areas many of these are process words that commonly appear in assessment.
Bound morpheme type of morpheme that can appear only as part of a larger word. Example prefixes such as pre, dis, in, un, and suffixes such as ful, ment, ly, ise are bound morphemes. Bound morpheme type of morpheme that can appear only as part of a larger word. Example prefixes such as pre, dis, in, un, and suffixes such as ful, ment, ly, ise are bound morphemes.
Vocabulary knowledge scale (V K S) self report scale which allows students to indicate how well they know vocabulary terms administered on a regular basis to track growth. Vocabulary knowledge scale (V K S) self report scale which allows students to indicate how well they know vocabulary terms administered on a regular basis to track growth.
Dramatic irony when the audience reader knows something the character does not. Example when the audience sees the road runner paint a hole in the side of a cliff, but Wile E Coyote continues to run ahead at full speed towards the hole. Dramatic irony when the audience reader knows something the character does not. Example when the audience sees the road runner paint a hole in the side of a cliff, but Wile E Coyote continues to run ahead at full speed towards the hole.
Tier one words common words that are already familiar to students when they enter school do not need to be taught in a classroom setting. Tier one words common words that are already familiar to students when they enter school do not need to be taught in a classroom setting.
Tier three words academic words that are specific to a particular content area or discipline would appear in a subject specific textbook or in the glossary of an informational text. Tier three words academic words that are specific to a particular content area or discipline would appear in a subject specific textbook or in the glossary of an informational text.
Reading vocabulary words a reader can recognize while reading a text. Example people typically have a larger reading vocabulary than speaking vocabulary, as the meaning of words can be determined from the context. Reading vocabulary words a reader can recognize while reading a text. Example people typically have a larger reading vocabulary than speaking vocabulary, as the meaning of words can be determined from the context.
Antonyms words with the opposite meanings. Example hot cold and big little. Antonyms words with the opposite meanings. Example hot cold and big little.
Verbal irony contrast between what is said and what is meant. Verbal irony contrast between what is said and what is meant.
Compound words two complete words that have joined together to form one word with a new meaning. Example bed room equals bedroom. Compound words two complete words that have joined together to form one word with a new meaning. Example bed room equals bedroom.
Thesaurus (digital) an online thesaurus. Example thesaurus dot com. Thesaurus (digital) an online thesaurus. Example thesaurus dot com.
Free morpheme unbound morpheme type of morpheme that can stand alone or can appear with other morphemes in a lexeme. Example simple words (i e words made up of one free morpheme, such as the, run, on, and so on) and compound words (i e words made up of two free morphemes, such as keyboard, greenhouse, and so on) are free morphemes. Free morpheme unbound morpheme type of morpheme that can stand alone or can appear with other morphemes in a lexeme. Example simple words (i e words made up of one free morpheme, such as the, run, on, and so on) and compound words (i e words made up of two free morphemes, such as keyboard, greenhouse, and so on) are free morphemes.
Word wall an on going bulletin board with terms used frequently in the classroom words are often added as they are introduced. Word wall an on going bulletin board with terms used frequently in the classroom words are often added as they are introduced.
Structural morphemic analysis using meaningful word parts (morphemes) to study a word and determine its meaning. Structural morphemic analysis using meaningful word parts (morphemes) to study a word and determine its meaning.
Dictionary (digital) an online dictionary. Example dictionary dot com. Dictionary (digital) an online dictionary. Example dictionary dot com.
Morphology the study of forms of words, including affixes, roots, stems, and parts of speech. Example the word bicycles is made up of three individual morphemes. The prefix bi, the stem cycle, and the suffix s. Morphology the study of forms of words, including affixes, roots, stems, and parts of speech. Example the word bicycles is made up of three individual morphemes. The prefix bi, the stem cycle, and the suffix s.
Suffix letter or letters at the end of a root word that changes its meaning. Example s, e s, e d, i n g, l y, e r, o r, i o n, t i o n, a b l e, and i b l e. Suffix letter or letters at the end of a root word that changes its meaning. Example s, e s, e d, i n g, l y, e r, o r, i o n, t i o n, a b l e, and i b l e.
Speaking vocabulary all the words known and used by a person in speech. Example students typically have a clear understanding of a word in order to use it in their speaking vocabulary. Speaking vocabulary all the words known and used by a person in speech. Example students typically have a clear understanding of a word in order to use it in their speaking vocabulary.
Root the smallest unit or core of a word that carries the meaning. Example form means shape, as in reform, conform, formulate. Root the smallest unit or core of a word that carries the meaning. Example form means shape, as in reform, conform, formulate.
Homographs words that have the same spelling as another word but have different meaning. Example tired meaning fatigue (verb) tire meaning a rubber cushion that fits around a wheel of an automobile (noun). Homographs words that have the same spelling as another word but have different meaning. Example tired meaning fatigue (verb) tire meaning a rubber cushion that fits around a wheel of an automobile (noun).
Frayer model a popular form of semantic mapping which helps students to identify and define unfamiliar concepts and vocabulary. Frayer model a popular form of semantic mapping which helps students to identify and define unfamiliar concepts and vocabulary.
Linguistic guide use when you need additional information about a language's history. Example Baugh's history of the English language. Linguistic guide use when you need additional information about a language's history. Example Baugh's history of the English language.
Academic vocabulary specialized vocabulary commonly found in an academic setting. Example many academic vocabulary words, like analyze, describe, and reflect, are important and relevant across all content areas. Academic vocabulary specialized vocabulary commonly found in an academic setting. Example many academic vocabulary words, like analyze, describe, and reflect, are important and relevant across all content areas.
Citation generator use to create proper citations for references in the style format you are using. Example bibme dot com. Citation generator use to create proper citations for references in the style format you are using. Example bibme dot com.
Inflectional affix an affix that changes the form of the root or base word. Example the inflectional affix, ed changes a verb to the past tense. Inflectional affix an affix that changes the form of the root or base word. Example the inflectional affix, ed changes a verb to the past tense.
Prefix a letter or letters at the beginning of a root word that changes its meaning. Example re, de, un. Prefix a letter or letters at the beginning of a root word that changes its meaning. Example re, de, un.
Inference a conclusion based on evidence, observation, and reasoning. Inference a conclusion based on evidence, observation, and reasoning.
Style manual use when you want to write in a uniform style. Example M L A handbook. Style manual use when you want to write in a uniform style. Example M L A handbook.
Connotation the implied meaning of a word the feeling a word conveys. Example describing a person as shrewd may make them feel negatively, even though the definition (sharp witted, intelligent) is positive. Connotation the implied meaning of a word the feeling a word conveys. Example describing a person as shrewd may make them feel negatively, even though the definition (sharp witted, intelligent) is positive.
Semantic mapping a form of scaffolding which helps students to develop connections among words. Example semantic maps have a variety of formats. In one method, students write an example, a non example, a synonym, and an antonym. Semantic mapping a form of scaffolding which helps students to develop connections among words. Example semantic maps have a variety of formats. In one method, students write an example, a non example, a synonym, and an antonym.
Schema (reading) background knowledge a reader brings to a text. Example someone who plays baseball can use his experience to understand a biography of Babe Ruth. Schema (reading) background knowledge a reader brings to a text. Example someone who plays baseball can use his experience to understand a biography of Babe Ruth.
Decoding in reading out loud, being able to sound out words by breaking them into simple forms in reading for comprehension, the understanding of how to read each letter or letter pattern in a word to determine the word's meaning. Decoding in reading out loud, being able to sound out words by breaking them into simple forms in reading for comprehension, the understanding of how to read each letter or letter pattern in a word to determine the word's meaning.
Morpheme a combination of sounds that has meaning in speech or writing and cannot be divided into smaller grammatical parts this includes prefixes and suffixes. Example write, cat, laugh, box. Morpheme a combination of sounds that has meaning in speech or writing and cannot be divided into smaller grammatical parts this includes prefixes and suffixes. Example write, cat, laugh, box.
Symbolism an object stands for an idea or a greater meaning. Example dove equals peace, red rose equals love and romance. Symbolism an object stands for an idea or a greater meaning. Example dove equals peace, red rose equals love and romance.
Cloze activity words are omitted from a reading passage and students determine the word that should be used there. Cloze activity words are omitted from a reading passage and students determine the word that should be used there.
Vocabulary notebook dedicated space where students track, define, and even illustrate new vocabulary. Vocabulary notebook dedicated space where students track, define, and even illustrate new vocabulary.
Foreshadowing the narrator or character hints at a future plot point. Foreshadowing the narrator or character hints at a future plot point.
Word web a form of scaffolding which helps students to understand and retain new words and concepts. Example during reading, as students encounter each word, they write down around the word different words or phrases that will help them remember the meaning. Word web a form of scaffolding which helps students to understand and retain new words and concepts. Example during reading, as students encounter each word, they write down around the word different words or phrases that will help them remember the meaning.
Dictionary (print) use when you need to define a word. Example Oxford English dictionary. Dictionary (print) use when you need to define a word. Example Oxford English dictionary.
Thesaurus (print) use when you need to locate a more suitable synonym for a word. Example the Oxford American writer's thesaurus. Thesaurus (print) use when you need to locate a more suitable synonym for a word. Example the Oxford American writer's thesaurus.
Satire the use of humor or exaggeration to critique human nature or a character. Satire the use of humor or exaggeration to critique human nature or a character.
Spell checker use this to check your spelling as you complete a document. Example Google doc spelling check. Spell checker use this to check your spelling as you complete a document. Example Google doc spelling check.
Matthew effect the tendency for stronger readers to build exponentially on their strengths and weaker readers to continue to struggle with their weaknesses, thus widening the gap between weak and strong readers. Example to prevent the Matthew effect, teachers should provide individualized support to struggling readers when they notice a knowledge gap developing. Matthew effect the tendency for stronger readers to build exponentially on their strengths and weaker readers to continue to struggle with their weaknesses, thus widening the gap between weak and strong readers. Example to prevent the Matthew effect, teachers should provide individualized support to struggling readers when they notice a knowledge gap developing.
Reference materials sources that provide facts or background information on various topics. Example dictionary. Reference materials sources that provide facts or background information on various topics. Example dictionary.
Derivational affix an affix that changes the root or base word into a new word. Example when the derivational affix, ful is added to the noun, beauty, the word beautiful forms, meaning full of beauty. Derivational affix an affix that changes the root or base word into a new word. Example when the derivational affix, ful is added to the noun, beauty, the word beautiful forms, meaning full of beauty.
Denotation a literal, dictionary meaning of a word. Denotation a literal, dictionary meaning of a word.
Irony an incongruity between what the reader expects the author to mean and what they actually mean. Irony an incongruity between what the reader expects the author to mean and what they actually mean.
Writing vocabulary all the words known and used by a person in writing. Example a students writing vocabulary is typically more formal than their speaking vocabulary. Writing vocabulary all the words known and used by a person in writing. Example a students writing vocabulary is typically more formal than their speaking vocabulary.
Vocabulary vocabulary development the ability to effectively know and use words in their listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Vocabulary vocabulary development the ability to effectively know and use words in their listening, speaking, reading, and writing.
Idiom a phrase or expression that does not mean the same as the literal words. Example break a leg back to the drawing board spill the beans. Idiom a phrase or expression that does not mean the same as the literal words. Example break a leg back to the drawing board spill the beans.
Synonyms words with the same or a similar meaning. Example angry mad furious bad evil immoral tainted and fast quick rapid. Synonyms words with the same or a similar meaning. Example angry mad furious bad evil immoral tainted and fast quick rapid.
Situational irony discrepancy between what happens and what the reader expects to happen. Situational irony discrepancy between what happens and what the reader expects to happen.
Grammar checker use this to check your grammar as you complete a document. Example Google doc grammar check. Grammar checker use this to check your grammar as you complete a document. Example Google doc grammar check.
Understatement when the author minimizes a significant point for effect. Understatement when the author minimizes a significant point for effect.