ELAR 8 ELL Reading Foundations
PLDs - Reading Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction. Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction.
Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards. Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards.
Beginning
Intermediate
Advanced
Advanced High
Read and understand very limited recently practiced, memorized, or highly familiar English in routine contexts
Have a very limited sense of English language structures
Vocabulary includes: environmental print; very high-frequency words; and concrete words represented by pictures
Read slowly, word by word
Highly dependent on visuals and prior knowledge to derive meaning
Apply basic reading comprehension skills on level-appropriate text
*K-1 students derive little or no meaning from stories read aloud in English and struggle with decoding. *K-1 students derive little or no meaning from stories read aloud in English and struggle with decoding.
Read and understand vocabulary related to: everyday oral language; literal meanings of common words; common academic/abstract language
Often read slowly and in short phrases; may re-read to clarify meaning
Starting to understand basic English language structures
Understand simple sentences in short, connected texts; occasionally depend on linguistic support
Struggle to independently read and understand grade-level texts
Apply basic and some higher-order comprehension skills to linguistically-accommodated texts
*K-1 students have limited comprehension of stories read aloud in English and struggle with decoding. *K-1 students have limited comprehension of stories read aloud in English and struggle with decoding.
Read and understand, with SLA support, vocabulary used in social and academic contexts, but have difficulty with lower frequency words
Starting to understand words/phrases beyond their literal meaning and multiple meanings of common words
Read longer phrases and simple sentences from familiar text at appropriate speed
Starting to construct meaning of grade-appropriate text
Can apply basic and higher-order comprehension skills, but are occasionally dependent on linguistic support with unfamiliar topics
*K-1 students can comprehend most main points and supporting ideas in stories read aloud in English and can decode with support. *K-1 students can comprehend most main points and supporting ideas in stories read aloud in English and can decode with support.
Can do the following at a level nearly comparable to native English-speaking peers (when reading grade-appropriate text):
Apply, with minimal SLA support basic and higher-order comprehension skills
Read and understand vocabulary, with some exceptions when low-frequency vocabulary is used
Generally read with appropriate rate, speed, intonation, and expression
Construct meaning
*K-1 students can comprehend main points and supporting ideas (explicit and implicit) in stories read aloud in English and recognize most sight vocabulary and high-frequency words at a level comparable to native English-speaking peers. *K-1 students can comprehend main points and supporting ideas (explicit and implicit) in stories read aloud in English and recognize most sight vocabulary and high-frequency words at a level comparable to native English-speaking peers.
Appropriate Accommodations / Supports
Read in short "chunks"
Use adapted, simplified, decodable texts with familiar English that they have learned
Include visual and linguistic supports
Display multiple examples of environmental print (labels, signs, logos)
Read text aloud to model enunciation
Choose stories with predictable storylines or familiar topics; mostly concrete high-frequency vocabulary; and short, simple sentences
Use visual and linguistic supports
Allow students to read independently
Utilize pre-reading strategies (i. e. , pre-teach vocabulary, discuss intent of text, activate background knowledge, predict meaning from the title, picture, or charts)
Use visuals, teacher/peer assistance, and linguistic aids to clarify meaning with unfamiliar topics
Read and think aloud to focus on main points, details, context clues, and abstract vocabulary
Pre-teach complex vocabulary
Provide oral reading opportunities
Use grade-appropriate texts that focus on content-specific words
Read texts that require higher-order comprehension skills, such as constructing meaning, connecting ideas, and drawing conclusions
Remember that it is not until students reach an Advanced level that they start to independently construct the meaning of grade-appropriate text. Remember that it is not until students reach an Advanced level that they start to independently construct the meaning of grade-appropriate text.
PLDs - Listening Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction. Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction.
Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards. Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards.
Beginning
Intermediate
Advanced
Advanced High
Struggle to understand simple conversations even with familiar topics and linguistic supports
Struggle to identify words and phrases that have not been modified for ELLs
Frequently remain silent, watching others for cues
Usually understand simple, short discussions on familiar topics and identify keywords/phrases needed for general meaning; unfamiliar topics require extensive linguistic support
Can ask the speaker to repeat, slow down, or rephrase speech
Usually understand longer, more detailed discussions on familiar and some unfamiliar topics, but sometimes need processing time and/or linguistic support
Understand most main points and important details, and some implicit information
Sometimes ask for clarification
Understand longer, detailed discussions with occasional need for processing time and little linguistic support; except when complex language is used
Understand main points, details, and implicit information at a level nearly comparable to peers
Rarely ask for clarification
Appropriate Accommodations / Supports
Use visual support such as photos, drawings, illustrations
Use gestures
Modify speech: speak slowly using familiar words / phrases
Use visual and verbal cues and gestures to reinforce spoken words
Pre-teach vocabulary before discussions
Increase wait time for students to process information
Pre-teach complex vocabulary
Ask comprehension questions
Use grade-appropriate material that focuses on content-specific words
Extra processing time and linguistic support are good ideas for ELLs at all levels, although they are rarely needed once a student has reached Advanced High. Extra processing time and linguistic support are good ideas for ELLs at all levels, although they are rarely needed once a student has reached Advanced High.
PLDs - Writing Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction. Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction.
Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards. Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards.
Beginning
Intermediate
Advanced
Advanced High
Cannot express ideas in writing or engage meaningfully in content-area writing assignments
Can label, list, and copy
Can use high-frequency words/phrases and short, simple sentences (in the present tense) based primarily on recently practiced or highly familiar material
Frequent errors (spelling patterns, word order, literal translations, use of native language) may hinder or prevent understanding
*K-1 students know too little English to express themselves in writing beyond the use of high-frequency words or short, recently-practiced sentences. *K-1 students know too little English to express themselves in writing beyond the use of high-frequency words or short, recently-practiced sentences.
Have a limited ability to express ideas in writing and engage meaningfully in content-area writing assignments
Can write short, simple sentences in present tense (occasionally future and past) and use high-frequency vocabulary
Writing displays: an oral tone; loosely connected text; few cohesive devices; repetition of ideas; undetailed descriptions/explanations/narrations; difficulty expressing abstract ideas
Errors may be frequent; some writing may be understood only by those accustomed to interacting with ELLs
*K-1 students know enough English to write about familiar topics simply and briefly. *K-1 students know enough English to write about familiar topics simply and briefly.
Can use English, with SLA support, to express ideas in writing and engage meaningfully in content-area writing assignments; SLA support is needed for challenging topics
Use basic (and occasionally more complex) verbs, grammar, and sentence patterns
Can use academic tone in academic writing; use common cohesive devices (with some repetition); narrate, explain and describe in some detail
Occasional errors, but writing is usually understood
*K-1 students can participate meaningfully, with SLA support, in most grade-appropriate writing activities with occasional errors. *K-1 students can participate meaningfully, with SLA support, in most grade-appropriate writing activities with occasional errors.
Can use English, with minimal SLA support, to express ideas in writing and engage meaningfully in content-area writing assignments
Demonstrate, with minimal SLA support, elements of grade-appropriate writing
Write at a level nearly comparable to native English-speaking peers in clarity and precision (regarding vocabulary and language structures)
Occasional difficulty with naturalness of phrasing
Errors are minor and rarely interfere with communication
*K-1 students can write at a level of complexity and detail nearly comparable to that of native English-speaking peers. *K-1 students can write at a level of complexity and detail nearly comparable to that of native English-speaking peers.
Appropriate Accommodations / Supports
Have students label items, create lists and copy words/phrases
Use a familiar topic to brainstorm and model organization of thoughts using simple sentences
Allow drawing to express concepts
Choose topics that are highly familiar and concrete and allow students to use high-frequency words
Journal writing
Use sentence stems
Create an interactive word wall
Provide a bank of words/phrases
Use graphic organizers and outlines to help students prepare writing
Use teacher modeling and student interaction
Expose students to many examples of texts that were written for a variety of purposes and audiences
Use genre analysis to identify features of different types of writing
To quickly determine a student's English level based on writing, read the writing aloud - grammar errors are easier to identify when read aloud. To quickly determine a student's English level based on writing, read the writing aloud - grammar errors are easier to identify when read aloud.
A beginning student's writing will have no flow
An intermediate student's writing will feel choppy
An advanced student's writing will flow
An advanced high student's writing will give detail with less repetition
PLDs - Speaking Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction. Beginning with the 2026-2027 school year, the new English Language Proficiency Standards (ELPS), finalized in 2024, will be implemented in instruction.
Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards. Until TExES certification exams reflect the new ELPS, this content will reflect the existing standards.
Beginning
Intermediate
Advanced
Advanced High
Mainly speak using single words / short phrases with limited high-frequency vocabulary or recently practiced or memorized material
May be hesitant or give up when trying to communicate
Lack the grammar needed to connect ideas and speak in sentences
Errors may hinder overall communication (e. g. speaking in native language)
Typically, pronunciation significantly inhibits communication
Can express simple, original messages, speak using sentences, and participate in short conversations
May hesitate frequently and for long periods
Speak simply using basic vocabulary; rarely speak in detail; speak using mostly simple sentence structures and tenses
Make errors that may hinder overall communication when using more difficult English
Pronunciation can usually be understood by people accustomed to interacting with ELLs
Can participate comfortably in most discussions on familiar topics and academic topics, with some pauses to restate or search for words/phrases to clarify meaning
Understand basic grammar features; can narrate and describe in the present, past, future tenses; learning to use complex sentences and complex grammar features
Make errors that interfere somewhat with communication when using complex grammar, long sentences, and less familiar words
May mispronounce words, but is usually understood
Can participate in extended discussions on social and grade-appropriate academic topics with few hesitations
Communicate effectively using abstract and content-based vocabulary, idioms, and colloquialisms, except with very low-frequency vocabulary
Use English grammar structures and complex sentences to narrate and describe at a level nearly comparable to native English-speaking peers
Make few errors; pronunciation rarely interferes with overall communication
Appropriate Accommodations / Supports
Provide students with ways to communicate without speaking (e. g. making charts or drawings, demonstrating)
Respect student's silent period
Provide students with sentence frames- use synonym and circumlocution strategies- focus on content of response, not errors
Use scaffolds like think-pair-shares and sentence stems
Assign oral presentations to practice using content-based terms and common abstract vocabulary
Allow extra processing time- provide sentence stems for complex grammar
Employ self-corrective techniques
Offer opportunities for extended social and academic discussions
To quickly determine a student's English level based on speaking, remember:
Beginning uses single words, short memorized phrases, or incomprehensible speech
Intermediate communicates a simple message with basic vocabulary and limited tenses
Advanced uses a variety of tenses and some abstract vocabulary
High Advanced speaks as clear and detailed as a native speaker
Adaptations for Diversity - English Language Learners Teachers should be prepared to accommodate the needs of all learners, including English Language Learners (ELLs). While these students will need additional support for their English language skills, it's important to remember to address the same instructional goals and objectives as you would for any student in your class. Teachers should be prepared to accommodate the needs of all learners, including English Language Learners (ELLs). While these students will need additional support for their English language skills, it's important to remember to address the same instructional goals and objectives as you would for any student in your class.
English language learners should not receive different content; they should receive linguistically supported content. English language learners should not receive different content; they should receive linguistically supported content.
Teachers should deliver comprehensible input to their English language learners. This means the information can be understood despite language barriers. Teachers should deliver comprehensible input to their English language learners. This means the information can be understood despite language barriers.
Here are some ways to support ELLs during classroom instruction through scaffolding and comprehensible input:
Provide visuals
Word walls
Vocabulary lists
Pictures
Gestures
Props
Vocabulary support
Pre-teach key terms
Reference materials
Word banks
Dictionaries
Glossaries
Depending on the student's proficiency levels, some translations to their native language for these resources may be appropriate. However, their goal is to learn English along with the content, so they should be exposed to the terms in English as well. Depending on the student's proficiency levels, some translations to their native language for these resources may be appropriate. However, their goal is to learn English along with the content, so they should be exposed to the terms in English as well.
Adjustments to delivery
No idioms
Straight-forward language
Gestures
Non-verbal cues
Slow down
Pause after complete thoughts
Don't forget that English language learners can hear just fine. While speaking slower may be helpful, there is no need to speak any louder than normal. Don't forget that English language learners can hear just fine. While speaking slower may be helpful, there is no need to speak any louder than normal.
ELLs may also need support when they are demonstrating their learning:
Teachers can provide scaffolds, such as sentence stems, to help students write or speak. Teachers can provide scaffolds, such as sentence stems, to help students write or speak.
Students may need additional time to complete assignments since their cognitive load is increased when processing both content and new language. Students may need additional time to complete assignments since their cognitive load is increased when processing both content and new language.
Students acquire a significant amount of language through peer interaction, so make time for discussion, group work, and even socialization. Students acquire a significant amount of language through peer interaction, so make time for discussion, group work, and even socialization.
Students should be given multiple opportunities to demonstrate their knowledge in various ways. Students should be given multiple opportunities to demonstrate their knowledge in various ways.
If students seem to be struggling with their assignments, make sure they are set up for success to demonstrate their content knowledge or academic skills. They should be given the language support they need to be successful. If students seem to be struggling with their assignments, make sure they are set up for success to demonstrate their content knowledge or academic skills. They should be given the language support they need to be successful.
Collaborating to Enhance Learning Learning English doesn't happen exclusively in the ELA classroom, nor do students learn solely from the ELA class's activities and lessons. It is important to work collaboratively with the ELL student's support network. This network could include:
Other teachers - What strategies are other teachers using to meet the student's needs? Maybe they have a way of presenting material or vocabulary that really resonates with the student, or have experience with a former student that could apply now. Other teachers - What strategies are other teachers using to meet the student's needs? Maybe they have a way of presenting material or vocabulary that really resonates with the student, or have experience with a former student that could apply now.
Other students - Don't underestimate the power of peers. Another ELL student can share strategies she uses for success or use their common language to work through a comprehension issue. Other students may be able to suggest a strategy that worked for them. Other students - Don't underestimate the power of peers. Another ELL student can share strategies she uses for success or use their common language to work through a comprehension issue. Other students may be able to suggest a strategy that worked for them.
ELL support staff - If your district has staff who specifically work for or with ELL students, they should be an excellent resource for scaffolding and support strategies to use in the classroom. ELL support staff - If your district has staff who specifically work for or with ELL students, they should be an excellent resource for scaffolding and support strategies to use in the classroom.
Parents/guardians - Keep parents informed about their student's progress in your classroom. Parents/guardians - Keep parents informed about their student's progress in your classroom.
Community members - Bringing in community members to support classroom initiatives gives students a sense of purpose. Look around your community for leaders who share bilingual backgrounds. They could come in and speak to the class or discuss their experiences as a bilingual learner with you to inform your classroom decisions. Community members - Bringing in community members to support classroom initiatives gives students a sense of purpose. Look around your community for leaders who share bilingual backgrounds. They could come in and speak to the class or discuss their experiences as a bilingual learner with you to inform your classroom decisions.
English Language Learners (ELLs)
students who are learning the English language, or for whom English is not a first language
Comprehensible Input
Information that can be understood despite language barriers. Legally required to be provided to all ELL students under statute set by Lau vs. Nichols. Information that can be understood despite language barriers. Legally required to be provided to all ELL students under statute set by Lau vs. Nichols.
Example.
If a teacher uses comprehensible input for her ELL students, they can understand the essence of what is being said even if they do not know every word or structure used in the message. If a teacher uses comprehensible input for her ELL students, they can understand the essence of what is being said even if they do not know every word or structure used in the message.