\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n\n1
INTRODUCTION: THE NATURE
OF METAPHYSICS
What is metaphysics?
People who are not familiar with metaphysics are apt to have a false, or at
least a somewhat distorted, conception of what it involves. Sometimes they
think it has something to do with mysticism and magic, which is com
pletely mistaken. Sometimes they think that it has something to do with
physics, which is true enough in a way. But it would be wrong to think that
metaphysics is to physics as metalogic is to logic, or as metaethics is to
ethics--that is, a kind of second-order inquiry into the conceptual founda
tions and methods of a first-order discipline. Metaphysics does include
some features of such an inquiry, but even in that respect its focus is not
exclusively upon the concerns of physics. Indeed, it is largely just an histor
ical accident that metaphysics is called what it is. Aristotle wrote a treatise
(or, more exactly, some of his lecture notes were collected to form a trea
tise) which much later came to be called the Metaphysics, simply because it
was placed in the canonical order of Aristotle's works after another treatise
of his, the Physics (the Greek prefix meta signifying this relation). ' Even so,
this was a happy accident, inasmuch as physics and metaphysics do overlap
in many of their fundamental concerns. In fact, perhaps it wasn't so much
of an accident after all, since it was natural, in the light of that overlap, to
place the Metaphysics after the Physics. (Though we should acknowledge
here that there are some significant differences between Aristotle's concep
tion of the subject-matter of physics and that of modern physicists. I shall
return, briefly, to Aristotle's view of metaphysics later in the chapter. )
See J. L. Ackrill, Aristotle the Philosopher (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981), ch. 9. For an
English translation of Aristotle's Metaphysics, see W. D. Ross (ed. ), The Works of Aristotle
Translated into English. Volume VIII: Metaphysica, 2nd edn. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1928).
nan\n2 INTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS
What is it, then, that metaphysics and physics have in common? Well,
physics--and here I speak of modern physics--is an empirical science
concerned to explain certain basic and ubiquitous phenomena in the nat
ural world, that is, in the realm of things existing in space and time. Physics
appeals to putative causal laws to explain such phenomena-for example,
the laws of electromagnetism and of gravitation, which causally explain the
motions of electrically charged and massive objects respectively. Meta
physics is also concerned, though not exclusively, with the nature of things
existing in space and time, with the nature of space and time themselves,
and with the nature of causation. But metaphysics is not at heart an empir
ical science--it does not typically appeal to experimental or observational
data in support of its claims. Nor are metaphysicians solely concerned with
the nature of the physical world--unless they happen to espouse the doc
trine of physicalism, which maintains that the only things that exist are
physical entities in space and time. They are also concerned with the nature
of abstract entities, such as the objects of mathematics and logic
numbers, sets, propositions, and so forth. Such entities plausibly do not
exist in space and time, but need not be deemed any less part of reality on
that account. Moreover, there are, very arguably, entities which do exist in
space and time but which are, even so, not the proper subject matter of the
empirical science of physics--entities such as persons and their mental
states of thought and feeling, and entities such as social and political
groups. According to many philosophers and scientists, the behaviour of
these entities can never be explained solely by appeal to the laws of physics,
not least because their behaviour is, in large measure, subject to rational
rather than merely to causal explanation. Of course, physicalist philo
sophers may want to challenge this view: but then they are engaging pre
cisely in a metaphysical debate, not one which belongs to the province of
physics itself.
What begins to emerge from these observations is that one of the roles
of metaphysics, as an intellectual discipline, is to provide a forum in which
boundary disputes between other disciplines can be conducted--for
instance, the dispute as to whether the subject matter of a special science,
such as biology or psychology or economics, can properly be said to be
subsumed under that of another, allegedly more 'fundamental science,
such as physics. According to one traditional and still widespread conception of metaphysics--which is basically the conception of metaphysicswhich informs the present book-metaphysics can occupy the inter
disciplinary role just described because its central concern is with the\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS | 3
fundamental structure of reality as a whole. No special science--not even
physics--can have that concern, because the subject-matter of every spe
cial science is identified more narrowly than this: for instance, biology is
the science of living things, psychology is the science of mental states, and
physics--as I have already indicated--is the science of those states and
processes (energetic states and dynamic processes, for example) which are
apparently common to all things existing in space and time. Even if it can
be successfully argued, as the physicalist maintains it can, that the whole of
reality is confined to things existing in space and time, it wouldn't follow
that metaphysics reduces to physics--because the very argument that real
ity is thus confined, which is a metaphysical argument, is not an argument
that physics can provide.
Metaphysics, as traditionally conceived, is very arguably ineliminable
and conceptually necessary as the intellectual backdrop for every other
discipline. Why? Ultimately, because truth is single and indivisible or, to
put it another way, the world or reality as a whole is unitary and necessarily
self-consistent. The various special sciences, and other intellectual discip
lines whose practitioners would probably not care to call themselves
'scientists'--such as historians and literary theorists--are all concerned, at
least in part, with the pursuit of truth, but pursue it according to their own
- methods of inquiry and within their own prescribed domain. None the
less, the indivisibility of truth means that all of these forms of inquiry
must, if they are to succeed in their aim, acknowledge the need to be
consistent with each other. Nor can any one of them presume to adjudicate
such questions of mutual consistency, because none of them has a jurisdic
tion beyond its own limited domain. Such adjudication can only be pro
vided by the practitioners of an intellectual discipline which aspires to
complete universality in its subject-matter and aims--and that discipline is
metaphysics, as traditionally conceived.
The foregoing argument may be looked upon suspiciously as special
pleading on the part of self-styled metaphysicians seeking to guarantee
themselves an intellectual role. And, to be fair, it would be wrong to
advance that argument in a purely dogmatic spirit, as though its conclu
sion was beyond debating. But, in a way, this point merely serves to
strengthen the claims of metaphysics to be an autonomous and indispens
able form of rational inquiry: because the point is that absolutely every
thing, including even the status and credentials of metaphysics itself, comes
within the purview of the universal discipline which metaphysics claims to
be. None of this means that metaphysicians have to be seen as a caste apart, \n| INTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS
loftily making their pronouncements from intellectual heights above the
common crowd. Precisely because metaphysics is a universal intellectual
discipline, it is one which no rational being can avoid engaging in at least
some of the time. We are all metaphysicians whether we like it or not, and
whether we know it or not. But this isn't to say that anyone's opinion on a
question of metaphysics is just as good, or as bad, as anyone else's. There is
no reason to deny that there can be such a thing as expertise in meta
physical thinking, which takes some pains to acquire. If I had had any
doubts about this, I would not have bothered to write this book!
The threat of relativism
Of course, the argument that we have just been examining in defence of
metaphysics as traditionally conceived--the argument from the indivis
ibility of truth, or from the unity of the world--may seem vulnerable to
attack from those who question this conception of truth and its associated
'universalist' conceptions of reason and rationality. I am thinking of those
philosophers, and practitioners of some other intellectual disciplines, who
espouse some form of cultural or historical relativism. Such people may
deny that truth is single and indivisible, maintaining that what is true for
one culture or historical epoch may not be true for another, and that
different cultures and epochs have different and incommensurable concep
tions of reason and rationality. But, of course, such a doctrine is itself a
metaphysical thesis, in the sense of 'metaphysics' that I have been
expounding and trying to defend: for it is nothing less than a claim about
the fundamental nature of reality, which could not be substantiated solely
by the methods of any special science or intellectual discipline, such as
anthropology or history or sociology. To the extent that the practitioners
of any such discipline are tempted to espouse such a doctrine, they must
acknowledge that what they are advocating is precisely a metaphysical
thesis, because it is one which transcends the boundaries of any more
limited form of rational inquiry. So, once again, we see that the attempt to
undermine or eliminate the metaphysical dimension of our thinking is
self-defeating, because the very attempt necessarily constitutes a piece of
metaphysical thinking itself.
This shows that the argument from the indivisibility of truth is not
absolutely essential to the defence of metaphysics, in the sense that meta
physics would be left completely without justification in its absence: which,
4\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS | 5
once again, should not surprise us, because everything, including even the
question of whether truth is indivisible, is potentially open to metaphysical
inquiry. On the other hand, this isn't to say that the argument from the
indivisibility of truth is idle or superfluous: for I think that the doctrine of
the indivisibility of truth can survive critical inquiry, whereas the denial of
that doctrine cannot. That being so, metaphysics may be said to contain
within itself, in the form of this argument, the grounds of its own justifica
tion. That is to say, metaphysical reasoning may be used to defend the
doctrine of the indivisibility of truth, and that doctrine can in turn be used
to argue for the indispensability of metaphysics. There need be nothing
viciously circular or question-begging about such a procedure.
The objection from naturalized epistemology
There are, however, other people besides cultural and historical relativists
who seek to undermine the credentials of metaphysics, traditionally con
ceived as a universal discipline, of a non-empirical character, concerned
with the fundamental structure of reality. For instance, there are those
philosophers who adhere to what is often known as the programme of
'naturalized epistemology"? The thought here is that any kind of know
ledge attainable by human beings, including anything that might deserve
to be called "metaphysical knowledge, must be compatible with our status
as a kind of natural creature--in fact, a species of animal--that has arisen
through wholly natural processes of biological evolution. Moreover, any
inquiry into the nature of such knowledge must, it may be alleged, be part
of a more general scientific inquiry into the cognitive capacities of crea
tures of our kind. Thus, epistemology--the theory of knowledge--is prop
erly to be conceived of as being a part of the natural science of human
psychology, which must in turn have a biological and ultimately a purely
physical foundation. But what scope does such a conception of human
knowledge and its sources have for acknowledging the existence of meta
physical knowledge, as traditionally conceived? Very little if any, it may be
thought. For how could a naturally evolved life-form, with cognitive
capacities 'designed by nature solely to equip it to survive in a hostile
- Much of the inspiration for this programme stems from the work of W. V. Quine: see espe
cially 'Epistemology Naturalized', in his Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1969). For discussion, see Hilary Kornblith (ed. ), Naturalizing
Epistemology (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1985). \n6 | INTRODUCTION: The nature of METAPHYSICS
environment, attain non-empirical knowledge of the fundamental structure of reality? On this view, the only kind of 'metaphysics' deserving ofrecognition would be, if there can be such a thing, naturalized
metaphysics--that is, a metaphysics knowledge of whose truths could
plausibly be seen as knowable by and practically advantageous to animals
with our particular biological capacities and needs. Any such 'metaphys
ics', it may be alleged, must be at least continuous with natural science
itself, or more likely just a part of it. So, on this view, there is no question
that metaphysics is equipped to answer which isn't properly in the domain
of some natural science--either the fundamental science, physics, or one
of the special sciences, if these are not ultimately reducible to physics.
The trouble with this line of thinking is, once more, that it is liable to
undermine itself and in the course of doing so demonstrate yet again the
indispensability or ineliminability of metaphysics as traditionally con
ceived. In the first place, to the extent that a wholly naturalistic and evo
lutionary conception of human beings seems to threaten the very possibil
ity of metaphysical knowledge, it equally threatens the very possibility of
scientific knowledge--for it is equally mysterious how a naturally evolved
creature should have any capacity to acquire knowledge of such arcane
matters as the formation of stars or the structure of DNA. No other
animal species with which we are acquainted is or ever has been capable of
such scientific knowledge. It is debatable whether the possession of such
knowledge is advantageous to our species: indeed, it may well turn out to
be the cause of our untimely extinction. More to the point, though, no
one has the slightest idea as to how or why early humans acquired this
capacity within the constraints imposed by the theory of evolution by
natural selection. Natural science itself cannot presently explain, then,
how natural scientific knowledge is possible in creatures like ourselves. So
the fact that it cannot explain how metaphysical knowledge, as tradition
ally conceived, is possible in creatures like ourselves gives us no very good
reason to suppose that such knowledge is not possible. For if it did, we
would equally have good reason to suppose that natural scientific know
ledge is not possible in creatures like ourselves--and this would mean that
we would no longer have any grounds to believe in the scientific theories
to which naturalized epistemology appeals, such as the theory of evolution
itself.
Furthermore, it has to be recognized that the very debate that I am now
conducting with the advocate of naturalized epistemology is one which
itself necessarily rests upon certain metaphysical assumptions--some of\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS | 7
which are shared and some of which are disputed. In short, the very doc
trine of naturalized epistemology, and the kinds of arguments that are
invoked in its support, have a metaphysical dimension to them which is at
odds with the central claims of that doctrine--so that the naturalized
epistemologist is apparently guilty of a curious failure of self-awareness,
casting all humankind in a severely naturalistic mould but not recognizing
that this very act betrays a style of thinking on his own part which cannot
easily be accommodated by such naturalism.
Kant and the possibility of metaphysics
But we should not allow these defensive moves on the part of metaphysics
to lull us into thinking that there is, after all, no need to explain the
possibility of metaphysical knowledge. It may well be that this possibility
cannot be explained entirely naturalistically, and we may be entitled to
conclude from this not that there is no such possibility but rather that
naturalism is inadequate. However, this still leaves us looking for a positive
explanation of the possibility. Here we may be reminded that it was
Immanuel Kant who first posed the momentous question 'How is meta
physics possible? " Kant's answer, however, was inimical to metaphysics as
traditionally conceived, that is, conceived as a form of rational inquiry into
the fundamental structure of reality. For Kant held that metaphysical
claims in fact concern not the fundamental structure of a mind
independent reality, even if such a reality exists, but rather the funda
mental structure of rational thought about reality. Kant believed that only
by construing metaphysical claims as having this concern could our non
empirical knowledge of their truth be explained and certified--the
assumption here being that the structure of our own thought is something
unproblematically accessible to us in a way in which the structure of mind
independent reality is not. That assumption may itself be questioned.
More fundamentally, however, it may be objected to the Kantian concep
tion of metaphysics that if nothing about the structure of mind
independent reality is accessible to us then, by the same token, nothing
about the structure of our own thought is accessible to us either--for, in
the relevant sense of mind-independent, our thought itself is nothing if
See Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, B22 in Kemp Smith (London: Macmillan, 1929),
pp. 56-7\n8 INTRODUCTION: The nature of metaphysICS
not part of mind-independent reality. By 'mind-independent reality', Imean the sum total of things whose existence is not dependent upon our
thinking of them. But our own thoughts have an existence which is not
dependent upon our thinking of them and so constitute part of mindindependent reality in this sense. It is true that our thoughts would notexist if we were not thinking them, but that is not to say that we must think
of them for them to exist. Some metaphysicians have held that the only
things that exist are thoughts and their thinkers, that is, the things having
those thoughts. This is not, however, a position according to which there is
no mind-independent reality, in the relevant sense of that expression.
It may be objected to the foregoing argument that it misconstrues the
nature of the Kantian view of metaphysical claims. In maintaining that
metaphysical claims concern the structure of our thought about reality as
opposed to the structure of mind-independent reality itself, it is saying that
such claims concern structural features of the contents of our thoughts, not
any features of the thoughts themselves conceived as real psychological
processes going on in our minds or heads. But how can it coherently be
said that structural features of the contents of our thoughts are not features
of our thoughts themselves? (The content of a thought--what it is a
thought about--is an essential feature of that thought, partly serving to
determine the very identity of that thought. A thought of mine that two
plus two equals four, or that lemons are bitter, would not be that very
thought but for its having that very content. Consequently, it seems there is
no possibility of our circumscribing the supposed subject-matter of meta
physics in such a way that it can be held to concern the contents of thoughts
without having any concern for the nature of thoughts themselves. And, I
repeat, thoughts themselves are nothing if not part of mind-independent
reality.
Perhaps the Kantian will try to counter this latest line of objection in
some way. But, ironically enough, any such attempt would undermine the
very position that he is trying to defend: for in order to make any such
attempt, the Kantian will have to engage in genuine metaphysical argument as traditionally conceived. He will have to deny, for instance, that thecontent of a thought is an essential feature of that thought: and this is to
deny a certain thesis concerning the nature of a certain category ofentities--thoughts--conceived as being elements of a mind-independentreality. Once again we see how metaphysics, as traditionally conceived, isinescapable for any rational thinker. The Kantian attempt to avoidmetaphysics in this sense by restricting our critical concerns purely
a
to the\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS |
contents of our thoughts appears doomed to failure. Questions to do with
content themselves have, inescapably, a genuinely metaphysical dimension,
that is, a dimension which does not have solely to do with the content of
thoughts about content.
The reason why Kant sought to redefine the nature of metaphysical
claims as being claims about the structure of our thought about reality
rather than the structure of reality itself is that he believed that only in
this way could the absolutely certain and non-empirical character of
metaphysical knowledge be explained. If metaphysical claims concerned
mind-independent reality, he reasoned, we could not possibly have certain
knowledge of their truth--and yet, he considered, we do know some
metaphysical truths with absolute certainty. Notice here, first of all, that the
very assertion that it would not be possible to have certain knowledge of
metaphysical truths if metaphysical truths concerned mind-independent
reality is itself a metaphysical claim, in the traditional sense of 'meta
physics', rather than in Kant's own redefined sense of the term. This in
itself shows, once more, the self-defeating nature of Kant's attempted
redefinition. Secondly, however, even granting the truth of this
metaphysical assertion, why shouldn't we respond to it by saying not that
metaphysical knowledge as traditionally conceived is impossible (itself a
self-defeating claim, inasmuch as it is precisely a metaphysical claim as
traditionally conceived), but rather that metaphysical knowledge is almost
never certain knowledge--that is, that metaphysical knowledge-claims can
almost never be absolutely invulnerable to falsification or disproof? Why
should we imagine that metaphysics affords us a method of rational
inquiry which guarantees the truth of its conclusions, beyond any possibil
ity of their subsequent reversal in the light of further inquiry? Not even in
mathematics do we think that we have such incontrovertible methods of
discovery. It is true, of course, that a mathematical 'proof' relinquishes the
title of proof' once it has been 'proved to be invalid, so that any genuine
'proof' cannot but be successful. But that is like saying that all knowledge
is, by definition, knowledge of what is true, and consequently that what we
'know cannot but be true.
Metaphysics and empirical knowledge
Of course, it may be considered that the greater problem about meta
physical knowledge-claims, as traditionally conceived, is not so much how
1116
9\n10 | INTRODUCTION: The Nature of metaphysics
they could attain to certainty as how they could be non-empirical. Now in
this respect, too, metaphysical knowledge-claims are akin to mathematical
knowledge-claims, which are likewise held to be non-empirical, in the
sense that they are not answerable to empirical evidence for their support
or confirmation. And then the worry might be this. If metaphysical
knowledge-claims concern the fundamental structure of mind
independent reality then, if that structure is, at least in some respects,
contingent rather than necessary, it is hard to see how we can have know
ledge of it which does not rely upon empirical evidence, for it seems that
only such evidence could reveal to us that the world we inhabit has one
contingent structure rather than another which it is equally possible for
the world to have had. In this respect, metaphysics differs from mathemat
ics, it may be said, where there is no element of contingency since the
objects and structures investigated by mathematics are purely abstract. (Of
course, it may be urged that the supposedly abstract nature of mathemat
ical objects--numbers, sets, functions and the like--also makes our puta
tive knowledge of them problematic, but for a quite different reason,
namely, because it is hard to understand how our minds, which belong to
the concrete world of things in space and time, can grasp relationships
between purely abstract objects. )
This kind of consideration, then, may seem to drive us in the direction
of regarding metaphysical knowledge, to the extent that it is possible at all,
as being a species of empirical knowledge. But then it is not clear, after all,
that metaphysics can legitimately claim to be distinct from, and in any
sense prior to, natural science: we seem to be compelled, after all, to accept
the view of naturalized epistemology that the only kind of metaphysics
available to us is one that is continuous with, or indeed just a part of,
empirical scientific inquiry into the nature of the world.
The proper response to this apparent difficulty is, I think, the following.
We should concede that, where a metaphysician asserts the existence of
some fundamental structural feature of reality which he deems to be con
tingent in character, then, indeed, he should acknowledge that this claim is
answerable to empirical evidence, at least in part. But it is important to see
that such a claim is not answerable solely to empirical evidence. For where
a metaphysician makes such a claim, it is incumbent upon him to
establish--though not necessarily with absolute certainty, for reasons
given earlier--that the existence of that feature is at least possible. The key
point here is that empirical evidence cannot be evidence for the existence
of anything which is not a possible feature of reality. But establishing that\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS 11
the existence of a certain feature of reality is possible is not something that
can, in general, be achieved by merely empirical means of inquiry, precisely
because empirical evidence can only be evidence for states of affairs that
can independently be shown to be possible. Thus metaphysics, like math
ematics, does have a non-empirical subject-matter, to the extent that it is
the intellectual discipline whose concern it is to chart the possibilities of
real existence. Metaphysics is concerned to discover what the totality of
existence could embrace: that is to say, what categories of entities could
exist and which of them could co-exist. Having charted the possibilities,
the question will remain as to which of many mutually incompatible pos
sibilities for the fundamental structure of reality actually obtains--and this
question can only be answered, if at all, with the aid of empirical evidence,
and then only tentatively and provisionally.
for thenotconriemelia defintly
Possibility, concepts, and semantics
object to furtherthefor time being confirm
We see, then, how, on this conception of the task of metaphysics, meta
physics can genuinely be concerned with the fundamental structure of
reality itself, rather than just with the structure of our thought about real
ity, and at the same time can have a non-empirical character which dis
tinguishes it from natural science. But a problem may still remain. For
how, it may be asked, is non-empirical knowledge of what is possible itself
possible? How is it possible for creatures like ourselves to chart the realm of
possibilities? Of course, this is a curious question, to the extent that it is,
itself, a question--addressed to ourselves--about the very realm of possi
bilities whose accessibility is being called into question. Suppose we were
to come up with an argument whose conclusion was that it is not possible
for us to chart the realm of possibilities. That conclusion would seem to
undermine itself, because the conclusion itself concerns the realm ofsibilities, maintaining that that realm does not include the possibility of
our charting it. We could only have reason to believe the conclusion if the
conclusion were false: so we can have no reason to believe it. Is this just a
debater's trick? I don't think so: rather, it is yet another example of the
unavoidability of metaphysics. As rational beings, we cannot but consider
ourselves capable of knowing at least something about the realm of possi
bilities. This should not be surprising. Reasoning itself depends upon a
grasp of possibilities, because a valid argument is one in which it is not
possible for the conclusion to be false if the premises are true--and a:
a
Ad
absidan
posodywavent\n12 | INTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS
rational being is a creature which can discern the validity of at least somearguments.
a
Some philosophers maintain that questions of what is possible are, ultimately, just questions about what concepts we deploy or the meaningsof our words. For example, it may be said that the only reason why it is notpossible for a bachelor to be married is that 'bachelor' means 'unmarriedman'. If all possibility is grounded in the meaning of words, which ispurely conventional in nature, perhaps there is, after all, no 'realm ofpossibilities' for metaphysics to chart in any ontologically serious sense. Indeed, the task we have been assigning to the metaphysician might, onthis view, more appropriately be assigned to the lexicographer. But, in fact, it doesn't make sense to suppose that all possibility is grounded in the
meaning of words, not least because there are possibilities and impossibilities concerning the meanings of words themselves which cannot with
out absurdity be taken to be grounded in the meanings of words. In anycase, returning to our bachelor example, it is clear that there is in fact a
perfectly good sense in which it is possible for a bachelor to be married:
what is not possible is for a bachelor to be married and still correctly be
described as a 'bachelor', given the meaning of this English word. This is
an impossibility concerning the meaning of a word. But the sense in whichit is possible for a bachelor to be married has nothing whatever to do with
the meanings of words. Similarly, the sense in which it is possible for ahuman being to run a mile in four minutes, or the sense in which it is
possible for a pint of water to be contained in a two-pint jug, has nothingwhatever to do with the meanings of words. These are real possibilities, which are grounded in the natures of things, not in the meanings of thewords we use to describe things.
There be an innocuous sense in which at least some possibilities
have a 'conceptual basis. Reflection on the concepts of a pint of water andof a two-pint jug suffices to persuade us that it is possible for the latter to
contain the former, just as reflection on the concept of an isosceles trianglesuffices to persuade us that it is possible to divide it into two equal rightangled triangles. But this isn't to deny that the possibilities in question aregrounded in the natures of the things concerned, nor is it to imply thatthese possibilities are grounded merely in the meanings of the words weuse to describe those things. For an adequate concept of a thing of a certainkind should embody a correct grasp of that thing's nature. Someone cannot, for instance, be in possession of an adequate concept of an isoscelestriangle if he conceives of this as a three-sided
may
geometrical figure none\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS | 13
of whose sides are the same in length--because an isosceles triangle is
not a figure of that nature. No harm is necessarily done, then, in saying
that a knowledge of real possibilities may be arrived at by reflection on
concepts: properly understood, this needn't be seen as implying that
possibilities don't exist independently of our ways of thinking about or
'conceptualizing the world.
I make these points about meanings and concepts because there are
some philosophers who would seek a basis in language, or more precisely
in the theory of meaning, for any legitimate claims that they would be
prepared to characterize as 'metaphysicaľ. " In many ways, such a view of
the status of metaphysical claims is a modern-dress version of Kant's view
of metaphysical claims as being concerned with the structure of thought.
Indeed, for those philosophers who consider that the structure of thought
just is, at bottom, the structure of the language in which thought is
expressed, the two views are very close indeed, if not identical. In any case,
objections similar to those against Kantianism may be raised against what
we may call the semantic conception of metaphysics. It is quite possibly
true that different languages reflect in their vocabulary and grammatical
structures the different metaphysical preconceptions of the speech com
munities whose languages they are. But even if this is true, it wouldn't
serve to show that metaphysical claims are grounded purely in language.
Moreover, it is important to recognize that human beings are not incapable
of challenging and rejecting the metaphysical preconceptions of the speech
community in which they happen to have been born and educated. To be
persuaded of this fact, one has only to reflect on the enormous variety of
metaphysical systems that have been proposed and defended over the cen
turies by philosophers belonging to the same or closely related speech
communities. So there really is no evidence that metaphysical thinking is
invariably or unavoidably subject to a strong degree of linguistic or cula
tural relativity. However, I have already said enough in rebuttal of the
relativist critics of metaphysics as traditionally conceived.
Ontology and ontological categories
At the outset of this chapter, I mentioned Aristotle, whose view was that
metaphysics is the science of being qua being, and for that reason
* See, for example, Michael Dummett, The Logical Basis of Metaphysics (London: Duckworth,
1991), introd. \nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF Metaphysics
conceptually prior to any special science with a more limited subject
matter. This view places ontology--the study of what categories of entities
there are and how they are related to one another--at the heart of meta
physics. Clearly, it is a view which accords well with the conception of
metaphysics that I have been defending in thischapter--the view that
metaphysics is concerned with the fundamental structure of reality as a
whole. Aristotle does not commit what I have characterized as the Kantian
error of supposing that metaphysics concerns the structure of our thought
about being rather than being itself. It is true, of course, that we can only
discourse rationally about the nature of being inasmuch as we are capable
of entertaining thoughts about what there is or could be in the world. But
this doesn't mean that we must substitute a study of our thought about
things for a study of things themselves. Our thoughts do not constitute a
veil or curtain interposed between us and the things we are endeavouring
to think of, somehow making them inaccessible or inscrutable to us. On
the contrary, things are accessible to us precisely because we are able to
think of them. The things we think of do not thereby collapse into the
thoughts we have of them, as idealist philosophers are apt to suppose. In
the remainder of this book, then, I shall be following Aristotle's lead rather
than Kant's concerning the nature of metaphysics as an intellectual discip
line though I should stress that it is no part of my aim to promote Aristot
le's views on other matters to do with metaphysics. For reasons given
earlier, my stance on this issue does not imply that it is inappropriate, in
metaphysics, to attempt to justify certain judgements by reflecting on con
cepts. In what follows, I shall frequently adopt this procedure when I
examine, amongst others, the concepts of identity, persistence, change,
necessity, possibility, causation, agency, space, time, and motion. For it is only
if we can achieve a clear understanding of such fundamental metaphysical
concepts and their interrelationships that we can hope to deploy them
successfully in our attempts to articulate the fundamental structure of
reality.
I have not included in this book a separate chapter on ontological
* For a fuller account of the conception of metaphysics defended here and assumed throughoutthe book, see my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1998), ch. 1. For other recent accounts of the nature of metaphysics, all of which I sympathizewith to some degree if not entirely, see Peter van Inwagen, Metaphysics (Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress, 1993), ch. 1: Michael Jubien, Contemporary Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1997), ch. 1; Michael J. Loux, Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction (London: Routledge, 1998), introd. ;and Frank Jackson, From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defence of Conceptual Analysis (Oxford: Claren
don Press, 1998). For a rather older but still very influential statement of the character of metaphysics, see P. E. Strawson, Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics (London: Methuen, 1959), pp. 9ff, where he distinguishes between 'revisionary and descriptive' metaphysics.
14\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS |
a
categories, because it is difficult to motivate a discussion of categorization
in abstraction from a detailed treatment of the metaphysical questions that
arise as to whether this or that category of entities should or should not be
embraced by our ontology, or theory of what there is. (The nearest I come
to providing such a discussion is in Chapter 13, although even there my
focus is only on selected issues of categorization; certain questions of
categorization also figure importantly in Chapters 19 and 20. ) But it may
be worth while saying a little here about the general shape that a system of
categories may be expected to have. Traditionally, most such systems are
hierarchical in structure, having the form of an inverted tree, the topmost
category being that of entity or being in general. Anything that does or
could exist is, it would seem, uncontroversially describable as an "entity' of
some sort. The next highest level of categorization is, however, a matter of
some controversy. Some metaphysicians, for instance, think that all entities
are fundamentally divisible at this level into universals and particulars,
while others see the most fundamental division as being between abstract
entities (for example, numbers, sets, and propositions) and concrete
entities. " (I shall say more about both of these divisions in Part VI of this
book. ) These high-level categories may then be further subdivided into a
range of subordinate categories at a third level of categorization
although, again, there is no consensus amongst metaphysicians as to how
exactly these divisions should be made. For example, one might want to
divide the category of universals into the two sub-categories of properties
and relations. Again, one might want to divide the category of concrete
entities into things (or persisting objects) and events--a division I discuss
in some detail in Chapter 13. "Things' might then be further subdivided
into substances and non-substances-examples of the latter being such
things as a heap of sand or a bundle of sticks, which lack any internal
principle of unity and depend for their existence and identity upon things
which do possess such a principle (things like plants, animals, molecules,
and stars, which are consequently classifiable as "substances').
But there will inevitably be some types of entity whose place in any
hierarchy of categories is difficult to settle. How, for instance, should we
categorize such putative entities as holes, gaps, and shadows? Are they
• For a third view, which sees the most fundamental division as being between contingent
entities and necessary entities, see Roderick M. Chisholm, A Realistic Theory of Categories: An Essay
on Ontology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), especially p. 3. I discuss ontological
categorization more fully in The Possibility of Metaphysics, ch. 8. See also Joshua Hoffman and
Gary S. Rosenkrantz, Substance among Other Categories (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1994), ch. 1.
15\n| INTRODUCTION: The nature of METAPHYSICS
entities
universals particulars
concreteproperties
(e. g. redness,
circularity)
relations
(e. g. parenthood,
betweenness)
abstract
(e. g. sets,
propositions)
things events
(e. g. explosions,
collisions)
substances
(e. g. animals,
molecules, stars)
non-substances
(e. g. heaps, holes?
shadows? )
Fig. 1. 1
concrete or abstract entities? Are they properly describable as 'immaterial
objects', or are they mere 'privations' or 'absences' and as such not really
beings at all, but 'non-beings? (Of course, if we really want to include
'non-beings' in our ontology, then we had better not treat the terms
sentity and being' as synonymous after all, at least so long as 'entity' is
taken to denote our topmost ontological category. ) Space and time them
selves, together with their various parts (individual regions of space and
moments of time, for example), are equally difficult to categorize, as will
emerge from some of the discussions in Part V of this book. With these
caveats in mind, it may none the less be helpful if, purely for purposes of
illustration, I indicate by means of a simple tree diagram how a system of
categories might in part be organized, along the lines just suggested (see
Fig. 1. 1). But I must stress that this diagram is merely illustrative and has no
claim to being either complete or uncontroversial.
A short outline of this book
It may also be helpful to readers if I now conclude this introductorychapter by providing a brief synopsis of the topics that will be covered in
16\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS
the remainder of the book. As befits a survey of the subject, the book's
contents are as comprehensive as I could practically make them. But many
readers will have a narrower range of concerns, which I hope they may be
helped to locate with the aid of the following overview. ?
Chapters 2, 3, and 4 concern problems of identity, persistence, and
change. Some of these problems involve cases of fission and fusion, in
which one thing 'becomes two' or two 'become one'--as in the notorious
puzzle of the ship of Theseus. In Chapter 2, I look at such cases with a view
to determining whether, and if so how, a composite thing can retain its
identity over time while undergoing a change of its component parts. I also
raise the question of whether identity could be vague, or a matter of
degree. In Chapter 3, I turn to the rather different question of whether, and
if so how, a thing can retain its identity over time while undergoing a
change of its intrinsic qualities--the so-called problem of intrinsic change.
Here I explain and evaluate the doctrine of temporal parts, which offers
one solution to this problem. Then, in Chapter 4, I look at the question of
whether our concept of identity should be a relative or an absolute one, in
the course of discussing how we can best conceptualize cases of so-called
substantial change--for example, the case of a statue being formed from a
lump of bronze. Should we allow that two different things, such as the
statue and its constituent bronze, can exist in exactly the same place at the
same time? How indeed, if at all, does the relation of constitution differ
from the relation of identity?
The next three chapters concern the metaphysics of modality, that is,
metaphysical issues to do with possibility and necessity. In Chapter 5, after
considering some analogies between time and modality, I look at a well
known attempt to prove that true identity statements are necessarily true
and raise some possible objections to this alleged proof. I also examine
some of its supposed metaphysical implications, in particular its bearing
upon the mind-body problem. In Chapter 6, I introduce the distinction
between essential and accidental properties and raise the question of
whether this distinction is founded in convention or has a more objective
basis. I also examine two important essentialist theses concerning the? This is also a convenient place for me to draw the attention of readers to the following veryuseful reference works and collections of readings on contemporary metaphysics: Hans Burkhardtand Barry Smith (eds. ), Handbook of Metaphysics and Ontology (Munich: Philosophia Verlag, 1991); Jaegwon Kim and Ernest Sosa (eds. ), A Companion to Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995);
Stephen Laurence and Cynthia Macdonald (eds. ), Contemporary Readings in the Foundations ofMetaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998); and Steven D. Hales (ed. ), Metaphysics: ContemporaryReadings (Belmont, Calif. : Wadsworth, 1999).
17\n| INTRODUCTION: the nature of metaphysICS
necessity of origin and the necessity of constitution. In this connection, I
describe certain modal paradoxes and the threats they pose for essential
ism. Next, in Chapter 7, I discuss the ways in which so-called possible
worlds have been invoked to interpret modal statements and raise some
questions concerning the ontological status of possible worlds and their
inhabitants. I also discuss the so-called problem of transworld identity and
examine some arguments for and against the doctrine of actualism, that is,
the view that only actual entities, not merely possible ones, exist.
The following group of three chapters focuses on the nature of causality
and the interpretation of counterfactual conditional statements. Many cur
rently popular accounts of such statements invoke possible worlds for their
interpretation, and such statements are in turn commonly invoked for the
purpose of analysing causal relations. In Chapter 8, I explain and discuss
some of the leading possible-worlds analyses of counterfactual con
ditionals, looking in particular at problems raised by the context
dependency of counterfactuals and by the difficulty of making judgements
of similarity between possible worlds. In Chapter 9, I look at the so-called
'Humean' or 'regularity' theory of causation and contrast it with counter
factual analyses of causal statements and probabilistic theories of caus
ation. I raise questions concerning the relata of causal relations--whether,
for example, we should take causes and effects to be events or facts--and
concerning the objectivity of the concept of cause. Finally, in Chapter 10, I
examine various counterfactual analyses of causation, giving special atten
tion to the question of whether such analyses can adequately accom
modate the possibility of certain forms of causal overdetermination. I also
raise some questions concerning conceptual priority, and the issue of
whether counterfactual analyses of causation are compatible with the view
that causal relations are purely objective.
Chapters 11, 12, and 13 follow on naturally from the preceding three,
being concerned with actions and events. In Chapter 11, I raise the question
of whether the senses in which events and agents are causes are distinct
and independent. Is one of these senses more fundamental than the other,
and if so, which? Can agent causation be 'reduced to event causation, or
vice versa? ('Agent, here may be understood in a broad sense, to include
inanimate objects--indeed, to include any object possessing causalpowers. ) In Chapter 12, I inquire whether the class of actions can simply beidentified with a subclass of events, or whether actions and events belongto quite distinct ontological categories. I explore this issue by discussinghow actions and events are to be individuated, focusing on problem cases
18\nINTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS 19
which raise difficulties concerning the location or time of occurrence of an
action or an event. I examine both spatiotemporal and causal criteria of
identity for actions and events. The initial focus in Chapter 13 is on the
question of whether persisting things (and more especially substances) are
ontologically prior to events, or vice versa. Should we be reductivists, elim
inativists, or non-reductive pluralists in such matters? A further issue I
examine is how places and times are related to the things and events which
occupy or occur at them: could there, for instance, be a stretch of time
during which nothing happens?
The topics of Chapter 13 lead us smoothly into those of the next five
chapters, which concern the nature of space and time in general. In
Chapter 14, I examine the distinction between absolute and relational con
ceptions of space and evaluate Sir Isaac Newton's celebrated dynamical
arguments in favour of absolute motion. I also look at the implications for
the nature of time of Albert Einstein's thesis of the relativity of simul
taneity. In Chapter 15, I look at Kant's famous problem concerning incon
gruent counterparts (objects such as a right hand and its mirror-image left
hand) and ask what implications, if any, it has for the nature of space. Is
space a system of relations, a substance in its own right, or, as Kant himself
thought, "transcendentally ideal? Chapter 16 concerns the notorious para
doxes of motion attributed to the ancient Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea.
Here I ask whether any of these paradoxes establishes that continuous
motion is impossible, or whether modern mathematics can resolve the
apparent difficulties raised by them. I also examine the issue of whether
space, time, and motion could be discontinuous. In Chapter 17, I discuss a
well-known argument for the unreality of time developed by the Cam
bridge philosopher J. M. E. McTaggart. In doing so, I look at the relation
between time and tense and raise the question of whether or not there are
tensed facts. I discuss the notion of temporal "becoming and the rivalry
between "static' and 'dynamic' conceptions of the nature of time. I also
consider the question of whether the future is as `real' as the present and
past and examine its bearing on the truth or falsehood of determinism. In
the last chapter of this group of five, Chapter 18, I raise the question of how
the direction of time is related to the direction of causation. Is backward
causation possible? I explore this issue by examining, amongst other
things, the possibility of time travel into the past. The discussion includes a
consideration of whether the 'arrow of time can be explained by reference
to physical laws.
The last two chapters of the book are concerned with two very\n20 | INTRODUCTION: THE NATURE OF METAPHYSICS
fundamental but closely related metaphysical distinctions, the distinctionbetween universals and particulars and the distinction between abstractand concrete entities. In Chapter 19, I examine various accounts of the firstof these distinctions and raise the question of whether we really need toinclude both universals and particulars in our ontology. Can particulars beregarded, in effect, as bundles of universals, or, conversely, can classes ofparticulars serve the purposes for which universals are usually invoked? Inthis context I discuss the merits and difficulties of theories which invoke
the existence of so-called 'tropes', sometimes also called 'particularizedqualities'. Finally, in Chapter 20, I look at the question of how we shoulddraw the distinction between abstract and concrete objects, and ask what
reason we can have, if any, to believe in the existence of abstract objects,
such as numbers, sets, and propositions. There is also some discussion of
how we should categorize 'facts' or 'states of affairs' and what place, if any, we should grant such items in our ontology. \nPART I
IDENTITY AND CHANGE\n\n2.
IDENTITY OVER TIME AND
CHANGE OF COMPOSITION
Numerical and qualitative identity
The concept of identity is a puzzling one, seeming at once perfectly simple
and yet enormously complex. On the side of simplicity, there is the
indisputable fact that everything is identical with itself and with no other
thing. And whatever is true of a thing is true of anything identical with that
thing, since anything identical with that thing is that very thing itself. This
latter principle is sometimes known as 'Leibniz's Law', in deference to its
most famous advocate, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. From what has been
said so far, identity seems to be an utterly trivial relation which can have no
metaphysical significance--trivial because everything whatever stands in
this relation to itself and to nothing else. Indeed, one may even wonder
with what propriety identity can be called a relation at all, since we nor
mally think of relations as holding between different things. However, we
are happy to say that a relation which holds between different things may
also sometimes hold between a thing and itself: for example, a person may
hit another person, but we also say that a person may hit himself. The odd
thing about identity, thought of as a relation, is that it can only ever hold
between a thing and itself. But perhaps that just makes it an unusual
relation, rather than not a genuine relation at all.
The more puzzling aspects of identity begin to emerge when we con
sider it in combination with the phenomenon of change. We regularly say
that things can change over time, meaning thereby that one and the same
thing can be different at different times. But it may seem to be nothing
short of a contradiction to say that a thing can be both the same and
different, that is, both the same and not the same. Here philosophers are
usually quick to draw a distinction between what they call numerical and
11***\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
qualitative identity. At least in many cases, they say, when a thing changes, it remains numerically one and the same thing but becomes qualitativelydifferent-for example, it is one and the same banana that is first green incolour and later yellow, or one and the same tree that is first small in sizeand later large. Are there, then, two different kinds of identity, or twodifferent senses of the word 'same? Most philosophers and logicianswould answer 'No' to this question. They would say that when we speak ofa thing becoming qualitatively different over time, we simply mean thatthis thing has numerically different qualities at numerically differenttimes--for instance, that the banana has one quality, greenness, at one
time and another quality, yellowness, at another time. On this view, all
identity is really numerical identity, but we have to distinguish between theidentity of a thing and the identity of its qualities.
Composite objects and change of parts
We shall be looking more closely at the nature of qualitative change in the
next chapter. In this chapter, I want to focus on another kind of change
which may seem at least as puzzling--change of composition. Many of the
objects that we refer to in everyday conversation are composite objects,
that is to say, they are composed of various other objects, which are there
fore parts of them. For instance, a typical table is composed of four
wooden legs attached to the four corners of a rectangular wooden surface.
Human beings and other living organisms are, of course, composite
objects, with a very complex compositional structure. A tree is composed
of trunk, branches, leaves, roots, and so forth--and these in turn are com
posed of other things, such as cells, which are composed of yet smallerorganic bodies and, ultimately, of subatomic particles. Thus we find in
nature various hierarchies of composition. We find such hierarchies also in
the realm of artefacts of our own making, such as cars and computers. In fact, examples drawn from the realm of artefacts are popular inphilosophical discussions of change of composition, because we tend to bemore familiar with the ways in which such objects are composed, theybeing products of deliberate human design.
Just as we find it perfectly natural to say that one and the same thing canchange its qualities over time, we find it perfectly natural to say that oneand the same thing can change its parts over time. Indeed, we seem compelled to say this in the case of living organisms, in whose very nature it is
24\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION 25
a.
to undergo processes of growth and metabolism which involve an
exchange of matter between an organism and its environment. But even in
the case of artefacts, we find it natural to speak of such change. When I
take my watch or car to be repaired, I do not complain that it is not the
same watch or car if it is returned to me with some of its worn parts
replaced by new ones. Of course, there is a sense in which the watch is not
the same' after it has been repaired: it is not the same in respect of its
component parts--it now has different ones. But it is still, we want to say,
one and the same watch--it is 'numerically the same. It is not the case that
the watch which I took to be repaired has ceased to exist and a new and
numerically different watch has replaced it. That, at least, is what we natur
ally want to say. But the question is: can we say this, without falling into
absurdity or even contradiction? It is relatively easy to construct certain
puzzle cases which seem to threaten the intelligibility of our ordinary ways
of talking about such matters. By the far the best known of these puzzle
cases is the problem of the ship of Theseus. The version we shall examine
was first stated by Thomas Hobbes, based on a passage from a work of the
ancient Greek biographer Plutarch.
The puzzle of the ship of Theseus
According to legend, when the hero Theseus died, his famous ship was
preserved in the harbour at Athens for many years. In the course of time,
parts of it began to decay and these were replaced by new parts of the same
form and materials as the originals. Eventually, none of the original parts
remained, posing the question of whether the ship in the harbour was still
the same ship as the ship that Theseus had sailed in--that is, whether it
was numerically identical with the original ship of Theseus. Since we cus
tomarily allow that an artefact can undergo replacement of its parts, at
least if the replacement occurs in a gradual and piecemeal fashion, the
obvious answer to this question would seem to be that the renovated ship,
as we may call it, is indeed identical with the original ship. The only
alternative would be to impose some limit on the proportion of a ship's
parts that could be replaced without loss of its identity--that is, without its
ceasing to exist. But it is easy to see that this will compel us to say that a
See Thomas Hobbes, De Corpore, ch. 11, in The English Works of Thomas Hobbes, ed. William
Molesworth (London: John Bohn, 1839-45).
epaisShip of these Ty
e follot flort. I venter
ail 1 Whicco to put\n| IdentitY AND CHANGE
ship cannot survive the replacement of any of its parts, which seemsabsurd, or at least strongly in conflict with common sense.
The reason for this consequence is that identity is a transitive relation: that is to say, if a is identical with b and b is identical with a then, ofnecessity, a is identical with c. Suppose, then, that we impose some limit onthe proportion of a ship's parts that can be replaced without loss of identity: for instance, suppose we stipulate that up to 5 per cent of a ship'sparts, but no more, can be replaced without that ship ceasing to exist.
According to this criterion, it would be possible to replace 4 per cent ofship a's parts in such a way that the resulting ship, ship b, is still identicalwith ship a. But then it would likewise be possible to replace 4 per cent ofship b's parts in such a way that the resulting ship, ship c, is still identicalwith ship b--in which case, the transitivity of identity implies that ship a isidentical with ship c. However, in such a case it could well be that ship a
and ship c differ in their parts by more than the 5 per cent limit (in fact, byup to 8 per cent), implying that, according to the proposed criterion, theycould not be the same ship. Thus we have a contradiction, the criterion
implying, in such a case, both that ship a is identical with ship c(because of
the transitivity of identity) and that ship a is not identical with ship c
(because the proposed limit is exceeded). Consequently, the only consist
ent limit to impose is one of o per cent, allowing no change of parts at all. ?
If we want to allow change of parts at all, it seems that we must allow a
complete change of parts. (A rather different proposal would be to say that
a ship cannot have more than a certain proportion of its original parts
replaced, but this, too, runs into difficulties: first, because any limit that
might be set would appear to be arbitrary, and second, because the original
parts of a thing are, by definition, the parts which that thing had when it
first came into existence, yet part of our problem is to distinguish between
a case of a new ship coming into existence and one of an existing ship
undergoing a change of parts. )
So far, we have seen that it is plausible to allow that something like a shipcan, in time, undergo even a complete replacement of its parts--provided, of course, that this is done little by little. But now we come to the real
puzzle of the ship of Theseus. Suppose that, as the original parts of Theseus' ship are gradually replaced by new ones, those original parts arecarefully removed to a warehouse and stored there, until the warehouse
The view that a composite object cannot, strictly speaking, ever undergo a change of parts isknown as 'mereological essentialism and is espoused by Roderick M. Chisholm: see his Person andObject: A Metaphysical Study (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1976), ch. 3 and app. B.
26\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION | 27
eventually contains all of the original parts, while all the replacement parts
belong to the ship in the harbour (the renovated ship, as we have decided
to call it). And then suppose that someone puts all of the original parts
together again to form a ship which is exactly like the original ship of
Theseus: call this ship the reconstructed ship. Now we have two very simi
lar ships, the renovated ship and the reconstructed ship, each of which
might seem to have some claim to be identical with the original ship of
Theseus. The claim of the renovated ship we have already examined: it rests
upon the apparent fact that a ship can undergo, in time, a complete
replacement of its parts. But the reconstructed ship also seems to have a
good claim, for not only is it exactly like the original ship in respect of its
appearance (as is the renovated ship), but also it is composed of exactly the
same parts. A further consideration apparently in support of this claim is
that we commonly allow that an artefact can be disassembled at one time
and later reassembled, the implication being that the reassembled artefact
is numerically identical with the one that was earlier disassembled--think,
for example, of a tent or a bicycle that is designed to be treated in this way,
or of a watch that is taken to pieces for cleaning and later put back together
again. If the original ship of Theseus had simply been gradually dis
mantled, without replacement of any of its parts, and the parts had been
successively removed to the warehouse, there eventually to be reassembled
to form a ship of exactly the same structure, the natural thing to say in this
case would be that the original ship had been moved, piece by piece, to the
warehouse. But isn't this also exactly what happens in the case in which the
original parts are replaced by new ones as they are removed from the ship
in the harbour?
Our problem, then, is this. In the case in which both renovation and
reconstruction occur, we have, at a later time, two ships, the renovated ship
in the harbour and the reconstructed ship in the warehouse, both of which
seem to have a good claim to be identical with the original ship of Theseus.
If there had been renovation without reconstruction, we would happily
have identified the renovated ship with the original ship; and if there had
been reconstruction without renovation, we would happily have identi
fied the reconstructed ship with the original ship. But we can't say, in the
case where both renovation and reconstruction occur, that both the reno
vated ship and the reconstructed ship are identical with the original ship,
because this again falls foul of the fact that identity is a transitive relation.
If the renovated ship is identical with the original ship and the original
ship is also identical with the reconstructed ship, then it follows, by the\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
arbitrary
transitivity of identity, that the renovated ship is identical with thereconstructed ship--and yet this surely cannot be the case, because therenovated ship and the reconstructed ship are two quite distinct ships, eachhaving a quite distinct location. On the other hand, it may seem
to say that one rather than the other of the two later ships is identical withthe original ship--for how can we choose, in a principled way, one ratherthan the other for this distinction? Moreover, if we do choose one of themfor this distinction--say, the renovated ship--then we may seem to havethe following absurd consequence on our hands. It seems that we shallhave to say, concerning the reconstructed ship, that although it is not infact identical with the original ship and, indeed, only came into existencefor the first time when its parts were assembled in the warehouse, nevertheless it would have been identical with the original ship if renovation had
never occurred, that is, if the original parts had not been replaced but had
simply been removed from the harbour to the warehouse. In that case, it
seems, the reconstructed ship would have been identical with the originalship, in which case it would have come into existence much earlier, namely,
when the ship of Theseus was first built. But how can it make sense to say
that a certain thing a, which is not in fact identical with a certain other
thing b, would have been identical with b if a certain thing c (in this case,
the renovated ship) had not existed? Surely, whether or not a is identical
with b is a matter which concerns only a and b, quite independently of
what other things do or do not exist.
Two radical solutions to the puzzle
In the light of this conundrum, we may be tempted to conclude that
neither of the later ships is identical with the original ship, though that is
scarcely more palatable than any of our other alternatives. We may even be
tempted to conclude that our common sense conception of composite
objects as things which can persist over time is ultimately incoherent.
However, before we resort to such desperate measures, let us be sure that
we have properly understood the options that confront us. It may be thatwe shall have to surrender some aspects of our common sense conceptionof objects and their persistence on account of the puzzle, or it may even bethat we can defend that conception in its entirety by noticing some distinctions that may so far have escaped us. One aspect of our commonsense conception of objects is that we deem it impossible for the same
28\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION 29.
object to be in two different places at once, or for different objects (or, at
least, different objects of the same kind) to be in the same place at the
same time. If we were to give up this assumption, then one or other of the
following solutions to the puzzle of the ship of Theseus would theoretic
ally be available to us. One solution would be to say that both the reno
vated ship and the reconstructed ship are identical with the original ship,
accepting that this implies that, at the later time, one and the same ship is
in two different places at once, that is, both in the harbour and in the
warehouse. Another solution would be to say, while accepting that the
renovated ship and the reconstructed ship are two quite distinct ships, that
both of these ships were originally in the harbour, so that, in fact, it was
misleading to speak of the ship of Theseus: according to this solution, the
two later ships exactly coincided with one another until the process of
renovation and removal began, whereupon they gradually became
separated.
It must be admitted that both of these solutions seem to be logically
unimpeachable, in that they apparently transgress no law of logic and
respect the transitivity of identity. But they require us to make such exten
sive revisions to our common-sense conception of objects and their per
sistence that we may doubt whether they make good sense, metaphysically
speaking. As I remarked in the previous chapter, the answers to questions
of what is possible are not, in general, determined purely by linguistic
conventions or the meanings of words, but rather by the natures of things
themselves, quite independently of the language which we use to describe
those things. Thus, we are in no position simply to stipulate that one and
the same thing 'can'exist in two places at once, or that two different things
'can' exist in the same place at the same time: if we want to say that either
possibility obtains, then we must earn the right to do so by advancing
cogent arguments--and that may not prove to be at all easy. Moreover,
both of these proposed solutions to the puzzle suffer from the difficulty
that they make it impossible for us to say how many things of a certain
kind, such as ships, exist in a certain number of places at a certain time
without reference to events occurring earlier or later than that time. For
instance, according to the first solution, we cannot tell whether, at a certain
time, we are confronted by two distinct ships in two different places or just
one and the same ship, without knowing about the prior history of the
ship or ships concerned. And according to the second solution, we cannot
tell whether, at a certain time, we are confronted by just one ship in a
certain place or two distinct ships, without knowing about the future\n30 identity AND CHANGE
history of the ship or ships concerned. These consequences seem to renderthe proposed solutions absurd and intolerable.
A better solution?
a
Maybe, however, our common sense conception of objects and persistencecan escape altogether unscathed from the puzzle of the ship of Theseus, ifwe handle it with due care. This is my own opinion, as I shall now try toexplain. ? First of all, we need to distinguish, in a way in which we have not
done so far, between ordinary cases in which a composite artefact, such as a
ship, is gradually disassembled and later reassembled and what happens in
the puzzle case to the original parts of the ship of Theseus. In the ordinary
cases, the various parts concerned are, at all times throughout the process,
either incorporated into a single, partially dismantled ship, or else not
incorporated into any ship at all. For example, there will be a time when
half of the parts are still connected together in a half-dismantled ship,
while the remaining half are loose and separate in a warehouse. At such a
time, it seems proper to say that the ship in question has a full complement
of parts, but that half of them are in the warehouse and half of them are
still in the partially dismantled ship. But what are we to say at the corres
ponding time during the process involved in the puzzle case, that is, when
half of the original parts of the ship of Theseus have been removed to the
warehouse and have been replaced by new ones in the harbour? It seems
indisputable that, at that time, we have in the harbour one entire ship, in
fully working order, with a full complement of parts. But do we also have,
at that time, a ship with a full complement of parts, half of which are in the
warehouse and half of which are in the harbour? If we answer 'Yes', then
we must say, it seems that half of these parts are shared by two distinct
ships, namely, the half which are in the harbour. The ships in question
must be distina ships, because they do not have exactly the same parts--
one of them has parts all of which are in the harbour, while the other has
half of its parts in the harbour and half in the warehouse. However, it is
very doubtful that it makes sense to say that two distinct ships can, at the
same time, share half of their parts. Certainly, our common-sense concep
tion of objects and their persistence does not license us to say this. I
a
The following view was first defended in my 'On the Identity of Artifacts", Journal ofPhilosophy bo (1983), 222-32.
of these stinetso
sh veron
por These\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION
suggest, then, that we should not say this. But then we must decide to
which ship the various parts concerned belong at the time in question.
Clearly, all of the parts in the harbour belong to the ship that is in the
harbour. But if, as we have decided, none of those parts simultaneously
belongs to any other ship, it follows that, at the time in question, there is no
ship which has a full complement of parts half of which are in the harbour
and half of which are in the warehouse. I conclude, indeed, that the parts
in the warehouse belong to no ship at all at that time. This is quite different
from what we say about the parts in the warehouse in an ordinary case of
disassembly and reassembly.
What I am contending is that there is a relevant difference between how
the original ship is related to the reconstructed ship in the puzzle case and
how the original ship is related to the reconstructed ship in an ordinary
case of disassembly and reassembly. The difference turns on the fact that,
in the latter sort of case, none of the original parts of the original ship is
ever appropriated by another, distinct ship. Once the original parts of a
ship have been appropriated by another, distinct ship, I suggest, they cease
to be parts of that original ship: and even if those parts are later
reassembled to compose a ship, the ship that they then compose is a new
ship, numerically different from the original one. In the puzzle case, how
ever, as we have just seen, if we suppose that the original ship is identical
with the reconstructed ship, then we must say that there are times at which
many of its parts have been appropriated by another, distinct ship
namely, the renovated ship--but that these parts later become, once again,
parts of the original ship. And this contravenes the principle that I have
just proposed
In defence of a generalized version of this principle, consider what we
might be committed to saying once we allow, without restriction, that a
thing's parts may be appropriated by other things but later become, once
again, parts of that thing. Suppose, for instance, that all of the atoms
composing a certain tree were to be dispersed throughout the universe for
many years, becoming parts of various other objects during that time, but
that at some much later time they were to come together again by chance
to form a tree, exactly similar to the original tree. Would this original tree
be numerically identical with the much later tree? Surely not. A generalized
version of the principle that I have proposed explains why that is so--and
this fact may be adduced in support of the principle. Of course, we must
not state the principle in such strong terms that it prevents us from saying
that I may temporarily borrow a wheel from your car to replace my.
31\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
missing one and later return it to you for reincorporation into your car.
In such a case, two distinct cars clearly exist throughout the period in
question, yours and mine, though first mine and then yours lacks a full
complement of parts. However, in the puzzle case of the ship of Theseus,
it seems that we can identify the reconstructed ship with the original ship
only if we are prepared to say that there is a time at which most of the ship
of Theseus' parts have been appropriated by another, distinct ship, the
renovated ship--namely, the time at which only the first few parts have
been removed to the warehouse and replaced by new ones. It seems
perfectly proper to insist that we should not be prepared to say this.
My proposed solution to the puzzle of the ship of Theseus implies that it
is the renovated ship that is identical with the original ship. But how, then,
can I escape the difficulty which, as I remarked earlier, seems to attend the
choice of either of the two later ships as being identical with the original
ship? This difficulty, as it applies to my solution, is that it seems that we
shall have to say, concerning the reconstructed ship, that although it is not
in fact identical with the original ship, nevertheless it would have been
identical with the original ship if renovation had never occurred, that is, if
the original parts had not been replaced but had simply been removed
from the harbour to the warehouse. My answer to this apparent difficulty
is that it is a mistake to suppose that the expression the reconstructed ship'
refers to the same ship in the two different possible situations--the situ
ation in which renovation does occur and the situation in which renova
tion does not occur. In both situations, there is a reconstructed ship, that is,
a ship which, at the later time, is put together from all the original parts of
the ship of Theseus that are stored in the warehouse. But the reconstructed
ship that would have been composed of those parts if renovation had not
occurred is not to be identified with the reconstructed ship that is com
posed of those parts in the puzzle situation, in which renovation does
occur. For the former ship would simply have been the ship of Theseus
itself, having undergone a process of disassembly and reassembly, whereas
the latter ship is a quite different ship which first comes into existence at
the later time. Thus, far from it being the case that the expression the
reconstructed ship' refers to the same ship in the two possible situations,
this expression, as it is used in the no-renovation situation, refers to the
same ship as the expression 'the renovated ship' does in the renovation
situation-namely, the original ship of Theseus. So, in answer to the
apparent difficulty for my proposed solution, we can see that I certainly do
not have to say that the reconstructed ship in the renovation situation
32\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION 33
would have been identical with the ship of Theseus if renovation had not
occurred, because the reconstructed ship of the renovation situation would
not even have existed if renovation had not occurred--rather, a quite
different reconstructed ship would then have existed and this would have
been identical with the original ship of Theseus.
It may be felt that this still leaves us with a puzzle. For the implication of
my proposed solution is that, in two different possible situations, the very
same ship parts can undergo exactly the same individual histories and yet
end up composing two quite different ships--the ship of Theseus in one
situation and a newly composed ship in the other. The only difference
between the two situations concerns not what happens to those individual
ship parts, but rather what happens, or fails to happen, to certain other ship
parts: in one of the situations, certain new ship parts are created and put in
place in the harbour, whereas this fails to happen in the other situation.
However, it is unclear to me why this should be deemed in any way para
doxical, since it is a straightforward consequence of the intuitively plaus
ible principle that I advanced earlier, namely, that if sufficiently many of a
thing's parts are incorporated into another thing, then those parts are
appropriated by that other thing and cease to be parts of the first thing. In
the renovation situation, the original parts of the ship of Theseus cannot
all go on being parts of a ship that is steadily being dismantled, because
sufficiently many of them belong instead to a fully functioning ship which
contains new parts. By the time all of the original parts are in the ware
house, none of them belongs to any pre-existing ship and so any ship
which is put together from them is a newly existing ship, not a previously
dismantled ship.
Intermittent existence
A further question which this discussion provokes is whether it is possible
for a composite thing, such as a ship, to enjoy an intermittent or interrupted
existence. So far, I have tried to avoid this issue, which is itself an extremely
vexed one. In an ordinary case of disassembly and later reassembly--as
when a tent is taken down and later erected again, or a watch is taken to
pieces for cleaning and later put back together again--it seems that we
have two options when asked what happens to the composite object con
cerned. We could say that it goes on existing in a disassembled state, or we
could say that it temporarily ceases to exist until it is reassembled. If we say\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
the latter, then we have to recognize a certain ambiguity implicit in talk of
a thing's 'beginning to exist': for if a thing can cease to exist and later
begin to exist' again, then begin to exist in this latter sense does not mean
the same as `come into existence for the first time'. Of logical necessity,
nothing can come into existence for the first time more than once, but we
should not allow the implicit ambiguity in talk of a thing's beginning to
exist' to beguile us into supposing that it is logically impossible--a contra
diction in terms--for a thing to enjoy an intermittent existence. Even so,
this still leaves us with the question of whether it is metaphysically possible
for a thing to enjoy an intermittent existence.
I consider that the answer to this question depends, as we might expect,
upon the nature of the thing concerned--that is, upon what kind of thing
it is. In the case of an artefact, such as a tent or a watch, which is designed
to be capable of disassembly and reassembly, I think that it is proper to say
that it continues to exist when it has been taken apart, provided that its
parts have not been incorporated into other, fully assembled things of the
same kind. Thus, if all the parts of my watch are used to replace parts in
various other fully functioning watches, my watch ceases to exist, for
reasons explained earlier. But if my watch is simply taken to pieces for
cleaning, it goes on existing in a disassembled state. However, other kinds
of composite objects are of such a nature that they cannot survive
disassembly-for example, a living organism, such as an animal, cannot
survive disassembly of its body parts. But I should also point out that, even
in the case of something like a watch, which can survive disassembly, we
have to be careful to specify into what kinds of parts the thing can be
disassembled without its ceasing to exist. Clearly, my watch cannot survive
disassembly' into its constituent atoms: to atomize my watch is to destroy
it for ever. Into what kinds of parts, if any, a composite thing can be
disassembled without its ceasing to exist will again be determined by the
nature of the thing in question. This simply reflects the fact, emphasized in
the previous chapter, that metaphysical possibility is grounded in the
natures of things. Now, given that even in the case of things like tents and
watches, which are designed to be disassembled and reassembled, we need
never speak of a composite thing's having an intermittent existence, I think
it improbable that we should, in fact, ever have need to speak in this way.
So my tentative verdict is that no composite object whatever enjoys a
merely intermittent existence--but I concede that my opinion in this
matter is controversial.
a
34\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION
Fission and fusion
The problem of the ship of Theseus is just one of a large class of problems
involving the fission or fusion of persisting objects. In a case of fission, one
object becomes two or more, whereas in a case of fusion, two or more
objects become one. (I shall not discuss fusion cases separately in what
follows, because it appears that they are merely the inverses of fission cases
and present no distinct problems of their own. ) Now, we must be careful
here as to what we understand by the verb 'become'. When it is said, for
example, that one object becomes two, this cannot unproblematically be
taken to mean that one object existing at an earlier time is at a later time
identical with two distinct objects--for this, as we saw earlier, conflicts
with the principle of the transitivity of identity, at least as that principle is
standardly understood. A few philosophers, it is true, would like to inter
pret that principle in a non-standard way, so that it only applies to things
at a single moment of time, not at different moments of time. Whether
this proposal is really intelligible is a difficult question, though my own
conviction is that it is not. That being so, to say that one object becomes'
two can, it seems, only mean either that one object ceases to exist and two
new objects are created from its parts, or else that one object continues to
exist but another new object is created from some of the old objects
former parts. The latter, I have suggested, is what happens in the case of the
ship of Theseus, which may therefore be classified as a case of fission.
Fission cases may be either symmetrical or asymmetrical. (In what fol
lows, for the sake of simplicity I shall restrict consideration to cases of one
object becoming two. ) In asymmetrical cases, such as the case of the ship
of Theseus, the 'fission products'--the two objects existing at the later
time--are differently related to the original object. In symmetrical cases, they are related in the same way. An example of a symmetrical fission case
would be that of a single amoeba dividing into two distinct amoebas, or
that of a single water drop dividing into two distinct water drops. In such a
case, there is quite a compelling reason to say that the original object ceases
to exist and gives rise to two new objects--the reason being that if we say,
instead, that the original object continues to exist as one of the fission
products, symmetry considerations make it impossible for us to decide, in
* See, for example, André Gallois, Occasions of Identity: The Metaphysics of Persistence, Change, and Sameness (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
35\n36 | IDENTITY AND CHANGE
a non-arbitrary way, which of the two fission products is identical with theoriginal object. Here it may be asked why we shouldn't say, in such a case, that one of the fission products is indeed identical with the original object, but that it is simply indeterminate which of the fission products this is. The
answer is that this suggestion seems to fall foul of a quite compellingargument that identity cannot be vague or indeterminate. Since that
argument has been very influential, we should spend a little time looking atit.
Is vague identity possible?
The argument against the possibility of vague or indeterminate identityruns as follows. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that it is indeterminate
whether a certain object a is identical with a certain object b. Now, Leib
niz's Law--which we met at the beginning of this chapter--implies that if
something is true of an object a which is not true of an object b, then a and
b cannot be identical. But, given that it is indeterminate whether a is
identical with b, it seems to follow that it is true of a that it is indeterminate
whether it is identical with b. However, it is plausibly not true of b that it is
indeterminate whether it is identical with b, since every object is surely
determinately identical with itself. Hence, it seems, something is true of a
which is not true of b, whence we can conclude, by Leibniz's Law, that a is
not identical with b. This reduces to absurdity our original supposition
that it is indeterminate whether a is identical with b, so we may concludethat identity cannot be indeterminate.
It must be confessed that there is an air of sophistry about this
argument--and I certainly have doubts about its cogency. ' In particular, it
may be questioned whether we are in fact entitled to assume that it is not
true of b that it is indeterminate whether it is identical with b. Notice,
however, that it will not do to challenge the argument simply on the
grounds that, in many cases, there is a degree of indeterminacy in the
language which we use to refer to things. Consider a name such as 'Mount
Everest, which refers to a certain mountain. This mountain, as is well
· One well-known version of this argument is due to Gareth Evans: see his 'Can There Be VagueObjects? ', Analysis 38 (1978), 208. See also Nathan U. Salmon, Reference and Essence (Oxford: Blackwell, 1982), 243 ff.
See further my 'Vague Identity and Quantum Indeterminacy', Analysis 54 (1994), 110-14, ormy The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), 63ff. \nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION |
known, is located in the Himalayas, along with many other tall mountains,
which are separated from one another by valleys. But it is to a degree
arbitrary where we say that the foot of one mountain ends and the foot of
another begins. Consequently, there is no single, precisely delimited piece
of terrain which indisputably deserves to be referred to as Mount
Everest'--many different, but very largely overlapping, pieces of terrain are
equally good candidates for this title. Call one of these pieces of terrain T.
Then, it seems, it is to a degree vague or indeterminate whether Mount
Everest is identical with T, simply because our use of the term "Mount
Everest' does not fix its reference sufficiently determinately to decide the
matter one way or the other. However, what we have here is not
indeterminacy in the relation of identity, but merely indeterminacy of
linguistic reference. Moreover, it does not seem that we can treat a case of
symmetrical fission as involving indeterminacy of this merely linguistic
sort. For the latter sort of indeterminacy typically arises when there is a
degree of 'fuzziness' in spatiotemporal boundaries--as there is, for
instance, in the spatial boundary of Mount Everest. But in a case of sym
metrical fission, as when one amoeba divides into two, there is no such
fuzziness: the moment of separation is precise and the fission products are
spatially disconnected from one another.
The paradox of the thousand and one cats
Problems of vagueness afflict our talk about composite objects quite gen
erally. One notorious problem of this kind is the so-called paradox of the
thousand and one cats. Suppose that Tibbles the cat is sitting on the mat.
Tibbles has, naturally, many hairs, but perhaps he is moulting, so that some
of these hairs are loose and about to drop from his coat. Once a hair has
definitely become separated from Tibbles, it is no longer a part of him. But
some of the hairs, maybe at least a thousand of them, are neither definitely
separated from Tibbles nor definitely not separated from Tibbles. One
conceivable way to describe the situation is to say that there are on the mat
many different, but largely overlapping, candidates for the name of 'Tib
bles', which differ from one another in respect of the number and identity
a
7 The problem was first posed by Peter Geach: see his Reference and Generality, 3rd edn. (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1980), 215. In its original form, the problem was not specifically one
of vagueness: I discuss it in that form in my kinds of Being: A Study of Individuation, Identity and
the Logic of Sortal Terms (Oxford: Blackwell, 1989), 68 ff.
37\n| Identity AND CHANGE38
a
of the hairs which may be said to belong to them. According to this con
ception, there are in fact many different cats on the mat--at least 1, 001 of
them--rather than just one cat. That may seem an absurd thing to say, but
defenders of this conception may urge that it involves less of a departure
from common sense than we might imagine. First of all, they may point
out that, while there are, strictly speaking, many different cats on the mat,
all of these cats may be counted as one and the same cat for everyday
purposes. It is not as though we have 1, 001 quite separate cats on the mat,
since the many different cats overlap one another almost entirely--that is
to say, they share the vast majority of their parts, differing from one
another by no more than a few hairs. Secondly, it may be urged that
nothing in our use of the name "Tibbles' fixes its reference decisively to just
one of the many cats rather than any other, and consequently nothing that
we are ordinarily inclined to say about Tibbles will be at all compromised
by the multiplicity of cats present on the mat. Where we are sure that
something is definitely true of Tibbles, such as that Tibbles is sitting on
the mat, this will be true because it is true of every cat in question.
Where something is not true of every cat in question but only of some of
them, however--such as that it possesses a certain hair--we shall
correspondingly not be sure that that thing is definitely true of Tibbles.
It may have been noticed already that the foregoing conception of Tib
bles's situation is not one that I can endorse, given principles that I have
already advocated earlier in this chapter. For I have expressly denied that
two distinct things of the same kind, such as two ships or two cats, can
share the majority of their parts at the same time. I cannot allow, then, that
things like cats can overlap one another to a very high degree. This may
seem to create a problem for me, for how can I decide, in a non-arbitrary
way, which of the many slightly different collections of cat parts present on
the mat composes the one cat that, according to my principles, is sitting on
the mat? The answer is that I do not have to decide. I can say that, in many
cases, the relation of part to whole is to a degree vague or indeterminate.
a
See further David Lewis, Many, but Almost One', in John Bacon, Keith Campbell, and Lloyd
Reinhardt (eds. ), Ontology, Causality and Mind: Essays in Honour of D. M. Armstrong (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1993), 23-38, reprinted in David Lewis, Papers in Metaphysics and
Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999). For more on problems of vagueness
in general and different approaches to solving them, see Rosanna Keefe, Theories of Vagueness
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000) and also Rosanna Keefe and Peter Smith (eds. ),
Vagueness: A Reader (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1997).
See further my 'The Problem of the Many and the Vagueness of Constitution, Analysis 55
(1995), 179-82. \nIDENTITY AND CHANGE OF COMPOSITION | 39
This does not commit me to saying that there is any vagueness in the
relation of identity (even if it should be thought that the latter relation
cannot be vague), since the relation of part to whole and the relation of
identity are quite different relations. According to my conception of Tib
bles's situation, there is only one cat sitting on the mat--Tibbles--but
many slightly different collections of cat parts are present there: and it is
indeterminate which of these collections composes Tibbles. Of course, this
conception of the situation requires me to say that a collection of cat parts
is not a cat, even though it may compose a cat. But that contention is not
difficult to defend, because cats and collections of cat parts have different
persistence conditions. That is to say, there are different kinds of changes
that cats and collections of cat parts can and cannot survive. For instance, a
collection of cat parts can survive the mutual separation of all of its mem
bers, but a cat cannot likewise survive if all of its parts are separated from
one another.
As will be gathered from my treatment of earlier problems in this chap
ter, my inclination is to find a common-sense solution to a metaphysical
problem if such a solution is available. My solution to the problem of
Tibbles is, I think, more in line with common sense than is the alternative
solution, which concedes that there are, strictly speaking, many different
cats sitting on the mat. It can hardly be objected that my solution is
ontologically more extravagant than its rival in that it invokes the existence
of collections of cat parts in addition to that of cats, for the existence of
such collections can scarcely be denied by advocates of the alternative
conception of Tibbles's situation.
However, perhaps it will instead be objected that my solution does
not, after all, relieve me of the obligation to recognize the simultaneous
existence of many different cats on the mat. For if any one of the
collections of cat parts present on the mat is capable of composing a
cat, why don't they all compose cats? --in which case, they will have to
compose different cats, since they are different collections. My answer,
once again, is that it is in the nature of cats that they cannot overlap
one another to any significant extent: it is this fact--that cats largely
exclude one another from occupying the same place at the same time
that prevents there from being more than one of the many largely
overlapping collections of cat parts that can compose a cat at one and
the same time. (To insist that cats largely exclude one another from
occupying the same place at the same time is quite consistent with
allowing that collections of cat parts can largely overlap one another, \n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
because cats and collections of cat parts are things of very differentkinds. )
As is the case with most difficult metaphysical problems, however, itwould be foolish to suppose that one person's solution will necessarilyconvince everyone else. I have presented my own proposed solutions to
two such problems in this chapter--the puzzle of the ship of Theseus and
the paradox of the thousand and one cats--not so much in order to
persuade readers that these solutions are correct, as to try to motivate them
to pursue their own solutions.
40\n3
QUALITATIVE CHANGE AND THE
DOCTRINE OF TEMPORAL PARTS
Leibniz's Law and the problem of qualitative
change
a
At the outset of the preceding chapter, I briefly mentioned the phenom
enon of qualitative change--the sort of change which occurs when a
banana changes in colour from being green to being yellow, or when a
tree changes in size from being small to being large. In such a case, I said,
one and the same object possesses numerically different qualities at
numerically different times. I also mentioned Leibniz's Law, character
izing this as the principle that whatever is true of a thing is true of
anything identical with that thing. But some philosophers feel that there
is a tension between Leibniz's Law and the notion of qualitative change. '
Consider, for instance, a piece of wire which is thought to change from
being straight to being bent, so that at first it possesses the quality of
being straight and later the quality of being bent. Now, something which
is bent is, for that very reason, not straight: the quality of being bent is
incompatible with the quality of being straight. How, then, can it be true
of one and the same object that it is both straight and bent? For if it is
true of the object that it is straight, then, by Leibniz's Law, it is not true
of that same object that it is not straight, and so not true of it that it is
bent.
The obvious answer to this apparent problem is to say that what is true
For more on the background to the problem about to be discussed see, especially, David Lewis,
On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), 202 ff. See also D. M. Armstrong, 'Identity
Through Time', in Peter van Inwagen (ed. ), Time and Cause: Essays Presented to Richard Taylor
(Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980). \n42 | IDENTITY AND CHANGE
of the object in our example is not simply that it is both straight and bent, but rather that it is straight at one time and bent at another, later time.
Although one and the same object cannot be both straight and bent at
the same time, because straightness and bentness are mutuallyincompatible qualities, nothing prevents it from being straight at onetime and bent at another. However, it may be felt that this answer does
not go to the heart of the problem. Given that straightness and bentness
are mutually incompatible qualities, as they certainly appear to be, howis it that one and the same object can possess both of them, even at
different times? How does reference to the times at which the object
allegedly possesses the mutually incompatible qualities render those
qualities any the less mutually incompatible and hence make such an
alleged case of qualitative change any the more intelligible? In fact, doesn't
the present answer to our apparent problem simply assume the very
thing that needs to be explained--namely, the possibility of qualitative
change?
Presentism
A number of very different metaphysical positions have been developed in
response to the problem of qualitative change. We can characterize these
different positions in terms of the different analyses they offer of a simple
statement ascribing a quality to an object at a time--that is, a statement of
the form 'a is F at ť'. Examples of such statements, in everyday English,
would be: "The banana is yellow today', 'The tree will be tall twenty years
from now', and 'The wire was straight a moment ago'. Of course, these
statements, being expressed in everyday English, use the grammatical
device of tense to convey reference to different times, but perhaps this is
unnecessary: perhaps the same information could be conveyed by tenseless
statements making use of dates to refer to different times. The question of
how tense (that is, talk of past, present, and future) is related to the nature
of time is a deep and difficult one, which we shall examine much more
fully in Chapter 17. However, for current purposes I should mention that
according to one philosophical view of the nature of time, only those
things which exist at the present moment--now--really exist at all; and the
only qualities which these things really possess are the qualities that they
possess now. According to this view--presentism, as it is often called--the
only statements ascribing qualities to objects that can strictly be true are\nQUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS | 43
those that ascribe those qualities now to objects that exist now. ? On this
view, then, the only strictly true statements of the form 'a is Fat ť are ones
of the form 'a is F now'. That being so, the word 'now in such a statement
is really redundant and can be dropped without loss of informative con
tent. This seems to solve the problem of qualitative change without more
ado, for then it follows that it is simply never strictly true to say that one
and the same object possesses mutually incompatible qualities at different
times, since the only real time is the present.
Of course, this leaves advocates of presentism with the problem of how
to make sense of our everyday talk about past and future times. But they
may say, for instance, that talk of what is allegedly the case at past and
future times can be construed as talk of what would be the case if a certain
past or future time were present. There is a parallel between this proposed
way of construing talk about past and future times and certain ways of
construing talk about possibilities. As we shall see more fully in Chapter 7,
talk about what is possibly the case is often interpreted, at least by many
philosophers, as talk about what is the case 'in' or 'at' possible worlds that
are different from this, the actual world. However, if we do not wish to be
realists about other possible worlds--that is, do not wish to grant them the
same ontological status as we grant to the actual world--we may seek to
construe talk about what is the case 'in' another possible world as talk
about what would be the case if that other world were actual. (Proponents
of such a view are, naturally, called "actualists'. ) In this way, we may be able
to license talk about other possible worlds but hold that, in reality, only the
actual world exists. In a similar way, then, the presentist, by adopting the
proposal suggested earlier, may be able to license talk about other times,
past or future, while holding that, in reality, only the present time exists.
Three temporal realist solutions to the problem
Most modern philosophers of time, it must be said, are not in favour of
presentism, so that the presentist's somewhat drastic solution' to the prob
lem of qualitative change is not one that is likely to have a very wide appeal.
To many, vndeed, it may appear more like an evasion of the problem than a? In modern times, the doctrine of presentism owes much to the work of A. N. Prior: see, for
example, his Papers on Time and Tense (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968). For a recent application of
the doctrine, see Trenton Merricks, 'On the Incompatibility of Enduring and Perduring Entities'
Mind 104 (1995), 523-31. \nIDENTITY AND CHANGE
solution to it--and, certainly, it seems to me to require a very considerabledeparture from common-sense ways of thinking. If we are realists abouttimes other than the present moment, we must take seriously the reference
to time that appears in a statement of the form 'a is F at t and find some
other solution to the problem of qualitative change. There are three realist
solutions that we need to consider, each of which corresponds to a differ
ent way of analysing or parsing a statement of this form. The first solution
builds the time referred to, t, into what is predicated of the object a, which
is regarded as the genuine subject of the statement. On this view, then,
what is predicated of, or ascribed to, the object a is not the simple quality
of Fness, but rather the relational property of being F-at-t--so that the
statement as a whole is more perspicuously expressed in the hyphenated
form 'a is F-at-t.
There is nothing strange about relational properties as such: they are
properties which things possess in virtue of being related in various ways
to other things. Thus, for example, the property of being a brother is a
relational property, because someone has this property just in case he is the
son of parents who have other children. However, it is natural (and per
haps even necessary) to assume that, in addition to relational properties,
there are non-relational or intrinsic properties--and natural to assume that
these are exemplified by qualities of colour and shape, such as yellowness
and straightness. But the solution to the problem of qualitative change
which is now under consideration holds, in effect, that it is an error to
suppose that objects undergoing such change possess such intrinsic qual
ities: rather, they stand in certain relations to times, in virtue of which they
possess such relational properties as that of being yellow-today or that of
being straight-yesterday. On this view, qualitative change is possible
because, for example, straightness-yesterday and bentness-today are
compatible relational properties, even though straightness-now and
bentness-now are incompatible.
However, the obvious objection to this proposal is that, rather than
explaining how qualitative change is possible, it denies that such change
ever really occurs, because it denies that the objects concerned possess the
intrinsic qualities that such change is supposed to involve. Moreover, to the
extent that the proposal threatens to deprive these objects of all intrinsic
properties whatever, permitting them to possess only relational properties,
it is of doubtful coherence. For an object can only possess relational
properties if it can stand in various relations to other objects--and yet, it
seems, unless both it and those other objects possess at least some intrinsic
|44\nQUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS |
properties which serve to characterize them independently of their rela
tions to anything else, it is hard to see how any of these objects could exist
at all, and consequently hard to understand how there could be anything to
stand in the relations in question. Of course, it might be suggested that
changeable objects always possess some permanent characteristics, which
could therefore consistently be regarded as intrinsic properties of them.
But it seems that we have no a priori guarantee that this is so.
The second of the three temporal realist solutions to the problem of
qualitative change analyses or parses a statement of the form 'a is Fat l as
follows. It builds the time referred to, t, into the subject of this statement,
which is now regarded as being not the object a itself, but rather the
temporal part of a that exists at time t, that is to say, a-at-t. Consequently,
the whole statement is, on this view, more perspicuously expressed in the
form 'a-at-t is F'. Thus construed, the statement ascribes the intrinsic
quality of Fness to a certain temporal part of a, rather than to a as a whole.
And then it is easy to see why, for instance, it can be perfectly consistent to
say that a piece of wire is bent now but was straight a moment ago, despite
the mutual incompatibility of the qualities of straightness and bentness
because, according to the current proposal, these qualities are not in fact
being ascribed to one and the same object, but to two numerically distinct
objects, albeit ones which are both temporal parts of the same object.
But there are several questions which this supposed solution to the
problem immediately provokes, some of which I can discuss now but some
of which I shall have to postpone. The most pressing question, perhaps, is
this: what exactly is a 'temporal part of a persisting object, such as a piece
of wire or a banana? It is not as though talk of such parts is a familiar
feature of everyday language. However, since this is a very big issue, I shall
discuss it later in this chapter, after we have looked at the third temporal
realist solution to the problem of qualitative change. For the time being,
then, let us just pretend that we understand what sort of thing a temporal
part of a persisting object is supposed to be--perhaps by loose analogy
with the spatial parts of extended objects, such as the top inch of an
upright wooden pole.
One question which we should obviously ask about the temporal-parts
solution to the problem of qualitative change is whether it really does solve
the problem or whether, like the previous 'solutions', it effectively denies
that qualitative change ever really occurs. Certainly, the temporal-parts
solution respects our common-sense idea that properties of colour and
shape are intrinsic qualities of the things that have them, rather than
45\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
relational properties of a special sort, involving relations to times. But itimplies that the things which have such intrinsic qualities are always thetemporal parts of persisting objects, rather than the persisting objectsthemselves (except, perhaps, in the unlikely event of there being at least
some persisting objects which never change in respect of their propertiesof colour and shape). And these temporal parts, it would seem, cannot
themselves be supposed capable of undergoing qualitative change--for if
we did suppose this, it is not clear how such entities could help us with the
problem of qualitative change, since they would then be subject to exactlythe same difficulty as besets the changeable, persisting objects of which
they are supposedly parts. So it emerges that, according to the temporal
parts solution, nothing which really has intrinsic qualities, such as yellow
ness and straightness, ever changes in respect of its qualities. Is this not
simply to deny, in effect, that qualitative change ever really occurs? Of
course, the temporal-parts theorist can say that a persisting, 'changeable'
object, such as a banana, can 'possess' intrinsic qualities, such as greenness
and yellowness, in a derivative sense--that is, in the sense that such an
object can have temporal parts which possess those intrinsic qualities. But
what such a persisting object really possesses, when it 'possesses' such an
intrinsic quality in this derivative sense, is in fact a certain sort of relational
property--one which it has in virtue of standing in the whole-to-part
relation to a certain thing which literally possesses the intrinsic quality in
question. And the persisting object never changes in respect of its relational
properties of this sort. So it never really changes at all. Indeed, nothing ever
really changes: change is just an illusion. If this is a 'solution to the prob
lem of qualitative change, then it seems to be like the presentist's 'solution'
in denying the existence of the very phenomenon whose possibility we seek
to understand. I have no doubt that most temporal-parts theorists (and,
likewise, most presentists) would object to this characterization of their
position, but it is not at all clear to me what grounds they could have for
doing so.
Let me then turn to the third temporal realist solution to the problem of
qualitative change. According to this solution, when we analyse or parse a
statement of the form 'a is F at ť, the reference to the time, t, should be
built neither into the subject of the statement nor into what is predicatedof, or ascribed to, the object in question. That is to say, we should take theproperty ascribed to be the intrinsic quality of Fness, rather than therelational property of being F-at-t, and we should take the object to whichthis property is ascribed to be a itself, not the supposed temporal part of a
46\n47QUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS
existing at t, a-at-t. But where else can the temporal reference go? The
answer, quite simply, is that it can go into the predicative or ascriptive link
itself, which is expressed in the original statement by the verb 'is? . So,
according to this view, the most perspicuous way to express that statement
is in the form 'a is-at-tF'. From a logico-grammatical point of view, what
this means is that the expression 'at l' has the status of a predicate modifier,
or adverb. ? It is understandable, perhaps, why such a solution should have
been overlooked, at least by philosophers trained to think in terms of the
categories of modern quantificational or predicate logic, as it is called. For
such logic simply has no place for adverbs.
A clarification of the adverbial solution
a
However, it may still seem rather obscure what this third solution is really
proposing, so some clarification is required at this point. The idea is that,
at least in the case of objects which exist in time, a quality can only be
ascribed to an object in some temporal mode, whether past, present, or
future: and this is the primary function of the basic tenses of verbs in
everyday language. The qualities of objects that exist in time are genuinely
intrinsic properties of them, not relational properties which those objects
have in virtue of their relations to certain times: but the possessing of a
quality by such an object is itself a temporally relative affair and so
involves, if you like, a relation to a time. Qualitative change then consists in
the fact that, relative to different times, one and the same object possesses
different qualities. If that sounds like a statement of the obvious, so much
the better.
Some people object that this proposal is no different, really, from the
first temporal realist solution that we examined, which turns qualities into
relational properties. But I think that that is unfair: there is a very great
difference between ascribing a non-relational property in a temporally
relativized way and ascribing a temporally relational property in an abso
lute or unrelativized way. It may also be objected that the proposal does
not so much solve the problem of qualitative change, in the sense of
explaining how such change is possible, as simply assume that such change
· See further my 'The Problems of Intrinsic Change: Rejoinder to Lewis', Analysis 48 (1988),
72-7, or my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1998), 129 ff. See also Sally Haslanger, 'Endurance and Temporary Intrinsics', Analysis 49 (1989),
119-25. \n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
does, and therefore can, occur. I accept that the proposal assumes that timeitself, and existence in time, are of such a nature that possession of aquality by an object existing in time is a temporally relative affair. But, according to this approach, that is what we must assume if we are tosuppose that qualitative change is possible. And the assumption appears tobe a perfectly coherent one. Since we are strongly inclined to believe, as afundamental article of common sense, that qualitative change is indeedpossible, it follows that we ought to adopt that assumption, at least untilsomeone can show us what is wrong with it. What I am suggesting, in fact, is that we ought to adapt our conception of time, if need be, to accom
modate the possibility of qualitative change, so strong is our convictionthat such change really occurs. We shouldn't assume that we have a
sufficiently firm grasp of the nature of time that we should be preparedto deny the possibility of qualitative change rather than abandon any
preconceptions we might have about the nature of time.
It may help us to comprehend the current proposal better if we contrastwhat it claims about the possession of qualities by objects which exist in
time with what may be said about the possession of properties by timeless
objects, if indeed there are such objects. Abstract objects, such as the
objects of mathematics--numbers, sets, functions, and so forth--are
commonly thought not to exist in time, nor indeed in space. That is why
the language of mathematics is characteristically tenseless. We say 'Two plus
three are five', not 'Two plus three were five' or 'Two plus three will be five':
and in saying "Two plus three are five', it is implausible to think that we
mean "Two plus three are now five'--that is, the 'are' is a tenseless 'are', not
the 'are' of the present tense. For it seems plausible that five does not
possess the property of being the sum of two and three at any time
neither at some time nor even at every time. Where mathematical objects
and their properties are concerned, reference to time simply does not
appear to enter into the picture. But modern logic was designed with the
language of mathematics largely in mind, so it would not be surprising if
the conception of predication, or property ascription, which it encourages
is a fundamentally tenseless one. Philosophers trained in modern logic
may accordingly feel that there is something either obscure or else superficial in the notion of irreducibly tensed predication. They may tend, evenif not deliberately, to model the possession of properties by time-boundobjects on the possession of properties by abstract, timeless objects. It isthis tendency, perhaps, that motivates the first two temporal realist solutions to the problem of qualitative change, for in both cases property
48\nQUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS | 49
possession is treated as timeless and all reference to time is placed either in
the nature of the properties or in the nature of the objects concerned.
Perdurance versus endurance
Theories of persistence over time are commonly divided into two species:
perdurance theories and endurance theories. * A perdurance theorist holds
that objects persist through time in virtue of possessing successive tem
poral parts, so that, on this view, only part of a persisting object, its current
temporal part, is present at any one time during its existence. By contrast,
an endurance theorist holds that an object persists through time in virtue
of being wholly present at every time at which it exists. In effect, this just
means that an endurance theorist denies that persisting objects have any
temporal parts. Of the four theories that we have examined so far in
connection with the problem of qualitative change, one is obviously a
perdurance theory; the remaining three all qualify as endurance theories.
Presentism automatically qualifies as an endurance theory: quite trivially, it
holds that every object is wholly present at every time at which it exists,
because, according to presentism, the only time at which anything at all
exists is the present moment--now--and so every part of anything that
exists exists now. But, clearly, the division between perdurance theories and
endurance theories is somewhat unnatural, because 'endurance theories
differ so radically amongst themselves. Indeed, the division between
perdurance theories and endurance theories is potentially misleading,
inasmuch as it may tempt us to imagine that the most important issue
concerning the persistence of objects over time is whether or not such
objects have temporal parts. The prominence given to this question may
suit the temporal-parts theorist, of course, but it may also distort
philosophical debate by obscuring other important issues.
Temporal-parts theories are undeniably popular at present, which may
seem a little puzzling in view of the strangeness of the notion of a temporal
part of a persisting object. Some temporal-parts theorists tend to attribute
this sense of strangeness to an ignorance on the part of ordinary folk about
scientific conceptions of time and space-time. They suggest that in
mathematical physics, especially since the advent of Einstein's theories of
* See again Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds, 202. Lewis himself favours a perdurance theory,
partly because he thinks that it provides the best solution to the problem of qualitative change. \n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
relativity, time is treated as a dimension akin to and inseparable from thethree dimensions of space, so that we should feel no more uncomfortableabout the notion of temporal parts than we do about the notion of spatialparts. If an object is extended along any dimension, be it spatial or temporal, it must surely make sense to think of that object as having partswhich take up less of that dimension than the object does as a whole. If
only we can bring ourselves to think of persisting objects as fourdimensional entities, 'spread out, as it were, in four wholly different
directions, then it would be only natural to think of them as havingfour-dimensional parts, extended in one direction' along the time axis.
But, it is suggested, because we only ever perceive objects as they are at a
moment of time and so only ever encounter in experience the momentary
three-dimensional "cross-sections' of objects, we get the false impression
that the objects themselves are only three-dimensional, being extended
solely in space.
I do not want to suggest that I have a great deal of sympathy for the
foregoing 'explanation' of our supposedly mistaken conception of persist
ing objects and the strangeness that the notion of temporal parts has for
us. The purported explanation itself rests on some very contentious
assumptions about the nature of time, which do not receive as much
support from physical science as temporal-parts theorists may be apt to
suppose. However, these are matters which we must postpone for later
discussion, in Part V of this book. In any case, it may be that temporal
parts theories need not be strongly committed to any particular theory of
time--though they are apparently committed to temporal realism--and if
so, that will make them more, rather than less, difficult to discredit. So let
us see what sense, if any, we can make of the notion of temporal parts,
without presuming too much about the nature of time, other than its
reality.
The notion of temporal parts
So far, the only real grip that we have been given on the notion of a
temporal part of a persisting object is through the construction of a special
David Lewis, one of the best-known advocates of temporal parts, says rather little about their
nature: see, however, his second postscript to "Survival and Identity', in his Philosophical Papersvol 2 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983), 76-7. See also my The Possibility of Metaphysics, y8 ff. and 114 ff. , where some of the criticisms that follow can be found in more detail.
50\nQUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS 51
a
a
way of referring to such an entity-an expression of the form 'a-at-t',
where a is a persisting object and t is a time at which that object exists. It
doesn't appear that expressions of this form ever really occur in ordinary
language. It is true that we sometimes say things such as 'Tom at six years
of age was a promising child. But it doesn't seem that in making such a
statement we are using the expression 'Tom at six years of age' to refer to a
certain entity which existed when Tom was six years of age but not at any
later time. In fact, it doesn't seem that, in such a statement, the words 'Tom
at six years of age constitute any sort of referring expression, or indeed any
sort of semantic unit at all. Rather, the statement is just a stylistic variant of
the statement 'At six years of age, Tom was a promising child', in which the
only object referred to is Tom, and the words 'at six years of age' constitute
an adverbial phrase modifying the predicate 'was a promising child'. The
same sort of thing may be said of the words 'Tom as a child', as they appear
in the statement 'Tom as a child was promising'.
It seems, then, that we cannot expect to get much help from ordinary
language in trying to understand what sort of entities temporal parts of
persisting objects might be. Ordinary language simply does not provide
ready-made ways of referring to such entities. However, another strategy
might be to exploit parallels with our everyday ways of talking about events
and processes. For many philosophers consider that entities of these kinds
quite obviously and unproblematically have temporal parts. Consider, for
instance, an event or process of some duration, such as a certain perform
ance of a play. We happily say that such a performance has early, middle,
and late parts. For instance, the performance of Scene 1 of Act 1 is an early
part of the performance as a whole. However, we cannot unproblematically
transfer this way of talking to persisting objects--things such as bananas,
trees, and pieces of wire. For these things are not, or at least are not at all
obviously, processes of any kind, even if certain processes are intimately
associated with them. We may speak, for instance, of the life of a tree, or
the career of a person, thinking of this as a process which the object in
question undergoes over time--and a life or career may have its early,
middle, and late parts. But the life of a tree is not identical with the tree of
which it is the life: to suppose so would be to make a simple category
mistake. Indeed, some opponents of temporal-parts theories contend that
the theory rests on just such a category mistake--the mistake of treating
persisting objects as if they were processes. A process has a duration--it
'goes on' for a certain period of time. But an object, although it endures'
or 'lasts' for a certain period of time, does not 'go on' in the sense in which\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
a
a process does. Of course, temporal-parts theorists may urge that this
categorial distinction between objects and processes is a superficial andphilosophically unjustifiable one, rooted in the idiosyncracies of everydaygrammatical forms. But it is not at all obvious that this is so; and theburden of proof lies with the temporal-parts theorist to demonstrate that
it is so, rather than with their opponents to demonstrate that it is not.
Another suggestion, which I have touched on already, is to try to model
the notion of a temporal part of a persisting object on some already wellunderstood notion of a spatial part of a spatially extended object. Themost uncontroversial examples of persisting objects are, of course, spatiallyextended--things such as bananas, trees, and pieces of wire--and thus
would appear to possess, quite unproblematically, spatial parts. But weshould be aware of a potential ambiguity implicit in talk of the 'spatialparts' of persisting objects. Recall the discussions of the previous chapter,
where we were concerned with issues to do with the composition of objects. Things such as trees are composite objects, possessing other such objects asparts, thus giving rise to hierarchies of composition. Ultimately, we are led
to suppose, all material objects are composed of subatomic particles. The
trunk, branches, and roots of a tree are parts of which it is composed; andthese parts are in turn composed of other objects. But the trunk, branches, and roots of a tree are, like the tree itself, spatially extended objects--so
there is a clear sense in which such objects are spatial parts of the tree. Butit seems most unlikely that the supposed temporal parts of persistingobjects can fruitfully be modelled on their 'spatial parts' in this sense of theterm. For, in this sense of the term, the 'spatial parts of persisting
objects--their component parts--are themselves just other persisting
objects. And, clearly, there is not much prospect of modelling the supposed
temporal parts of persisting objects on persisting objects themselves--not,
at least, if we seek to do so with a view to gaining some insight into thenature of persistence.
There is, however, a second possible sense of the term 'spatial part inwhich we might suppose persisting objects to possess such parts. We mightthink of such a part as an entity whose spatial boundaries are defined in
relation to the object of which it is a part. Earlier I gave a putative exampleof an entity of this sort: the top inch of an upright wooden pole. This, itseems, is an object whose spatial boundaries are defined by the surface of
the pole and a horizontal plane intersecting the pole one inch from its top. This object contains all the matter of the pole that is confined within theseboundaries. That persisting objects really do have spatial parts of this kind
52\nQUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS | 53
is not incontestable, however. It is far from clear, on the basis of the
description so far given, what the identity conditions of something like the
top inch of a wooden pole are supposed to be. Are we to suppose, for
instance, that if a cut were made through the pole one inch from its top,
the object that we have designated the top inch of the pole' would become
separated from the pole--and if so, would it then have ceased to be the top
inch of the pole? If we answer 'Yes' to both questions, the implication is
that the top inch of the pole is not essentially the top inch of the pole, but is
something which could in principle be identified in a quite different way,
without reference to the pole of which it is supposedly a part. In that case,
however, it is not clear that we are dealing with something which is really
any different from what we earlier called a component part of a persisting
object. A key feature of an object's component parts is that they can exist,
and be identified, independently of the whole object which they help to
compose. Thus, a branch of a tree can be preserved while the rest of the
tree is destroyed; indeed, perhaps it can even be grafted on to another,
quite different tree. We do not need to know to which tree, if any, it belongs
in order to identify the branch as the particular object that it is.
It emerges, then, that if we are to think of something like the top inch of
the wooden pole as being a spatial part of it, but not merely in the sense in
which a component part of the pole is such a part, we must take theа
spatially defined characteristics of that entity to be essential properties of
it--that is, to be properties of it which it could not lack, because they help
to determine its very identity. According to this conception, it makes no
sense to talk of separating a spatial part of an object from the whole of
which it is a part. Whether we must allow spatially extended persisting
objects to have spatial parts in this sense is debatable. Certainly, even if
such parts exist, they should not be thought of as entities which literally
compose the whole of which they are parts. It might be better, indeed,
not to call them 'parts' at all, but to describe them instead as spatial
'sections' or 'regions' of spatially extended objects. But whatever we call
them, if we are indeed prepared to acknowledge their existence at all, we
must accept that they are entities whose very identities are dependent
upon the persisting objects to which they supposedly belong. This fact
has important implications for any attempt to model the supposed tem
poral parts of persisting objects on their spatial parts thus conceived. For
the temporal parts of persisting objects, thought of according to this
model, will likewise have to be entities whose very identities are depend
ent upon those persisting objects. And this threatens to compromise\n| identity AND CHANGE
their intended role in a theory of persistence, as I shall now try toexplain.
A problem for perdurance theories
Clearly, a theory of persistence should explain what it is for a persistingobject to persist through time--that is to say, what it is for one and thesame object to exist continuously throughout a certain period of time, perhaps undergoing qualitative change as it does so. Theories of persistence which invoke temporal parts for this purpose--so-called perdurancetheories--maintain, as noted earlier, that an object persists through timein virtue of possessing, or indeed consisting of, a succession of differenttemporal parts, each part existing at a different time in the life of the
object. However, if temporal parts are thought of on the model of spatialparts which we have just been looking at the different temporal parts of apersisting object cannot be identified independently of the persistingobject of which they are supposedly parts. According to this model, if apersisting object, O, has a temporal part that exists at a certain time t, then
that temporal part is an entity which can only be identified in terms of its
relations to O and t. Hence, on pain of circularity, it can only be identifiedif O itself can be identified independently of that temporal part--and thesame applies to all the rest of O's supposed temporal parts. But now we cansee that this presents a serious problem for any perdurance theory of O'spersistence. For if the only way in which we can identify the different
temporal parts of O is in terms of their being the temporal parts that oneand the same object, 0, possesses at various different times, this presupposes that we already grasp what it is for that very object, O, to exist atdifferent times and hence to persist through time. A perdurance theorycannot, it seems, convey to us, in non-circular terms, what it is for O to
persist through time, because the successively existing entities which itinvokes for this purpose -- O's supposed temporal parts--are entitieswhich we are only able to conceive of in terms of their relations to O, itselfalready conceived of as something persisting through time. Nor can itmake sense to suppose that O literally consists of a succession of temporalparts thus conceived--any more than it makes sense to think of a persisting object as being composed of its spatial parts, in the sense of spatial partcurrently being entertained.
54\n55QUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS
Temporal parts as theoretical entities
These considerations may persuade us that a perdurance theorist would be
ill-advised to adopt the foregoing model of temporal parts. Temporal parts
will have to be thought of as entities which are ontologically more funda
mental than the persisting objects to which they supposedly belong. The
problem is that we have not, so far, managed to find a way of thinking of
them that seems to meet this requirement. But perhaps the temporal-parts
theorist could urge that we are putting the cart before the horse. Maybe we
shouldn't even attempt to understand what temporal parts might be
independently of the theoretical framework which invokes them. Perhaps
we should regard them as theoretical entities, by analogy with the theor
etical entities invoked by explanatory scientific hypotheses--entities such
as electrons and genes--belief in the existence of which is justified by the
explanatory success or utility of the theories which postulate them. The
temporal-parts theorist may urge that perdurance theories solve so many
metaphysical problems, so economically, that we are justified in believing
in the existence of temporal parts--and that all we need to understand
about their nature is that they possess the characteristics which perdurance
theories require them to possess in order to serve the explanatory purposes
for which they are invoked. In order to assess this line of argument, we first
need to evaluate the alleged explanatory successes of perdurance theory.
It is generally considered a virtue in an explanatory scientific theory if it
manages to unify, within a single explanatory structure, phenomena which
were previously thought to be quite independent. Thus, one of the notable
successes of Newton's theory of gravitation was that it provided a unifying
framework of explanation for both celestial mechanics (which deals with
planetary and lunar motions) and terrestrial mechanics (which deals with
the motions of projectiles near the surface of the earth). In a similar way, it
may be urged on behalf of perdurance theories that they provide a unitary
framework of explanation for both qualitative change and change of
composition--the two kinds of change discussed in this and the preceding
chapter. We have already seen, in this chapter, how perdurance theories
deal with the problem of qualitative change--and, although I have
questioned how successful they really are in this respect, it must be
acknowledged that they are widely thought to offer the best solution to this
problem. To this we may now add that temporal-parts theories offer seem
ingly simple and economical solutions to the problems of fission and\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
fusion described in the previous chapter. For example, in the case of theship of Theseus, the temporal-parts theorist can maintain that the renovated ship and the reconstructed ship, although different persistingobjects, share their earlier temporal parts with each other. That is to say, each of these ships consists of a different succession of temporal parts, butnot of wholly distinct successions, for the two successions overlap in theirearlier stages, until the process of renovation and removal begins. In a way, this is to say that, prior to the beginning of that process, the two shipsexactly coincide with one another in the harbour at Athens. But, it may besaid, there is nothing mysterious or objectionable about the notion of such
coincidence, because we never have two different temporal parts of a shipin the same place at the same time: in the earlier stages of their existence, the two ships have exactly the same--that is to say, numerically identicaltemporal parts.
How does this answer the question as to which ship--the renovated shipor the reconstructed ship--is identical with the original ship of Theseus? The answer provided is that, in fact, there was no such thing as the ship ofTheseus, because there never was just one ship in the harbour at Athens, even though there was, at every time until the process of renovation began, just one temporal part of ship there. In the previous chapter, a similarsolution was briefly entertained, but without appeal being made to thetheory of temporal parts. The question is, then, whether the temporalparts version of this solution escapes the objections raised against theoriginal version. My own feeling is that it does not. In particular, there isthe important objection that, according to this solution, unless we knowthe future course of events, we cannot tell how many ships we may beconfronted with in a single place at any given moment of time. If it shouldturn out that one or more processes of fission are due to occur, then we areconfronted with two or more ships in the same place at the same time, prior to the occurrence of those processes. But how can the number ofships existing here and now depend upon what may or may not happen inthe future--unless, perhaps, determinism is true and there is, whether wenow know it or not, only one possible course of future events consistentwith present facts and the laws of nature? The fact that, according to thetemporal-parts theorist, there need never be more than one temporal partof a ship in the same place at the same time, while a commendable consequence of the theory, does nothing, as I see it, to mitigate the difficultyjust raised.
I should
not give the impression that temporal-parts theorists are
56\nQUALITATIVE CHANGE AND TEMPORAL PARTS 57
obliged to offer the foregoing solution to the problem of the ship of The
seus. They could urge, instead, that this case is one in which either one or
both of the fission products is a newly created persisting object--for
instance, that the renovated ship is identical with the original ship, but that
the reconstructed ship is a new ship coming into existence for the first time
when the original parts are put together again in the warehouse. This was
my own solution, of course. However, it may be wondered what could
really motivate this solution when advanced in the context of a temporal
parts theory. I was able to advance it by appealing to the common-sense
principle that distinct ships cannot overlap to any significant degree. But,
as we have just seen, there is nothing in temporal-parts theory to support
that principle, since the theory can quite consistently allow that distinct
ships may share some of their temporal parts. So, altogether, it is not
perhaps so clear as some temporal-parts theorists would like us to think
that their approach provides the simplest and most economical solutions
to problems of fission and fusion.
Another range of problems for which temporal-parts theorists may
claim to have the best solutions are problems involving vagueness, such as
the paradox of the thousand and one cats discussed in the previous chap
ter. But here, too, the superiority of their approach is not incontestable.
And even if we accept that temporal-parts theories provide a unitary
explanatory framework in which problems of qualitative change, fission,
and vagueness can conveniently be dealt with, we have to wonder whether
this is enough to justify our acceptance of an idea so apparently obscure
and contrary to common sense as that of temporal parts. Metaphysics is
quite a different enterprise from the construction of explanatory scientific
theories, as we saw in Chapter 1. When a scientific theory postulates a new
species of theoretical entity, it is a prerequisite of the intelligibility of the
theory that the entities in question be introduced to us as belonging to
some intelligible ontological category. Ontological categories themselves
cannot be regarded as theoretical posits, our grasp of which can be seen to
derive from our grasp of the theories in which they are embedded--for we
can have no real grasp of those theories without first understanding the
categories in question. But the notion of a temporal part of a persisting
object is precisely the notion of a putative ontological category--one of a
supposedly very fundamental kind. Thus, it is after all illegitimate, I
think, to assimilate the perdurance theorist's invocation of temporal
parts to the physicist's postulation of a new species of subatomic particle.
Perdurance theorists owe us an explicit and perspicuous account of the\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
nature of temporal parts. So far, it may well seem, they have failed to
provide one.
What should we say about persistence, if we reject the perdurance
approach to it? Clearly, several alternatives are possible which may be
described, however misleadingly, as 'endurance' approaches. What such
views have in common is the conviction that the notion of something's
persisting through time is ultimately primitive and irreducible. This is not
to deny that particular cases of persistence may have causal explanations,
as when we explain why the members of one species of animal or plant are
longer-lived than those of another. It is just to say that the fact of persist
ence through time as such--one and the same thing's being continuously
in existence for a period of time--is not something that is reducible to any
fact or set of facts of a kind which does not involve persistence. That this
should be so is certainly conceivable, even if we may not yet be convinced
that it must be so.
There is a very extensive literature on each side of the debate between perdurance and
endurance approaches to the nature of persistence. For a classic statement of the perdurance
position, see W. V. Quine, 'Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis', in his From a Logical Point of View,
2nd edn. (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1961). For a more recent defence, see Mark
Heller, The Ontology of Physical Objects: Four-Dimensional Hunks of Matter (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1990). For a recent defence of an endurance approach, see Trenton
Merricks, 'Endurance and Indiscernibility', Journal of Philosophy 91 (1994), 165-84.
58\n4
SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND
SPATIOTEMPORAL COINCIDENCE
Beginning and ceasing to exist
In the previous two chapters, we have looked at two different kinds of
change that persisting objects can undergo: change of composition and
qualitative change. The first sort of change occurs when a composite object
undergoes a change of its component parts. The second sort occurs when
one and the same object has numerically different qualities at numerically
different times. Of course, these two kinds of change are not entirely
independent of one another. Sometimes, a change of the one kind brings
about a change of the other kind. For example, if a composite objecta
acquires new parts possessing qualities that are different from those of its
old parts, the composite object itself may undergo a change of its
qualities--as when a house changes in colour because new bricks of a
different colour are used to replace its old bricks. But a composite object
can also undergo qualitative change without undergoing any change of
composition--for instance, when its component parts are simply
rearranged, with the result that the shape of the composite object as a
whole changes. But there is also a third kind of change that we need to
consider, which is traditionally called substantial change. This is the kind of
change which occurs when a persisting object either begins or ceases to
exist. It is thus not exactly a kind of change which happens in or to an
object, in the way that qualitative and compositional changes are, but
rather it is a change of objects--a change with respect to what objects there
are in the world. This is called 'substantial change' because persisting
objects--things such as houses, apples, and planks of wood--are trad
itionally called "individual substances, or 'substantial individuals". Of
course, this was a kind of change which I did discuss to some extent in\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
2
Chapter 2, but in the present chapter it will be the main focus of our
attention.
a
Most of the substantial individuals that we are familiar with--indeed,
perhaps all of them--are composite objects. It is natural to assume that
there must exist some non-composite substantial individuals, because it is
natural to assume that hierarchies of composition cannot be infinitely
descending that is to say, it is natural to assume that although an object's
component parts may themselves be composite objects, and the parts of
these parts may again be composite, there must eventually be an end to
such a series of whole-part relations, the terminus being provided by
objects which are by their very nature simple or non-composite. The
'atoms' of the ancient Greek philosopher Democritus played precisely this
role in his ontology--'atom' meaning, originally, that which cannot be cut
or divided into any lesser parts. In modern physics, the so-called 'elem
entary particles', such as electrons and quarks, play a similar role--though
in many other ways they are quite unlike Democritean atoms, since they
are not conceived of as being perfectly hard and rigid bodies with precise
geometrical shapes. Whether it is really metaphysically impossible for hier
archies of composition to be infinitely descending is a difficult question,
which I shall not attempt to answer here. Perhaps the most that we can
safely say is that empirical evidence currently suggests that all material
objects do in fact have ultimate component parts of a simple or non
composite nature. However, since no macroscopic material object is non
composite as far as we know and macroscopic objects will be our main
concern in this chapter, we can effectively confine our attention in what
follows to composite objects.
One way for a substantial individual to come into existence is for certain
other objects to be united together so as to form its component parts. This
is what happens when a house is built from bricks or a ship is constructed
from planks and spars. Another way, however, is for certain objects, which
are already united together to form a composite whole, to be rearranged in
such a way that a composite whole of a new kind comes into existence.
This is what happens when a mass of bronze is moulded into the form of a
statue: a statue, we say, is created out of the bronze. Perhaps this is also
what happens when a living organism, such as a plant or animal, is created
out of a mass of organic matter. Substantial change of this kind raises some
difficult metaphysical problems, however. Consider the case of the bronze
and the statue. We seem compelled to say that the mass or lump of bronze
is a numerically distinct object from the statue, because the lump and the
60\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE 61
statue will ordinarily have come into existence at different times--the
lump first and later the statue. Moreover, the lump and the statue plausibly
have different persistence conditions--that is to say, there are different kinds
of changes that can and cannot be survived by the lump and the statue
respectively. For example, the lump can survive a change in which it is
flattened into the shape of a disc, but the statue cannot survive such a
change. Conversely, the statue can survive the loss or replacement of some
of the bronze particles that compose it, but the lump of bronze cannot:
removing or replacing some of the bronze particles leaves us with a numer
ically distinct lump of bronze. However, if the lump and the statue are
numerically distinct substantial individuals, then they are individuals bear
ing a seemingly strange relationship to one another--for during at least
part of their existences they exactly coincide with one another, occupying
precisely the same place at the same time. Moreover, while this is the case,
exactly the same bronze particles compose these two numerically distinct
individuals, the lump and the bronze--and we may wonder how this is
possible.
Can there be coinciding objects?
Many philosophers think that it is fundamentally absurd to suppose that
the lump and the statue are two numerically distinct objects which exactly
coincide with one another for a period of time and are composed of
exactly the same particles. They complain that they cannot understand
what would make these objects distinct at such a time. ' How could either
object have any property which the other object lacked? Of course, it may
be replied that the objects could have different historical and modal
properties--where an historical property of an object is one which it has in
respect of what has happened to it in the past and a modal property of an
object is one which it has in respect of what could happen to it. We have
already said, for instance, that the lump and the statue may have come into
existence at different times and that there are different kinds of change that
they can and cannot survive. However, it may be wondered how two
objects which are, at a certain moment in time, exactly alike in their non
historical and non-modal properties could, none the less, differ in respect
See, for example, Michael B. Burke, 'Copper Statues and Pieces of Copper', Analysis 52 (1992),
12-17, and Eric T. Olson, 'Material Coincidence and the Indiscernibility Problem', Philosophical
Quarterly 51 (2001), 337-55. \n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
of their historical and modal properties. And the lump and the statue doappear to be exactly alike in their non-historical and non-modal propertieswhen they exactly coincide with one another. That being so, if this implies
that they cannot, after all, differ from one another in their historical and
modal properties, then the principle of the identity of indiscernibles--if we
are prepared to accept it-would apparently compel us to judge that they
are in fact one and the same object, not two numerically distinct objects.
(Note that the principle of the identity of indiscernibles, which maintains
that no two objects can possess exactly the same properties, should not be
confused with what is commonly known as 'Leibniz's Law'--the principle
that whatever is true of a thing is true of anything identical with that thing:
see Chapter 3. Confusion is sometimes encouraged by the fact that Leibniz
himself endorsed both principles and made them famous; but it is gener
ally agreed that Leibniz's Law is the less contentious of the two principles. )
Relative versus absolute identity
Faced with this apparent conundrum, philosophers have responded in a
number of different ways, most if not all of which seem to require some
departure from everyday ways of thinking. One possibility is to question
certain standard assumptions about the nature of identity itself. Identity is
normally thought of as being an absolute relation, in the following sense.
Let 'F' and'G'be certain sortal terms, that is to say, general terms denoting
certain sorts or kinds of substantial individual. Examples would be the
terms 'tree', planet', 'tiger', and, indeed, 'statue' and 'lump of bronze'.
Then it is standardly assumed that if a and b are numerically the same F
and are also both Gs, then a and b are also numerically the same G. Indeed,
it is easy to see that Leibniz's Law implies this, if we take the law to assert,
in effect, that if, for some sortal term "X', a is the same X as b, then
whatever is true of a is also true of b. For then it follows that if a and b are
the same F, then whatever is true of a is also true of b; but if a is a G, then it
is surely true of a that it is the same G as a, whence it is also true of b that it
is the same Gas a. But perhaps this standard assumption--and with it thestandard version of Leibniz's Law--should be questioned. Perhaps itmakes sense, after all, to suppose that a and b may be the same F and yet
not the same G. This is what a proponent of a relative conception of
See further David Wiggins, Sameness and Substance (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980), 19-20.
62\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE |
identity maintains. According to this view, we cannot say of certain indi
viduals a and b that they are, or are not, identical simpliciter--that is,
without further qualification. They may be identical relative to one sortal
characterization of them, but distinct relative to another.
How might this help us with the case of the statue and the lump of
bronze? Simply as follows. We felt pressed to say, on the one hand, that the
statue and the lump are two numerically distinct objects, because they
differ in their historical and modal properties. On the other hand, at least
while the statue and the lump exactly coincide with one another, we feel
pressed to say that they cannot, after all, be two numerically distinct
objects. The relative identity theorist may, however, diagnose our difficul
ties as arising from a misconception that identity and distinctness are
absolute relations, when in fact they are sortally relative. According to the
relativist, we cannot intelligibly speak of the statue and the lump being, or
failing to be, numerically identical objects, because this is to attempt to
speak of identity and distinctness without relativizing them to appropriate
sortal characterizations of the objects that we are referring to. Perhaps
what we should say--and what, according to the relativist, we can consist
ently say--is that the statue and the lump of bronze are one and the same
lump of bronze, but not one and the same statue.
In order to make this proposal a little more intuitively appealing, con
sider what we might say if the lump of bronze were to be melted down
again and formed into a different statue (perhaps the first statue was a
statue of Napoleon and the second a statue of Wellington). According to
the relativist, we might say of the first and second statues that they are
different statues but the same lump of bronze. But then, it seems, if the
lump of bronze is a statue at the time at which the first statue exists, it is
not the same statue as the first statue. For, if it were, then, by the same
token, the lump of bronze would have to be the same statue as the second
statue when that exists. But if the first statue were the same statue as
the lump of bronze and the lump of bronze were also the same statue
as the second statue, then it seems that the transitivity of identity implies
that the first statue would be the same statue as the second statue--which,
we have agreed, it is not. So we must conclude that the first statue and the
lump of bronze are not one and the same statue, even if they are one and
the same lump of bronze. The attraction of this account is that it explains
3 The best-known proponent is Peter Geach: see his Reference and Generality, 3rd edn. (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1980), 181.
63\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE
of their historical and modal properties. And the lump and the statue do
appear to be exactly alike in their non-historical and non-modal properties
when they exactly coincide with one another. That being so, if this implies
that they cannot, after all, differ from one another in their historical and
modal properties, then the principle of the identity of indiscernibles--if we
are prepared to accept it--would apparently compel us to judge that they
are in fact one and the same object, not two numerically distinct objects.
(Note that the principle of the identity of indiscernibles, which maintains
that no two objects can possess exactly the same properties, should not be
confused with what is commonly known as 'Leibniz's Law'--the principle
that whatever is true of a thing is true of anything identical with that thing:
see Chapter 3. Confusion is sometimes encouraged by the fact that Leibniz
himself endorsed both principles and made them famous; but it is gener
ally agreed that Leibniz's Law is the less contentious of the two principles. )
Relative versus absolute identity
Faced with this apparent conundrum, philosophers have responded in a
number of different ways, most if not all of which seem to require some
departure from everyday ways of thinking. One possibility is to question
certain standard assumptions about the nature of identity itself. Identity is
normally thought of as being an absolute relation, in the following sense.
Let 'F' and 'G' be certain sortal terms, that is to say, general terms denoting
certain sorts or kinds of substantial individual. Examples would be the
terms 'tree", "planet', 'tiger', and, indeed, 'statue' and 'lump of bronze'.
Then it is standardly assumed that if a and b are numerically the same F
and are also both Gs, then a and b are also numerically the same G. Indeed,
it is easy to see that Leibniz's Law implies this, if we take the law to assert,
in effect, that if, for some sortal term X', a is the same X as b, then
whatever is true of a is also true of b. For then it follows that if a and b are.
the same F, then whatever is true of a is also true of b; but if a is a G, then it
is surely true of a that it is the same Gas a, whence it is also true of b that it
is the same Gas a. " But perhaps this standard assumption--and with it the
standard version of Leibniz's Law--should be questioned. Perhaps it
makes sense, after all, to suppose that a and b may be the same F and yet
not the same G. This is what a proponent of a relative conception of
See further David Wiggins, Sameness and Substance (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980), 19-20.
62\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE
identity maintains. According to this view, we cannot say of certain indi
viduals a and b that they are, or are not, identical simpliciter--that is,
without further qualification. They may be identical relative to one sortal
characterization of them, but distinct relative to another.
How might this help us with the case of the statue and the lump of
bronze? Simply as follows. We felt pressed to say, on the one hand, that the
statue and the lump are two numerically distinct objects, because they
differ in their historical and modal properties. On the other hand, at least
while the statue and the lump exactly coincide with one another, we feel
pressed to say that they cannot, after all, be two numerically distinct
objects. The relative identity theorist may, however, diagnose our difficul
ties as arising from a misconception that identity and distinctness are
absolute relations, when in fact they are sortally relative. According to the
relativist, we cannot intelligibly speak of the statue and the lump being, or
failing to be, numerically identical objects, because this is to attempt to
speak of identity and distinctness without relativizing them to appropriate
sortal characterizations of the objects that we are referring to. Perhaps
what we should say--and what, according to the relativist, we can consist
ently say--is that the statue and the lump of bronze are one and the same
lump of bronze, but not one and the same statue.
In order to make this proposal a little more intuitively appealing, con
sider what we might say if the lump of bronze were to be melted down
again and formed into a different statue (perhaps the first statue was a
statue of Napoleon and the second a statue of Wellington). According to
the relativist, we might say of the first and second statues that they are
different statues but the same lump of bronze. But then, it seems, if the
lump of bronze is a statue at the time at which the first statue exists, it is
not the same statue as the first statue. For, if it were, then, by the same
token, the lump of bronze would have to be the same statue as the second
statue when that exists. But if the first statue were the same statue as
the lump of bronze and the lump of bronze were also the same statue
as the second statue, then it seems that the transitivity of identity implies
that the first statue would be the same statue as the second statue--which,
we have agreed, it is not. So we must conclude that the first statue and the
lump of bronze are not one and the same statue, even if they are one and
the same lump of bronze. The attraction of this account is that it explains
a
The best-known proponent is Peter Geach: see his Reference and Generality, 3rd edn. (Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press, 1980), 181.
63\n| Identity AND CHANGE
why we are pulled in two different directions concerning the statue and the
lump of bronze, wanting to say both that they are distinct and that they are
identical. Moreover, it even reconciles, in a way, the two judgements that
we feel inclined to make, so that we are not compelled to surrender either
in favour of the other: we can retain both judgements, provided that we
qualify each in the way that the relativist recommends.
I have tried to represent the relativist solution to our problem in as
favourable a light as possible, but it is not without difficulties of its own.
For one thing, in abandoning the standard version of Leibniz's Law, it
abandons what many philosophers and logicians would see as the most
fundamental principle of identity, without which we effectively lose all
real grip on the notion of identity. The 'relativized identity relations' of
the relativist, it may be objected, are not really relations of identity at all,
but something else--relations of similarity, perhaps. Another problem is
that questions of identity are intimately bound up with questions of
existence, so that if one wants to relativize identity to sortal characteriza
tions, one must be prepared to relativize existence to sortal characteriza
tions also. This seems to have very strange implications. Suppose that the
(first) statue is destroyed by melting down the bronze, but the bronze
remains intact and so continues to exist. Now, according to the relativist,
the statue is the same lump of bronze as the lump of bronze--and, as we
have just said, the lump of bronze continues to exist. So, even after the
process of melting has occurred, there still exists something which is the
same thing of some sort as the statue, according to the relativist. This
seems to imply that the statue does still exist, albeit only 'as' the lump of
bronze rather than 'as' the statue. But it would also seem that the relativ
ist is not entitled to any 'absolute' or 'unrelativized conception of exist
ence. So the relativist must judge that is wrong to say that the statue
ceases to exist simpliciter when it is melted down--it only ceases to exist
'as' a statue. Perhaps this is not an absurd thing to say, but it certainly
seems to require a very big departure from common-sense ways of think
ing about existence and substantial change. We may have to give up
saying, for instance, that a piece of paper is simply destroyed when it is
burnt to ashes, or even that a human being simply ceases to exist upon
undergoing a fatal accident.
• See further my Kinds of Being: A Study of Individuation, Identity and the Logic of Sortal Terms
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1989), 56 ff.
64\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE 65
Temporal parts and coinciding objects
Suppose we decide that the absolute conception of identity is too funda
mental to be given up. How else might we handle the case of the statue and
the lump of bronze? Temporal-parts theories, of the sort we discussed in
the previous chapter, provide what may seem to be an attractive solution to
our problem. The temporal-parts theorist can say that, so long as the statue
and the lump of bronze exactly coincide, they have exactly the same
temporal parts, even though they may have different temporal parts
before or after that period. This allows us to say that, considered as 'four
dimensional wholes, the statue and the lump of bronze are indeed
numerically distinct objects--and yet that, at any given time during their
coincidence, just one temporal part of an object exists in the place they
occupy, because the temporal part of the statue which exists at that time
is numerically identical with the temporal part of the lump of bronze
which exists at that time. This account, like the relativist one, both
explains and to some extent justifies our inclination to say that the statue
and the lump of bronze both are and are not identical with one another
during the time of coincidence. As temporally extended wholes they are
not identical, but they are "partly identical during the period of coinci
dence, inasmuch as they have exactly the same temporal parts during that
time.
Naturally, this solution will only appeal to those who do not consider
temporal-parts theories subject to insuperable objections. But even for
someone who accepts a theory of temporal parts, coinciding objects can
still present a problem. Consider a case in which a bronze statue is made
from bronze which only comes together into a lump at the time when the
statue is formed and which is dispersed or destroyed when the statue itself
is destroyed. In that case, the statue and the lump of bronze coincide
throughout their entire existence, so that, according to the temporal-parts
theory, they have exactly the same temporal parts at all times and con
sequently are one and the same 'four-dimensional whole. The trouble now
is that we still want to say that there are changes which the statue could
have survived but which the lump of bronze could not have survived and
vice versa--in short, that they have different modal properties. But this
difference in their properties is enough, by Leibniz's Law, to imply that the
statue and the lump of bronze are numerically distinct objects, even grant
ing that they possess the same non-modal properties throughout their\n| IdentitY AND CHANGE
respective existences and consequently do not differ in respect of any oftheir historical properties.
a
One possible response that the temporal-parts theorist can give to this
apparent difficulty is to say that, when we ascribe a modal property to anobject, our ascription must be in a certain sense relativized to some
appropriate sortal characterization of the object--and that one and the
same object may possess a certain modal property relative to one sortal
characterization of that object and yet lack it relative to another such
characterization. We shall have to say, for instance, that 'as' a lump of
bronze a certain 'four-dimensional whole could survive flattening, but that
'as' a statue it could not. This suggestion is, of course, reminiscent of what
the relative identity theorist was envisaged as saying about the existence of
objects--the difference being that, whereas the temporal-parts theorist
need only relativize judgements of what changes an object could survive to
how that object is characterized sortally, the relative identity theorist has
to relativize judgements of what changes an object actually does survive to
how that object is characterized sortally. One may well wonder, however,
whether, if one is going to have to admit such relativization in any case, it is
not preferable to adopt the relative identity theorist's position, since that
does not require us to include in our ontology such seemingly strange and
obscure entities as the supposed temporal parts of persisting objects. It is
true that the temporal-parts theory allows us to retain the standard, abso
lutist notion of identity and the standard version of Leibniz's Law, but
perhaps a commitment to the existence of temporal parts is too heavy a
price to pay for this advantage.
Some radical solutions to the problem
of coincidence
Can we solve the problem of the statue and the lump of bronze without
either relativizing identity or adopting the doctrine of temporal parts? In
particular, can we do so without having to say that two numerically
distinct persisting objects can exist in exactly the same place at the same
time? Yes, we can, but only if we are prepared to give up some other
See, for instance, Harold W. Noonan, 'Indeterminate Identity, Contingent Identity and
Abelardian Predicates', Philosophical Quarterly 41 (1991), 183-93, and Constitution is Identity',
Mind 102 (1993), 133-46.
66\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE 67
a
common-sense assumptions. For instance, we could deny that there are
really any such things as 'statues', conceived as constituting a distinctive
kind of persisting object. We could hold instead that, although a lump of
bronze may become 'statue-shaped for a certain period of time, this does
not amount to the creation of any new substantial individual distinct from
the lump itself. Alternatively, we could deny that there are really any such
things as 'lumps of bronze', holding instead that, although a number of
bronze particles may become united together for a certain period of time,
this does not ordinarily amount to the creation of any new substantial
individual in addition to the many bronze particles themselves--but that
when an intelligent agent deliberately imposes a specific form upon the
particles, they then begin to compose a new substantial particular, such as
a statue. If we adopt either of these positions, we may have to admit that a
plurality of different objects (the bronze particles) can together occupy
exactly the same place as some one object of a certain sort-either a lump
of bronze or a statue, as the case may be. But this is obviously quite
different from saying that some one object of a certain sort can exactly
coincide with some one object of another sort.
However, if we are prepared to entertain either of these positions, it is
not clear why we should not be prepared to combine them, denying the
existence of both statues and lumps of bronze and accepting only the
existence of bronze particles. But it is easy to see where this train of
thought is likely to lead, namely, to the view that, in reality, the only
persisting objects that exist are simple or non-composite ones, the most
likely candidates being the so-called elementary particles of physics. The
implication would be that none of the assumed objects of common-sense
ways of thinking really exist, including not only artefacts, plants, and ani
mals, but even we human beings ourselves (on the assumption that if we
are anything, we are composite beings). Perhaps a case can be made out for
saying that living organisms are special in some way and so really do exist,
despite being composite objects. But that will certainly not be easy. It
seems, then, that the position we are now contemplating is potentially a
paradoxical one, in which we have to deny even our own existence in
favour of the existence of certain theoretical entities--the elementary par
ticles of modern physics--whose status as 'persisting objects' is in any case
See, for example, Peter van Inwagen, Material Beings (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1990), 81 ff. For a sustained argument in favour of the view that conscious beings, including
ourselves, are the only composite macroscopic objects, see Trenton Merricks, Objects and Persons
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001). \n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
questionable, in view of the notorious 'wave-particle duality' of quantummechanical phenomena. The danger is that we shall have to end up concluding that there are no persisting objects in the world at all.
Is there any way in which we can, without adopting either the theory ofrelative identity or the doctrine of temporal parts, acknowledge the realexistence of macroscopic composite objects such as statues and lumps ofbronze and still deny that two numerically distinct objects can exactlycoincide? The answer is that yes, we can provided that we are prepared toabandon yet another feature of common-sense ways of thinking aboutobjects and their persistence. What we could say in the case of the statueand the lump of bronze is that when the lump of bronze is formed into thestatue, bringing the latter into existence, the lump of bronze itself ceases toexist. We may still want to say that a lump of bronze exists after the statue
has been created, but it is open to us to deny that this lump of bronze is
identical with the lump of bronze from which the statue was formed. We
can say instead that this new lump of bronze is simply identical with the
statue itself and thus came into existence when the statue did. There is
nothing logically inconsistent about this combination of judgements. But
it can hardly be said to respect our common sense ways of thinking about
the persistence of objects. For its implication is that merely by imposing a
certain shape upon a lump of bronze--the kind of shape that is necessary
to form it into a statue of a certain sort--we bring it about that that lump
of bronze ceases to exist. Why should that be so? How could a lump of
bronze cease to exist merely for this reason? Our common-sense notion of
a lump of bronze is precisely the notion of something which can undergo
any manner of change in its overall shape, provided that it continues to be
composed of the same bronze particles united together into a mass. I
conclude that there is very little prospect for an acceptable solution to our
problem along these lines.
In defence of coinciding objects
Having considered every other alternative that seems even remotely plausible, let us now consider again the view that the statue and the lump ofbronze are numerically distinct persisting objects which exactly coincide
See, for example, Michael B. Burke, 'Preserving the Principle of One Object to a Place: ANovel Account of the Relations among Objects, Sorts, Sortals, and Persistence Conditions', Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (1994), 591-624.
68\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE
awith one another for a certain period of time. As I have already indicated,
an apparent difficulty with this view is that the statue and the lump of
bronze seem to be indistinguishable from one another at such a time: we
cannot tell them apart by the minutest scrutiny, or so it seems. However,
much depends on what precisely is understood by `indistinguishability in
this context. It certainly seems to be true that the statue and the lump of
bronze are empirically indistinguishable during the period of their coinci
dence, at least in the sense that during that time they do not differ from
one another in respect of any perceptible property--say, of shape, colour,
or weight. But persisting objects may--and, in fact, must-possess many
other properties in addition to their perceptible ones, if by a perceptible
property' one means a property whose possession by an object at a timea
can in principle be discovered by observation of that object at that time.
We have already mentioned certain kinds of property which are clearly not
perceptible in this sense--the historical and modal properties of objects.
Of course, many of the historical properties of objects can be detected
empirically, although not simply by observing the objects at the time at
which they possess them. A man may possess the historical property of
having had a beard ten years ago, but no observation of him now can be
expected to reveal this fact about him. As for modal properties, consider
such so-called dispositional properties as elasticity and solubility. Elasticity
is a modal property, because it is the property an object has of being able to
return to its original shape upon being stretched. An empirical test can
certainly reveal whether or not an object has this property: one can simply
attempt to stretch the object and see whether it returns to its original
shape. But such a test takes time to perform, so it does not provide an
empirical means of detecting, at a certain time, that an object is elastic at
that time. This is why elasticity is not, strictly speaking, a perceptible prop
erty of an object, in the sense I have just defined. By contrast, we can very
often detect an object's colour or shape at a certain time simply by observ
ing at it at that time, which is why colour and shape are, in this sense,
perceptible properties. These considerations suggest that although it may
be the case that the statue and the lump of bronze are empirically indis
tinguishable during the time of their coincidence, this still leaves scope for
them to possess different properties from one another during that time
and hence to be distinguishable' in a broader sense. However, it remains to
be seen whether, and if so how, this possibility can be exploited by the
advocate of spatiotemporal coincidence.
Earlier, I suggested that some philosophers find it difficult to understand
69\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
how two numerically distinct objects could be exactly alike in respect oftheir non-historical and non-modal properties at a certain time and yetdiffer from one another in respect of their historical and modalproperties--particularly if, as is supposedly the case with the statue and
the lump of bronze, the two objects in question are composed of exactlythe same material particles. Now, it is certainly true that the statue and thelump of bronze cannot be expected to differ from one another in respect oftheir physical dispositional properties during the time of coincidence. Ifthe bronze is electrically conductive and soluble in sulphuric acid, so toowill be the statue. This is because such dispositional properties aregrounded in, or 'supervene upon', the properties and relations of the
material particles composing the statue and the lump of bronze. However,
not all modal properties are like such dispositional properties in this
respect. Some of an object's modal properties arise not from its material
constitution but from its persistence conditions, which determine what sorts
of changes the object can and cannot survive--and this is a matter of what
kind of object the object is. A statue, for instance, is a kind of object which,
unlike a lump of bronze, cannot survive much change to its shape. Con
versely, a lump of bronze is a kind of object which, unlike a statue, cannot
survive any change to its material composition.
These modal properties of the objects in question are evidently not to be
explained by reference to the properties and relations of the material par
ticles which compose statues and lumps of bronze respectively. Such modal
properties are not really empirical properties at all, but rather a priori ones
that are grounded in categorial distinctions of a metaphysical nature. It is
an a priori truth that what is required for a lump of bronze to persist over
time is for certain bronze particles to be united together for a period of
time, without any of them being separated from the rest or being replaced
by any new particles. Equally, it is an a priori truth that what is required for
a statue to persist over time is for sufficiently many material particles--but
not necessarily the same material particles--to be united together for a
period of time while constantly exhibiting a certain overall shape. The
concepts of a lump of bronze and of a statue are precisely the concepts of
persisting objects of kinds governed by the foregoing persistence condi
tions. The consequence is that one cannot in principle tell, simply by
examining an object empirically at a certain moment of time, that it is a
statue or a lump of bronze. For whether or not something qualifies as an
object of one of these kinds at a certain moment of time is partly a matterof what is the case at earlier and later moments of time. If, by chance, a
70\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE |
a
large number of bronze particles were to come together for just a moment
in the shape of a statue, immediately to be dispersed again a moment later,
that would not imply that either a lump of bronze or a bronze statue had
existed for that moment--for no persisting object composed of those par
ticles would have been created. In this respect, the properties of being a
lump of bronze and being a statue are similar, it seems to the property of
being in motion. Whether or not an object is in motion at a certain
moment of time cannot be established simply by an empirical examination
of the object at that time, because it is partly a matter of what is the case at
earlier and later moments of time-namely, whether the object is in a
different position at earlier and later moments of time. (Or so it seems: but
we shall see in Chapter 16 that the metaphysics of motion is a controversial
topic. )
We now have to hand the materials with which to answer the objections
that have been raised against the notion of the spatiotemporal coincidence
of persisting objects, such as the statue and the lump of bronze. It is true
that, at any given moment of their coincidence, the statue and the lump of
bronze do not differ in respect of any property whose possession by them
is determined solely by what is the case at that moment of time, without
any reference to what is the case at earlier or later moments of time. This is
why the statue and the lump of bronze are indistinguishable in respect of
their perceptible properties at any moment of their coincidence. It is also
true that the statue and the lump of bronze do not differ, at any moment of
their coincidence, in respect of any of their physical dispositional
properties--understanding these to be dispositional properties that are
grounded in the properties and relations of the material particles compos
ing them. However, it can still be true that the statue and the lump of
bronze differ, at any moment of their coincidence, in respect of many of
their modal and historical properties: for their possession of these proper
ties is not determined solely by what is the case at the times at which they
possess them, nor are these properties grounded in the properties and
relations of the material particles composing the statue and the lump of
bronze.
Here it is important to appreciate that modal and historical properties,
quite generally, are only ascribable to objects in virtue of the fact that
certain appropriate persistence conditions are assignable to those objects.
Clearly, we cannot properly say of a certain presently existing object that
something befell it in the past, or that it would behave in such-and-such a
way in the future if it were to be acted on in a certain fashion, unless we can
71\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE
how two numerically distinct objects could be exactly alike in respect of
their non-historical and non-modal properties at a certain time and yetdiffer from one another in respect of their historical and modal
properties--particularly if, as is supposedly the case with the statue andthe lump of bronze, the two objects in question are composed of exactlythe same material particles. Now, it is certainly true that the statue and the
lump of bronze cannot be expected to differ from one another in respect oftheir physical dispositional properties during the time of coincidence. If
the bronze is electrically conductive and soluble in sulphuric acid, so too
will be the statue. This is because such dispositional properties are
grounded in, or 'supervene upon', the properties and relations of the
material particles composing the statue and the lump of bronze. However,
not all modal properties are like such dispositional properties in this
respect. Some of an object's modal properties arise not from its material
constitution but from its persistence conditions, which determine what sorts
of changes the object can and cannot survive--and this is a matter of what
kind of object the object is. A statue, for instance, is a kind of object which,
unlike a lump of bronze, cannot survive much change to its shape. Con
versely, a lump of bronze is a of object which, unlike a statue, cannot
survive any change to its material composition.
These modal properties of the objects in question are evidently not to be
explained by reference to the properties and relations of the material par
ticles which compose statues and lumps of bronze respectively. Such modal
properties are not really empirical properties at all, but rather a priori ones
that are grounded in categorial distinctions of a metaphysical nature. It is
an a priori truth that what is required for a lump of bronze to persist over
time is for certain bronze particles to be united together for a period of
time, without any of them being separated from the rest or being replaced
by any new particles. Equally, it is an a priori truth that what is required for
a statue to persist over time is for sufficiently many material particles--but
not necessarily the same material particles--to be united together for a
period of time while constantly exhibiting a certain overall shape. The
concepts of a lump of bronze and of a statue are precisely the concepts of
persisting objects of kinds governed by the foregoing persistence condi
tions. The consequence is that one cannot in principle tell, simply by
examining an object empirically at a certain moment of time, that it is a
statue or a lump of bronze. For whether or not something qualifies as an
object of one of these kinds at a certain moment of time is partly a matterof what is the case at earlier and later moments of time. If, by chance, a
|70\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE 71
large number of bronze particles were to come together for just a moment
in the shape of a statue, immediately to be dispersed again a moment later,
that would not imply that either a lump of bronze or a bronze statue had
existed for that moment--for no persisting object composed of those par
ticles would have been created. In this respect, the properties of being a
lump of bronze and being a statue are similar, it seems to the property of
being in motion. Whether or not an object is in motion at a certain
moment of time cannot be established simply by an empirical examination
of the object at that time, because it is partly a matter of what is the case at
earlier and later moments of time-namely, whether the object is in a
different position at earlier and later moments of time. (Or so it seems: but
we shall see in Chapter 16 that the metaphysics of motion is a controversial
topic. )
We now have to hand the materials with which to answer the objections
that have been raised against the notion of the spatiotemporal coincidence
of persisting objects, such as the statue and the lump of bronze. It is true
that, at any given moment of their coincidence, the statue and the lump of
bronze do not differ in respect of any property whose possession by them
is determined solely by what is the case at that moment of time, without
any reference to what is the case at earlier or later moments of time. This is
why the statue and the lump of bronze are indistinguishable in respect of
their perceptible properties at any moment of their coincidence. It is also
true that the statue and the lump of bronze do not differ, at any moment of
their coincidence, in respect of any of their physical dispositional
properties--understanding these to be dispositional properties that are
grounded in the properties and relations of the material particles compos
ing them. However, it can still be true that the statue and the lump of
bronze differ, at any moment of their coincidence, in respect of many of
their modal and historical properties: for their possession of these proper
ties is not determined solely by what is the case at the times at which they
possess them, nor are these properties grounded in the properties and
relations of the material particles composing the statue and the lump of
bronze.
Here it is important to appreciate that modal and historical properties,
quite generally, are only ascribable to objects in virtue of the fact that
certain appropriate persistence conditions are assignable to those objects.
Clearly, we cannot properly say of a certain presently existing object that
something befell it in the past, or that it would behave in such-and-such a
way in the future if it were to be acted on in a certain fashion, unless we can
a\nIDENTITY AND CHANGE
say, in principle, what is required for that very object to exist both now andin the past, or both now and in the actual or possible) future. One consequence of this is that the statue and the lump of bronze can in fact differ
from one another, during the time of their coincidence, even in respect ofcertain of their dispositional properties--the implication being that not all
of their dispositional properties are simply grounded in the properties andrelations of the material particles which compose them. For example, we
may say of the statue that it is disposed to cast a shadow of a certain shape,
implying that if it were to be set on the ground and exposed to sunlight, a
shadow of that shape would be cast on the ground at its foot. But we
cannot say of the lump of bronze, without qualification, that it is disposed
to cast a shadow of any particular shape. For, whereas the statue, so long as
it exists, must retain a certain constant shape, this is not true of the lump
of bronze--these facts being consequences of the respective persistence
conditions of the statue and the lump of bronze.
I have taken considerable pains to defend the view that two numerically
distinct persisting objects can coincide, because, although it may super
ficially seem peculiar, any alternative view seems to have still more peculiar
consequences. Perhaps the view seems peculiar, in part, because it is con
fused with another, much less easily defensible view--namely, that two
numerically distinct persisting objects of exactly the same kind can
coincide. The idea that two statues, or two lumps of bronze, could exist in
exactly the same place at the same time seems very strange indeed
although, as we have seen, some accounts of objects and their persistence
require us to say precisely this. The view that I have defended restricts
cases of spatiotemporal coincidence between persisting objects to ones in
which the objects in question possess different persistence conditions and
are consequently objects of quite different kinds. If one were to ask an
ordinary member of the public whether or not two different objects could
exist in the same place at the same time, one might well receive an
emphatic 'No' for an answer--but that, I think, is only because the
respondent would not have in mind the kind of case that we have been
discussing.
See, for example, Christopher Hughes, 'Same-Kind Coincidence and the Ship of Theseus', Mind 206 1997), 53-67. For an opposing view, see David S. Oderberg, 'Coincidence Under aSoral', Philosophical Review 105 (1996), 145-71.
|72\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE 73
Identity and constitution
e
A
а
If we accept that the statue and the lump of bronze are two numerically
distinct objects even when they coincide, a question still remains concern
ing their relationship to one another when they do: if that relationship is
not one of identity, what then is it? A standard answer would be to say that
the relationship is one of constitution": the lump of bronze constitutes the
statue during the period of their coincidence. Constitution is understood
to be an asymmetrical relation: that is, if a constitutes b, then b does not
constitute a. The statue, for instance, does not constitute the lump of
bronze. But how do we decide which object constitutes which? That ques
tion can perhaps only be answered satisfactorily by providing an analysis
or definition of the constitution relation, which is no easy matter. I shall
not attempt to present a definitive analysis here, though I do want to
mention one quite promising proposal. The proposal assumes, as seems
reasonable, that the relation of constitution only ever obtains between
persisting objects which are composite, as are the statue and the lump of
bronze. And the proposal is this: that one composite object, a, constitutes
another composite object, b, at a time t just in case a and b exactly coincide
at t and every component part of a at t is a component part of b at t, but
not every component part of b at t is a component part of a at t. This
definition has the desirable feature of implying that constitution is an
asymmetrical relation. But it may be wondered how it is satisfied in the
case, say, of the statue and the lump of bronze. The answer is that while it is
plausible to say that every component part of the lump of bronze is a
component part of the statue--for example, each particle of bronze is--it
is also plausible to say that there are certain parts of the statue which are
not component parts of the lump of bronze. I am thinking of such parts of
the statue as its head, arms, legs, and so forth. Each of these parts of the
statue, it seems right to say, is constituted by a part of the lump of bronze,
but is not identical with that part of the lump of bronze, for the same
reason that the statue itself is not identical with the lump of bronze as a
whole-namely, because a part of the statue such as its head has different
persistence conditions from those of the part of the lump of bronze which
exactly coincides with that part of the statue. This helps to explain why it
definitely seems wrong to say that the head of the statue is a part of the
a a
• See Wiggins, Sameness and Substance, 30 ff. \n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
lump of bronze as a whole. But a full defence of this proposal would
require much more discussion, so I offer it here merely as an illustration of
how one might attempt to analyse the relation of constitution.
The problem of Tibbles and Tib
10
Our discussion of spatiotemporal coincidence would not be complete
without consideration of another kind of case which threatens to be, in
some ways, even more troubling than that of the statue and the lump of
bronze. Let us recall from Chapter 2 our friend Tibbles the cat. Tibbles, like
any normal cat, has a tail, which we can call, quite simply, 'Tail. Tail is
clearly a component part of Tibbles. But now consider the rest of
Tibbles--the whole of Tibbles apart from Tail--and let us call this 'Tib'.
Whether there really is any such object as Tib is a debatable matter, as we
shall see, but for the time being let us assume that there is. ' Then Tib
would also appear to be a component part of Tibbles. Clearly, Tibbles and
Tib are not identical with one another, for Tibbles has Tail as a part
whereas Tib does not. However, cats can survive the loss of their tails. So
suppose that Tibbles loses Tail, perhaps in an accident. Since Tail was no
part of Tib, the loss of Tail can apparently have no bearing on the existence
or non-existence of Tib. " So when Tibbles loses Tail, it seems that Tib must
still exist. If so, however, then it is now the case that Tibbles and Tib exactly
coincide with one another. And the question is: how is it possible for them
exactly to coincide and yet to remain numerically distinct from one
another?
One's initial thought might be that this is not really any different from
the case of the statue and the lump of bronze: we can say that, after the loss
of Tail, Tib constitutes Tibbles--and constitution is not identity. But it is
not clear that such an answer is in fact available to us in this case, because it
is not clear that Tib and Tibbles are objects of different kinds, in the sense
of possessing different persistence conditions from one another. Tib is not
like the lump of bronze in being something which cannot undergo a
change of its material composition. Nor does it appear that we can
For doubts about the existence of such objects as Tib, see Peter van Inwagen, 'The Doctrine of
Arbitrary Undetached Parts', Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 62 (1981), 123-37, reprinted in hisOntology, Identity, and Modality: Essays in Metaphysics (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2001).
But this might be questioned: see Michael B. Burke, 'Dion and Theon: An EssentialistSolution to an Ancient Puzzle', Journal of Philosophy 91 (1994), 129-39.
74\nSUBSTANTIAL CHANGE AND COINCIDENCE
plausibly say, after the loss of Tail, that Tibbles has any component part
which is not also a component part of Tib, as well as vice versa. So the
definition of the constitution relation that I offered a moment ago would
not seem to permit us to say that Tib constitutes Tibbles after the loss of
a
Tail.
As usual, several other solutions to this problem, of varying plausibility,
can be suggested. A proponent of the doctrine of temporal parts can say
that, after the loss of Tail, Tibbles and Tib have all their temporal parts in
common, so that they are 'four-dimensional objects which exactly
coincide with one another after, but not before, a certain moment of time.
Another possibility is to say that Tib does, after all, cease to exist when Tail
is lost. Yet another possibility is to say that no such object as Tib ever
existed--and perhaps no such object as Tail, either. But any putative solu
tion to the problem should take into account its full ramifications. If a
solution defends the view that, after the loss of Tail, Tib and Tibbles are
two numerically distinct objects which exactly coincide with one another,
then it must also defend the possibility of there being any number of such
exactly coinciding objects. This is because we can easily imagine a succes
sion of losses of parts of a cat, each one of which would generate an
addition to the number of exactly coinciding objects. For instance, after
the loss of Tail, Tibbles and Tib might suffer the loss of Ear, so that
now three objects exactly coincide--Tibbles, Tib, and the part of Tib and
Tibbles that did not include Ear.
I think there may be something to be said for the suggestion that Tib
does exist prior to the loss of Tail, but ceases to exist thereafter. But this will
require us to say that Tib does not, after all, have the same sort of persist
ence conditions as Tibbles the cat does. However, once we do say that, then
it perhaps becomes more questionable whether we should admit the exist
ence of Tib at all. Tib's existence would be awkward to deny if that com
mitted us to denying also the existence of Tail, because it is an article of
common sense that cats have tails amongst their component parts. How
ever, may well be possible to deny that the existence of Tib and that of
Tail stand or fall together. Tail certainly has a claim to being a genuine
component part of Tibbles--that is, to being something which helps to
compose Tibbles because it is identifiable independently of Tibbles and,
indeed, could continue to exist even if Tibbles were to cease to exist. (Recall
here my characterization in the previous chapter of component parts' in
these terms. ) But it is very doubtful that the same can be said for the
putative object Tib. For Tib was only introduced to us as 'the rest of
it
75\n| IDENTITY AND CHANGE
Tibbles apart from Tail--that is, as the difference between two otherobjects, Tibbles and Tail. It is not clear, then, that we are provided with anyway of identifying the putative object Tib independently of Tibbles and
Tail--and so it is not clear that Tib, even if it exists, could qualify as agenuine component part of Tibbles. (Certainly, it is hard to see how Tib
could continue to exist even if Tibbles were to cease to exist in the way that
Tail plainly could. ) But once we deny Tib this role, it becomes questionable
why we should acknowledge Tib's existence at all. And if we deny Tib's
existence, then of course there is no question of Tib exactly coinciding with
Tibbles after the loss of Tail: the problem is dissolved.
76\nPART II
NECESSITY, ESSENCE,
AND POSSIBLE WORLDS\n\n5
NECESSITY AND IDENTITY
Two kinds of possibility
a
In the preceding three chapters, my central theme has been the identity
over time of persisting objects capable of undergoing various kinds of
change in time. In the course of my discussions, I sometimes had occasion
to talk about the modal properties of persisting objects, such as the modal
property that a lump of bronze has of being able to survive a change of
shape. Closely related to this modal property of the lump of bronze is
another kind of modal property: the property it has, at any given moment
of time, of being such that it could have had a different shape from the
shape it actually has at that time. Clearly, to say that it has this property at a
given moment of time is different from saying that it has, at that time, the
property of being such that it could change its shape and thus actually
acquire a different shape from the shape it has at that time. In the latter
case, we are talking about a possibility of change over time. Not so in the
former case: there we are talking about what might have been the case at a
given time, in contrast with what is actually the case at that same time. This
latter kind of possibility we may call 'counterfactual possibility'. The for
mer kind of possibility--a possibility of change over time--we could per
haps call 'temporal possibility". (There is, however, one respect in which
the term 'counterfactual possibility' is potentially misleading: it may sug
gest that only what is not actually the case can be possible' in this sense,
whereas in fact we want to say that what is actually the case is, for that
very reason, something which could have been the case and so is
'counterfactually possible' in the sense intended. )
How are the two kinds of possibility related to each other? Does a
possibility of either kind imply a corresponding possibility of the other
kind? It does not seem so. Consider first the question of whether a counter
factual possibility implies a corresponding temporal possibility. Given that
a\nnecessity, essence, and possible worlds
a
something could have had a different shape now from the shape that itactually has now, does it follow that that thing can acquire that differentshape in the future? I don't think so. For example, a sculptor could perhapshave given a somewhat different shape to a statue that he has just madebut it doesn't follow that the statue can now be made to take on that
different shape. Equally, it seems clear that a temporal possibility does not
imply a corresponding counterfactual possibility. Just because a thing can
acquire a different shape in the future from the shape that it actually has
now, it doesn't follow that it could have had a different shape now. For
example, it might be that a plant of a certain kind must possess a certain
shape at a certain stage of its existence--for instance, when it is a seed
even though it is possible for it to change its shape thereafter. In the case of
such a plant, it is true to say of it, when it is a seed, that it could not have
had a different shape from the shape that it actually has at that moment.
Yet it is also true to say of it that it can acquire a new shape in the future.
Possibility as a dimension of variation
In this and the next two chapters, we shall be mostly concerned with what I
have just called 'counterfactual possibilities. Although I have just con
trasted such possibilities with 'temporal possibilities, there are certain
tempting analogies between the notion of counterfactual possibility and
the notion of time itself. Because of the pervasive phenomena of temporal
change, time is often thought of as being a certain kind of dimension of
variation. The three dimensions of space are even more obviously dimen
sions of variation in this generic sense: spatially extended things can vary
in certain ways along their width, breadth, or height. For example, a river
gets broader as it approaches the sea and a poker whose tip is stuck in a fire
gets hotter along its length. Whether time really is a dimension of variation
is a contentious issue, discussion of which must be postponed until we
reach Part V of this book. But let us accept the suggestion for present
purposes. In that case, some of the parallels that we may be tempted to
draw between time and counterfactual possibility--or just plain possibility, as I shall call it from now on--rest upon our being able to see possibility,
too, as a kind of dimension of variation. Just as we think of a persistingobject as existing 'at different times, which are ordered in a linear
sequence from earlier to later, so we may think of an object as existing 'in'different possible situations, which are also ordered in some way: we may,
80\nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY | 81
a
for instance, think of some of these possible situations as being more
'remote' ('less close") than others. But we must be careful not to press such
an analogy too far, even if we deem it to be basically sound: for there is
really no reason to suppose that possible situations'--whatever exactly we
make of this notion can be ordered into a linear sequence in the way that
times can. Nor, plausibly, is this because possibility is not just one
dimensional, as time is, but more like space in having several different
dimensions. Rather, it is because the only tenable notion of closeness'
between possible situations appears to be based on considerations of
similarity--and entities of any given kind can normally be deemed similar
to or dissimilar from one another in indefinitely many different ways,
depending on which features of them we choose to focus upon.
I have been speaking of `possible situations', as though these are items
that can be likened in certain ways to times and places, the latter being
spatiotemporal 'locations' and the former being, as we might put it, modal
'locations'. Again, the analogy can at best be only a loose one. Apart from
anything else, a modal location', or possible situation, will normally
include its own spatiotemporal features. When we speak of a possible
situation 'in' which a certain object exists, that situation will certainly have
to be one in which the object exists at a certain time and in a certain place,
at least if that object is something concrete such as a tree or an animal or a
mountain: for there is no possible situation in which a tree, say, exists, but
has no spatiotemporal location. A further fact to notice is that possible
situations, as we have been speaking of them so far, are not necessarily
mutually incompatible: very often, both of two different possible situations
could obtain together--for instance, a possible situation in which I am
rich and a possible situation in which you are poor. This is just to say that,
in addition to there being two such possible situations, there is a possible
situation in which I am rich and you are poor. By contrast, although there
is both a possible situation in which I am rich and a possible situation in
which I am not rich, there is no possible situation in which I am both rich
and not rich.
a
Possible worlds
Modern modal metaphysics lays great emphasis upon a certain special
class of possible situations, designating these possible worlds. Possible
worlds, unlike possible situations in general, are--by definition, in effect\n| NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
mutually incompatible. This is because they are conceived of as being'maximal' possible situations. A possible situation is 'maximal' just in caseit satisfies the following condition: for any proposition, p, either it is thecase that p is true in the situation in question, or else it is the case that p isnot true (and hence that not-p is true) in the situation in question. Itshould be obvious why any one maximal possible situation is mutuallyincompatible with, or excludes, any other maximal possible situation. For
two maximal possible situations will be numerically distinct only if there issome proposition, p, which is true in one of them but not true in the other.
But then there cannot be a possible situation which includes both of these
maximal possible situations, because it would have to be one in which p
was both true and not true--and there is no such possible situation. It is
important not to confuse the condition that I have just stated for the
maximality of a possible situation with another condition which every
possible situation must satisfy, namely, this: for any proposition, p, it is the
case that either p or not-p is true in the situation in question. The earlier
condition implies that, if we were to list all the propositions that are true in
a given maximal possible situation, then, for any proposition, p, we would
always find in the list either the proposition p itself or else the proposition
not-p (but not, of course, both of them). The other condition merely
implies that, if we were to list all the propositions that are true in any
possible situation whatever (whether or not it is maximal), we shall always
find in the list the proposition either p or not-p. This second condition is
simply a condition which any situation must satisfy if it is to be a possible
situation, whereas the former condition is the condition which any
possible situation must satisfy if it is to be maximal.
Necessary truths and necessary beings
Because possible worlds are maximal possible situations, each possible
world is, as it were, a complete way that everything could be. In Chapter 7,
we shall look more closely into the ontological implications of talk about
possible worlds and examine several different theories concerning their
nature and the role they should play in the metaphysics of modality. For
the time being, however, we shall adopt talk of such worlds relatively
uncritically, accepting that it is at least a convenient means of renderingperspicuous certain kinds of modal claim. In this connection, the firstthing to notice is that there are some propositions that are true in every
82\nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY 83
possible world. These propositions are necessary truths. A relatively
uncontroversial example would be any proposition of the form either p or
not-p, such as the proposition that either grass is green or it is not the case
that grass is green. That this proposition is a necessary truth is guaranteed
by the laws of logic, which hold in every possible world. (I am assuming
here that the so-called law of excluded middle--of which the proposition
just cited is an instance--is correct. This has been disputed by some logi
cians; but although logicians may dispute what exactly the laws of logic are,
that there are some such laws is much less open to dispute. ) Rather more
interesting examples of necessary truths are supplied by mathematics: for
instance, any proposition of elementary arithmetic, such as the prop
osition that two plus three equals five. (Some philosophers of mathematics
maintain that mathematics is not in fact a body of truths; however, most
who do accept that it is a body of truths would also accept that it is a body
of necessary truths--and this is the view that I am assuming for present
purposes. I shall return to the issue of mathematical truth in Chapter 20. )
A much more controversial example of a putative necessary truth would be
the proposition that God exists, though many philosophers and theo
logians have maintained that it is a genuine example. Just as there are
necessary truths--propositions that are true in every possible world--so
there are possible truths, these being propositions that are true in some
possible world. Any proposition which is actually true is for that very
reason a possible truth, because the actual world is itself a possible world.
But many propositions that are actually false are, none the less, possible
truths, being true in some possible world other than the actual world. A
plausible example would be the proposition that I am rich--for, although I
am not in fact rich, I surely could have been. Notice that any necessary
truth is, ipso facto, a possible truth, because if a proposition is true in every
possible world, then it is, a fortiori, true in some possible world. Finally, we
can use possible-worlds talk to characterize the class of contingent proposi
tions: these are propositions that are true in some possible worlds but not
true in others.
As well as using the language of possible worlds to characterize the
modal status of propositions, we can use it to characterize the modal status
of beings. For example, a necessary being is something which exists in every
possible world, a possible being is something which exists in some possible
world, and a contingent being is something which exists in some possible
worlds but not in others. Traditionally, God has been taken to be a para
digm example of a necessary being, but less contentious examples are some\n82 | NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE Worlds
mutually incompatible. This is because they are conceived of as being
*maximal' possible situations. A possible situation is maximal just in case
it satisfies the following condition: for any proposition, p, either it is the
case that p is true in the situation in question, or else it is the case that p is
not true (and hence that not-p is true) in the situation in question. It
should be obvious why any one maximal possible situation is mutually
incompatible with, or excludes, any other maximal possible situation. For
two maximal possible situations will be numerically distinct only if there is
some proposition, p, which is true in one of them but not true in the other.
But then there cannot be a possible situation which includes both of these
maximal possible situations, because it would have to be one in which p
was both true and not true--and there is no such possible situation. It is
important not to confuse the condition that I have just stated for the
maximality of a possible situation with another condition which every
possible situation must satisfy, namely, this: for any proposition, p, it is the
case that either p or not-p is true in the situation in question. The earlier
condition implies that, if we were to list all the propositions that are true in
a given maximal possible situation, then, for any proposition, p, we would
always find in the list either the proposition p itself or else the proposition
not-p (but not, of course, both of them). The other condition merely
implies that, if we were to list all the propositions that are true in any
possible situation whatever (whether or not it is maximal), we shall always
find in the list the proposition either p or not-p. This second condition is
simply a condition which any situation must satisfy if it is to be a possible
situation, whereas the former condition is the condition which any
possible situation must satisfy if it is to be maximal.
a
Necessary truths and necessary beings
Because possible worlds are maximal possible situations, each possible
world is, as it were, a complete way that everything could be. In Chapter 7,
we shall look more closely into the ontological implications of talk about
possible worlds and examine several different theories concerning their
nature and the role they should play in the metaphysics of modality. For
the time being, however, we shall adopt talk of such worlds relatively
uncritically, accepting that it is at least a convenient means of rendering
perspicuous certain kinds of modal claim. In this connection, the first
thing to notice is that there are some propositions that are true in every\nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY 83
a
possible world. These propositions are necessary truths. A relatively
uncontroversial example would be any proposition of the form either p or
not-p, such as the proposition that either grass is green or it is not the case
that grass is green. That this proposition is a necessary truth is guaranteed
by the laws of logic, which hold in every possible world. (I am assuming
here that the so-called law of excluded middle--of which the proposition
just cited is an instance--is correct. This has been disputed by some logi
cians; but although logicians may dispute what exactly the laws of logic are,
that there are some such laws is much less open to dispute. ) Rather more
interesting examples of necessary truths are supplied by mathematics: for
instance, any proposition of elementary arithmetic, such as the prop
osition that two plus three equals five. (Some philosophers of mathematics
maintain that mathematics is not in fact a body of truths; however, most
who do accept that it is a body of truths would also accept that it is a body
of necessary truths--and this is the view that I am assuming for present
purposes. I shall return to the issue of mathematical truth in Chapter 20. )
A much more controversial example of a putative necessary truth would be
the proposition that God exists, though many philosophers and theo
logians have maintained that it is a genuine example. Just as there are
necessary truths--propositions that are true in every possible world--so
there are possible truths, these being propositions that are true in some
possible world. Any proposition which is actually true is for that very
reason a possible truth, because the actual world is itself a possible world.
But many propositions that are actually false are, none the less, possible
truths, being true in some possible world other than the actual world. A
plausible example would be the proposition that I am rich--for, although I
am not in fact rich, I surely could have been. Notice that any necessary
truth is, ipso facto, a possible truth, because if a proposition is true in every
possible world, then it is, a fortiori, true in some possible world. Finally, we
can use possible-worlds talk to characterize the class of contingent proposi
tions: these are propositions that are true in some possible worlds but not
true in others.
As well as using the language of possible worlds to characterize the
modal status of propositions, we can use it to characterize the modal status
of beings. For example, a necessary being is something which exists in every
possible world, a possible being is something which exists in some possible
world, and a contingent being is something which exists in some possible
worlds but not in others. Traditionally, God has been taken to be a para
digm example of a necessary being, but less contentious examples are some
a\n84 NECESSITY, essence, AND POSSIBLE worlds
of the abstract objects of mathematics--things such as the natural num
bers. Many metaphysicians also regard propositions as being abstract
objects that are necessary beings. However, we must be careful to avoid a
confusion which may arise. I earlier characterized a necessary truth as
being a proposition that is true in every possible world and a possible truth
as being a proposition that is true in some possible world. The question of
a proposition's modal status in this sense is quite different from the ques
tion of whether propositions are necessary beings. If a proposition is a
necessary being, then it exists in every possible world--but that is quite a
different matter from that proposition being true in every possible world.
Some propositions, indeed--such as the contradictory proposition p and
not-p--are not true in any possible world: and yet, if propositions are
necessary beings, these propositions exist in every possible world.
An argument for the necessity of identity
We are now in a position to proceed to the main business of this chapter,
which is to examine the modal status of a special class of propositions,
identity propositions. An identity proposition is any proposition that an
object a is identical with an object b, where a and b are any objects what
ever. For example, the proposition that George Orwell is identical with Eric
Blair is an identity proposition--one that is actually true. Some identity
propositions are, of course, actually false, such as the proposition that
George Orwell is identical with D. H. Lawrence. And some are quite plainly
necessarily true, such as the arithmetical identity proposition that five is
identical with five. An interesting question, however, is whether there are
any contingent identity propositions, that is, any identity propositions that
are true in some possible worlds but not true in others. Many modal
metaphysicians consider that there are no contingent identity proposi
tions, basing this judgement on a famous argument or proof which seems
to have been developed independently by Ruth Barcan Marcus and Saul
Kripke.
For Kripke's version of the proof, see his 'Identity and Necessity', in Milton K. Munitz (ed. ),
Identity and Individuation (New York: New York University Press, 1971), reprinted in the very
useful collection edited by Stephen P. Schwartz, Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kinds (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1977). See also Saul A. Kripke, Naming and Necessity (Oxford: Blackwell,
1980), which first appeared in Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman (eds. ), Semantics of Natural
Language (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1972). For the work of Ruth Barcan Marcus, see her Modalities:
Philosophical Essays (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993). \nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY
The argument has two premises, both of which are taken to be necessary
truths. The first premise is that everything is necessarily identical with
itself--the principle of the necessity of self-identity. The second premise is
Leibniz's Law--the principle that whatever is true of something is true of
anything identical with that thing. Suppose, then, that a certain identity
proposition is true: say, the proposition that a is identical with b, where a
and b are any objects whatever. Now, by the principle of the necessity of
self-identity, we can say that a is necessarily identical with a. From this it
follows that it is true of a that it is necessarily identical with a. But from
this and the assumption that a is identical with b it follows, by Leibniz's
Law, that it is also true of b that it is necessarily identical with a--from
which it follows that a is necessarily identical with b. What we seem to have
proved, then, is that if it is true that a is identical with b, then it is necessar
ily true that a is identical with b--and consequently that there cannot be an
identity proposition that is merely contingently true (true in some possible
worlds but not in others).
It may be helpful to set out the foregoing argument in a rather more
formal fashion, as follows, each numbered line constituting a step in the
proof. Lines (1) and (2) are the two premises of the argument, each
assumed to be a necessary truth. Line (3) has the status of an assumption
or hypothesis.
(1) For any object x, it is necessarily the case that x is identical with x.
[the necessity of self-identity]
(2) For any objects x and y, if x is identical with y, then whatever is true
of x is also true of y. [Leibniz's Law]
(3) a is identical with b. (assumption]
(4) It is necessarily the case that a is identical with a. (from (1)]
(5) It is true of a that it is necessarily identical with a. (from (4)]
(6) If a is identical with b, then whatever is true of a is also true of b.
[from (2)]
(7) Whatever is true of a is also true of b. (from (3) and (6)]
(8) It is true of b that it is necessarily identical with a. (from (5) and (7)]
(9) It is necessarily the case that a is identical with b. (from (8)]
Therefore,
(10) If a is identical with b, then it is necessarily the case that a is
identical with b.
85\nnecessity, essence, AND POSSIBLE worlds
The conclusion, (10), rests on the fact that from the assumption made in
line (3) we can derive the claim made in line (9).
There are many reasons why the conclusion of this argument is interest
ing and perhaps even surprising. One is that, if the argument is correct, it
shows us that there can be necessary truths that are not knowable a priori,
that is, not knowable independently of empirical evidence. Take the prop
osition that Hesperus is identical with Phosphorus, these being the ancient
Greek names for the morning star and the evening star respectively.
Astronomers now know, of course, that the morning star and the evening
star are one and the same heavenly body, namely, the planet Venus. If the
Barcan-Kripke proof is correct, it is a necessary truth that Hesperus is
identical with Phosphorus: but if so, it is plainly one whose truth was, and
had to be, discovered empirically, by means of astronomical observation.
The epistemological status of this identity proposition is thus quite differ
ent from that of the identity proposition that Hesperus is identical with
Hesperus, which is an a priori truth of logic. This implication of the
Barcan-Kripke proof renders it suspicious in the eyes of some philo
sophers, especially those who think that necessity cannot reside in the
nature of things themselves, independently of the ways in which we con
ceptualize things or describe them in language. However, I am not at all
sympathetic to the latter view of the nature of necessity, as I hope I made
clear in Chapter 1, so I shall raise no objection to the Barcan-Kripke proof
from this direction.
Some objections to the argument
Is the Barcan-Kripke proof valid? Most modal logicians would agree that it
is. Yet it may be possible to object that it is subtly question-begging, that is,
that it implicitly assumes precisely what it is supposed to prove. The
objection that I have in mind focuses on the step from line (4) of the proof
to line (5), that is, from the proposition that it is necessarily the case that a
is identical with a to the proposition that it is true of a that it is necessarily
identical with a. It might be objected that all that really follows from the
former proposition is the much weaker consequence that it is true of a that
it is necessarily identical with itself. After all, line (4) is derived directly
sity of True Identity Statements', Mind 91
86\nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY |
from the principle of the necessity of self-identity, (1), which is simply the
principle that everything is necessarily identical with itself. From this we
surely can conclude that it is true of a, in particular, that it is necessarily
identical with itself--but it is not perhaps so clear that we can conclude
that it is true of a that it is necessarily identical with a. To assume that we
can conclude the latter is, it may be said, effectively just to assume that any
truth of identity concerning a is a necessary truth, which is the very thing
to be proved. If this objection is correct, line (5) of the proof should be
replaced by the following line:
(5*) It is true of a that it is necessarily identical with itself. [from (4)]
This means that line (8) of the proof must be changed to:
(8*) It is true of b that it is necessarily identical with itself. [from (5+)
and (7)]
This in turn means that line (9) of the proof will be replaced by:
(9+) It is necessarily the case that b is identical with b. [from (84)]
And (9+), of course, is a wholly uninteresting and unsurprising a priori
truth.
Even if the Barcan-Kripke proof is subtly question-begging, that does
not mean, of course, that its conclusion is false, just that it does not provide
us with a good reason for thinking that its conclusion is true. That conclu
sion, recall, is that any true identity proposition is necessarily true. The
implication is, for instance, that if Hesperus is identical with
Phosphorus--if they are in fact one and the same object--then Hesperus
and Phosphorus could not have been distinct. In the language of possible
worlds: if Hesperus and Phosphorus are one and the same object in the
actual world, then there is no possible world in which Hesperus and Phos
phorus are two distinct objects. (Of course, there are worlds in which
Hesperus and Phosphorus do not exist at all, since Hesperus and Phos
phorus are not necessary beings: but the claim is that any world in which
either of them exists is a world in which both of them exist and they are
identical with each other. ) Against this claim, it may be urged that one can
perfectly well imagine a possible world in which astronomers discover that
Hesperus and Phosphorus are two distinct planets. However, that one can
imagine a situation does not necessarily imply that it is a genuinely pos
sible situation. We can perhaps imagine a time traveller going back to the
past and changing the course of history: but it is not genuinely possible to
87\n88 NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
change the course of history, that is, to make it the case that something
which has happened has not happened, for this involves a contradiction.
(As we shall see in Chapter 18, it is important to distinguish between
changing the past, which is not possible, and affecting the past, which may
be. ) Furthermore, when it is urged that one can imagine a possible world
in which astronomers discover that Hesperus and Phosphorus are two
distinct planets, it may be questioned whether this really does characterize
the content of a possible act of imagination: perhaps all that we can really
imagine is a possible world in which there exist two planets very similar to
Hesperus and Phosphorus, which the astronomers of that world discover
to be two distinct planets.
It is also unsatisfactory to object to the thesis that any true identity
proposition is necessarily true that it has 'counterexamples' such as the
following: it is true, but not necessarily true, that the largest planet in the
solar system is identical with the planet which is fifth nearest to the sun.
The proposition in question is certainly true, since Jupiter is both the
largest planet in the solar system and the planet which is fifth nearest to the
sun. And the proposition is not necessarily true, both because the solar
system could have had a larger planet than Jupiter and because Jupiter
could have had a different orbit around the sun. However, such a prop
osition is not a genuine 'identity proposition', in the sense that we have
been discussing. Earlier, I said that an identity proposition is any prop
osition that an object a is identical with an object b, where a and b are any
objects whatever. It should be understood that the terms 'a' and 'b'in such
a context serve purely to refer to the object(s) in question and therefore
contribute nothing else to the proposition expressed with their aid. So
called 'definite descriptions'--noun phrases such as "the largest planet in
the solar system' and 'the planet which is fifth nearest to the sun'do
not have a purely referential function: they make a further contribution
to propositions that are expressed with their aid, in virtue of their
descriptive content. In everyday language, it seems, so-called proper
names--such as "Jupiter', 'Hesperus', and 'Eric Blair'--serve purely to
refer to certain objects and make no descriptive contribution to the pro
positions that are expressed with their aid. Hence, propositions such as
the proposition that Hesperus is Phosphorus and the proposition that
George Orwell is Eric Blair are genuine identity propositions in the
intended sense. It is propositions such as these that are alleged to be
necessarily true if true at all. (Some philosophers of language, it must
be acknowledged, have claimed that everyday proper names, such as
а\nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY |
"Jupiter', are in fact 'disguised definite descriptions, or are 'abbreviations'
for such descriptions. This is implausible, though the issue is too large to
go into here. Suffice it to say that, if this view of everyday proper names
were correct, then propositions expressed with their aid would not be
identity propositions in the intended sense--but this would certainly not
imply that there are no such propositions and would have no direct
bearing on the claim that true identity propositions in this sense are
necessarily true. For present purposes, all assume that this view
of everyday proper names is false and continue to use them in order to
express identity propositions. )
I
Rigid designators
In this connection, it is often claimed, by proponents of the thesis that any
true identity proposition is necessarily true, that everyday proper names
are 'rigid designators? ? Using the language of possible worlds, a rigid desig
nator is standardly defined to be a term which designates the same object
in every possible world in which it designates anything at all. However, if it
is now stipulated that an "identity proposition', in the intended sense, is
any proposition that is expressible by means of a sentence of the form 'a is
identical with b', where 'a' and 'B'are rigid designators, then the thesis that
any true identity proposition is necessarily true is in danger of being trivi
alized. For ifʻa is identical with b' is true and hence 'a' and b'designate the
same object in the actual world, but we also stipulate that both 'a' and 'b'
designate this same object in any other possible world, then we appear to
have no option but to say that there is no possible world in which 'a' and
b'designate different objects and hence that 'a is identical with b'is
necessarily true. However, a victory secured by these means would be a
hollow one. The thesis of the necessity of identity is only of metaphysical
interest if it is a substantive one that needs to be argued for, rather than just
a consequence of a linguistic stipulation. That is why I have not stipulated
that the terms used to express an identity proposition must be rigid desig
nators, in the sense just defined, but only that these terms must serve
purely to refer to certain objects and contribute nothing else to the pro
positions expressed with their aid. If it turns out that the thesis of the
necessity of identity is correct, then it will turn out that such terms may be
a. This is Kripke's terminology: see Naming and Necessity, 48 ff.
89\nNECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
described as 'rigid designators': but to define them as such in advance
would appear to beg the very question at issue.
A minor complication here, which I have so far glossed over, is that if
two rigid designators, 'a' and 'b', are co-designative--that is designate the
same object--in every possible world in which either of them designates
anything at all, this still leaves open the possibility that there are worlds in
which neither of them designates anything, namely, all those worlds in
which neither a nor b exists. Unless a and b are necessary beings, there
must be some such worlds. But then it might be questioned whether it can,
after all, be a necessary truth that a is identical with b, because it may be
questioned whether the proposition that a is identical with b is true in
every possible world, including those worlds in which a and b do not exist.
However, we should not too lightly assume that the proposition that a is
identical with b is not true in such worlds, merely because a and b do not
exist in them. It may be better to say that this proposition is trivially or
'vacuously true in such worlds. We should bear in mind here that if
propositions are themselves necessary beings, as was suggested earlier, then
this proposition certainly exists in any world in which neither a nor b
exists--and hence is either true or else not true in any such world. Alter
natively, however, we could weaken our characterization of necessary
truth, saying that the proposition that a is identical with b is a necessary
truth, in the weak sense, just in case it is true in every possible world in
which either a or b exists. Either way, it seems that the complication just
mentioned does not threaten to raise a major issue, so I shall ignore it for
present purposes.
a
Transworld identity
The question of whether one object could have been two distinct objects is
reminiscent of the question, touched on in Chapter 2, of whether one
object could become two distinct objects--that is, whether one object exist
ing at an earlier time could at a later time be identical with two distinct
objects. I remarked that the latter possibility conflicts with the principle of
the transitivity of identity, at least as this is ordinarily interpreted. If trans
temporal (or 'diachronic') identity--that is, identity over time--is transi
tive, it follows that one object could not become two in the sense just
explained. By the same token, it would seem, if transworld identity
identity across possible worlds--is transitive, it follows that one object
90\nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY
а
could not have been two. For to say that one object could have been two, in
the language of possible worlds, is to say that an object a in a world w, is
identical with both of two distinct objects, b and c, in another world wą.
But if object b in world w, is identical with object a in world w, and yet
object a in world w, is also identical with object c in world wį, then, by
transitivity, object b in world w, is identical with object c in world wą.
However, I have already warned that we should be cautious about drawing
parallels between time and modality, despite certain superficial resem
blances between them. There is a strong case for saying that when we talk
about identity over time, we are genuinely talking about identity, that is,
about the relation which, of necessity, every object bears to itself and only
to itself. It is less clear that this can literally be what we are talking about
when we talk about identity 'across possible worlds"--because it is much
less clear what is meant by saying that an object exists 'in'a number of
different possible worlds than what is meant by saying that an object exists
'at' a number of different times. We shall have to postpone further discus
sion of this question until Chapter 7, when we shall look more closely into
the nature of possible worlds as they are characterized by various theories.
Until we have done that, I suspect, the language of possible worlds is likely
to render more, rather than less, obscure the question of whether one thing
could have been two.
Could two objects have been one?
It is, admittedly, difficult to think of prima facie examples of one object
which could have been two. As well as asking whether one object could
have been two, however, we can ask whether two objects could have been
one. Just as the first question is about the necessity of identity, the second is
about the necessity of diversity. It is natural to assume that the answers to
the two questions must be the same, but this assumption may be coher
ently challenged. Indeed, prima facie examples of two objects which could
have been one are perhaps not so hard to come by. Consider, for instance,
the case of a pair of monozygotic twin boys, Tom and Jack. One might be
tempted to say that, if their common zygote had not split, Tom and Jack
would literally have been identical--not just "identical twins', as they are in
actuality, but numerically identical with one another. The only alternative,
See further my 'On a Supposed Temporal/Modal Parallel Analysis 46 (1986), 195-7.
91\n92 NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE worlds
it seems, would be to say that, if their common zygote had not split, Tom
and Jack would not have existed at all. It is not, I think, simply obvious that
this alternative is preferable. However, it is not so easy to adapt this sort of
example to the converse question of whether one object could have been
two. Suppose that Harry is not a monozygotic twin, because his zygote did
not split. Is it then plausible to say that, if his zygote had split, Harry would
have been two different people? If so, who would those two people have
been? The trouble is that we don't have two different names for them, or,
indeed, any means of designating them differently. If we say that one of
them would have been Harry, then we have to say that the 'other one
would also have been Harry--but this seems to imply that Harry would
have been in two different places at once, which is absurd. In this case, it
seems preferable to say either that, if Harry's zygote had split, then Harry
would not have existed at all, or else that, if Harry's zygote had split, then
Harry would have had a monozygotic twin brother. I am inclined to think
that, of these two alternatives, the second is the more plausible. What it
implies is that, if Harry's zygote had split, then both Harry and someone
else would have existed--which is quite different from saying that Harry
would have been two different people. The other person who would have
existed is someone whom we do now have a means of designating, even
though we may not yet possess a name for him. We can say, quite simply,
that this other person would have been Harry's monozygotic twin brother. I
don't mean to claim that the argument that I have just been advancing is
perfectly compelling, however. In fact, I think that the broader lesson is
that questions to do with the necessity of identity and diversity are rather
less cut-and-dried than some philosophers tend to suppose. '
The necessity of identity and the mind-body
problem
The thesis of the necessity of identity has important metaphysical implica
tions, so we should not regard the question of its truth too lightly. To
illustrate its metaphysical importance, I shall now consider its bearing on
one of the central questions of philosophy, the mind-body problem.
For two interesting challenges to the thesis of the necessity of identity, see Hugh S. Chandler,
"Rigid Designation', Journal of Philosophy 72 (1975), 363-9, and Allan Gibbard, 'ContingentIdentity. Journal of Philosophical Logic 4 (1975), 187-222. For discussion of Chandler's paper, see Nathan U. Salmon, Reference and Essence (Oxford: Blackwell, 1982), 219 ff. \nNECESSITY AND IDENTITY
aAccording to one currently prevalent view, a person is identical with his or
her body. On this view, then, I just am my body. Suppose we call my body
'B'. Then the claim is that I am identical with B. However, it seems plaus
ible to claim also that I could have existed without B existing--either
because I could have had a different body or else, more radically, because I
could have existed without having any body at all. These possibilities cer
tainly seem to be imaginable. Of course, as I have already emphasized, we
shouldn't suppose that everything which is imaginable is therefore genu
inely possible. But that something is imaginable is at least prima facie
evidence that it is genuinely possible--and if we can find no good reason
to deny that it is possible, perhaps we should accept, even if only provi
sionally, that it really is possible. Suppose, then, that it is indeed possible
that I should have existed without B existing. In the language of possible
worlds, this is to say that there is a possible world in which I exist but B
does not. In such a world, clearly, the proposition that I am identical with B
is not true. So there is some possible world in which I exist and the
proposition that I am identical with B is not true. But, according to the
thesis of the necessity of identity, if the proposition that I am identical with
Bis true in this, the actual world, then it is true in every possible world (or,
at least, in every possible world in which either I or B exists). Hence we
must conclude that the proposition that I am identical with B in this, the
actual world is not true. The reasoning here is perfectly straightforward
and doesn't even need to be expressed in the language of possible worlds to
be made clear. Avoiding that language, the reasoning effectively reduces to
this. According to the thesis of the necessity of identity, if it is true that I
am identical with B, then it is necessarily true that I am identical with B.
But I could have existed without B existing, so it is not necessarily true that
I am identical with B. Therefore, it is not true that I am identical with B.
If this argument is correct, one thing that it shows is that the claim that a
person is identical with his or her body is in fact an extremely strong claim,
because it has implications not only for what is the case in this, the actual
world, but also for what is the case in every possible world (or, at least, in
every possible world in which either the person or his or her body exists).
Indeed, for this reason, one may doubt whether empirical evidence
which can only make reference to what is the case in this, the actual world,
since that is the only world we can observe--could ever suffice to establish
* For some recent doubts about this sort of argument, see Trenton Merricks, 'A New Objection
to A Priori Arguments for Dualism', American Philosophical Quarterly 31 (1994), 80-
93\n94 | NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE worlds
the truth of such an identity claim. This may not be at all congenial to
those philosophers who are apt to make such identity claims, because in
support of those claims they tend to appeal to scientific evidence of correl
ations between the psychological states of persons and physiological states
of their bodies. It would be much more convenient for these philosophers
if they could simply concede that a person could have failed to be identical
with his or her body, while insisting none the less that a person is iden
tical with his or her body, as a matter of contingent fact. However, if the
thesis of the necessity of identity is correct, such a position is simply not
available to these philosophers.
Here it may be objected that earlier I raised no such problem for the
empirically based claim that Hesperus is identical with Phosphorus, which
I represented as having been established by astronomical observation. Yet,
if the thesis of the necessity of identity is correct, this identity claim equally
has implications for what is the case in every possible world. However,
there is a significant difference between the two cases, I think. In the case of
Hesperus and Phosphorus, we are already satisfied, quite independently of
the identity claim concerning them, that they are objects of the same kind,
governed by the same identity conditions. We are satisfied that each of
them is a planet--a persisting mass of matter which orbits the sun in a
certain clearly definable path. It is easy to see how careful astronomical
observations could establish that the orbits of Hesperus and Phosphorus
coincide, so that they can be predicted to be in the same place at the same
time. Given that they are masses of matter and that numerically distinct
masses of matter cannot exist in the same place at the same time, it follows
that Hesperus and Phosphorus are identical. The reasoning here does
clearly appeal to more than merely empirical evidence: it appeals also to
certain metaphysical principles, albeit ones that are relatively unconten
tious. However, in the case of a person and his or her body, what are
fundamentally in contention are the relevant metaphysical principles
themselves. If it could be agreed that persons and their bodies are objects
of the same kind, with the same identity conditions, it would be no more
problematic to appeal to empirical evidence to establish an identity
between a particular person and a particular body than it is to do so in the
case of Hesperus and Phosphorus. The question would not be whether a
particular person was identical with any body at all, but merely which
particular body a person was identical with. But that is not how matters
stand with regard to persons and bodies: here the dispute is precisely as to
the nature of entities of these kinds and whether, indeed, they are entities
m\n|NECESSITY AND IDENTITY
of the same kind or not. That is why it is facile to suppose that the question
of whether or not a person is identical with his or her body could be settled
straightforwardly by appeal to empirical evidence, such as evidence of
correlations between a person's psychological states and physiological
states of that person's body.
I think that the point I have just been making is one which to some
extent holds good whether or not the thesis of the necessity of identity is
correct, though to say this is not in any way to belittle the metaphysical
significance of that thesis. The thesis undoubtedly has important implica
tions for the nature of identity claims and for the kinds of evidence and
argument that are needed to confirm their truth. For what it is worth, I am
inclined to think that the thesis is correct, even though I have raised some
doubts concerning some purported ways of establishing it and even
though I am less convinced that its counterpart, the thesis of the necessity
of diversity, is also correct.
95\n6.
ESSENTIALISM
Essential and accidental properties
It is customary, both in everyday speech and in philosophical discussion, to
distinguish between the essential and the accidental properties of objects.
Commonplace though this distinction is, it gives rise to certain puzzles and
paradoxes which threaten its tenability, at least if it is conceived as a dis
tinction which obtains independently of language and human convention.
Yet, abandoning the distinction, or representing it as having a merely con
ventional basis, threatens to undermine so much of our common-sense
ontology as to leave us, perhaps, with no coherent conception of the world
at all. Hence, much of importance hinges on the question of whether the
distinction can be justified and defended--and it is with this question that
the present chapter will chiefly be concerned.
At the outset of the previous chapter, I distinguished between two dif
ferent kinds of possibility--"temporal possibility and `counterfactual
possibility--the first being the possibility of something's changing in some
respect over time and the second being the possibility of something's
having been different in some respect from how it actually is. Correspond
ing to the two different kinds of possibility, there are two different notions
of an essential property. According to the first notion, an essential property
of an object is a property which that object has always possessed and which
it cannot cease to possess without thereby ceasing to exist. ' According to
the second notion, an essential property of an object is a property which
that object always possesses and which it could not have failed to possess--in other words, in the language of possible worlds, it is a property which
that object possesses at all times in every possible world in which it exists.
Compare Baruch A. Brody, Identity and Essence (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980), 81 ff. and 116 ff. \nESSENTIALISM | 97
a
The second of these senses in which a property may be said to be 'essen
tial' is stronger than the first. That is to say, if a property P is an essential
property of an object ( in the second sense, then P is also an essen
tial property of O in the first sense; but the converse is not true--P may be
an essential property of O in the first sense without being an essential
property of O in the second sense. Thus, many of an object's historical
properties are plainly essential properties of it in the first sense, but are
plausibly not essential properties of it in the second sense. For example, if a
certain object, O, first came into existence at a certain time, t, then that
object has always had the property of having first come into existence at t
and cannot cease to possess it, unless it ceases to exist and thereby ceases to
possess any properties whatever. But it does not follow that O could not
have first come into existence at a different time--and if it had, then it
plainly would not have possessed the property of having first come into
existence at t. Plausibly, this property is not an essential property of O in
our second sense--it is not a property which O possesses at all times in
every possible world in which O exists.
The second notion of an essential property--the counterfactual
notion--is not only the stronger notion but also the more interesting and
contentious one. It is this notion that we shall be focusing on in the present
chapter, along with the corresponding notion of an accidental property. An
accidental property of an object, in this sense, is a property which an object
possesses at some time but which it could have failed to possess--in other
words, it is a property which that object possesses at some time in the
actual world but which it does not possess at any time in some other
possible worlds in which it exists. However, it is one thing to define what
we mean by speaking of 'essential and accidental properties in this fash
ion and quite another to demonstrate that certain properties of an object
really are essential or accidental in the defined senses. If it should turn out
that we cannot maintain at all convincingly that any property of any object
is essential, then the very distinction between essential and accidental
properties will serve no useful purpose and might as well be abandoned.
But before we inquire into this issue, I want to divide the essential
properties that an object might possess into two different sorts. If an object
has any essential properties, some of them may be properties which can be
possessed by more than one object, while others may be properties which
only that object can possess. A plausible example of an essential property
of the first sort would be any particular dog's property of being a dog: for
many different objects possess this property, and yet, plausibly, any object\n98 | NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
which does possess it could not have failed to possess it--in other words,
any such object possesses the property of being a dog in every possible
world in which that object exists. However, in different possible worlds,
different objects possess the property of being a dog: it is not the case that
the same dogs exist in every possible world, even if we restrict ourselves to
worlds in which some dogs do exist. I shall say a little more later about
essential properties like this. But now let us turn to the other and rather
more contentious sort of essential property--one which only one object
can possess.
There is nothing especially problematic about the notion of a property
which only one object can possess. For instance, only one dog can possess
the property of being the first dog to reach the North Pole. It may be that
no dog possesses this property, either because no dog has ever reached the
North Pole or else because, before any other dog reached the North Pole,
two or more dogs simultaneously reached it. But it plainly cannot be the
case that two different dogs both possess the property of being the first dog
to reach the North Pole. However, this property is plausibly not an essential
property of whichever dog it is that possesses it, assuming that some dog
does: because, plausibly, there is another possible world in which this dog
exists but does not possess the property--either because no dog possesses
the property in that world or because some other dog possesses it in that
world. So, although it is the case that, in every possible world in which
something possesses this property, it is possessed by just one object, it is
not the case that in every possible world in which something possesses this
property, it is the same object that possesses it. Clearly, however, if there is a
property which only one object can possess which is an essential property
of whichever object it is that possesses it, it cannot be possessed by differ
ent objects in different possible worlds. For if a certain object, O, possesses
the property in one world and it is an essential property of O, then it is
either O alone or else nothing that possesses the property in any other
world: it is O alone that possesses it in any other world in which O exists,
while nothing possesses it in any other world in which O does not exist.
(Here it may be asked why the property should not be an essential property
of O that is possessed by O alone in all the worlds in which O exists and yet
also be an essential property of some other object that is possessed by that
other object alone in other worlds in which O does not exist. The answer is
that there is some possible world in which O and this other object both
exist and in this world it is O alone that possesses the property, given that it
is an essential property of O and that only one object can possess it in that\nworld: but that means that the property cannot be possessed by the other
object in every possible world in which that object exists and hence it
cannot be an essential property of that other object. )
Essential properties and the necessity of identity
So, we may ask, are there in fact any such essential properties--essential
properties which only one object can possess? If the thesis of the necessity
of identity is correct--as I tentatively concluded at the end of the previous
chapter--then it would seem that there certainly are some essential prop
erties of this sort. I have in mind a property such as the property of beingidentical with O, where O is any particular object. For if the thesis of the
necessity of identity is correct, then anything which is identical with O in
this, the actual world is identical with O in every possible world in which O
exists. And, it would seem, only whatever is identical with O in any given
possible world possesses the property of being identical with O in that
world. Hence, whatever is identical with O in this, the actual world pos
sesses the property of being identical with O in every possible world in
which anything possesses that property--so that the same thing, O, alone
possesses that property in any world in which anything does. But this is
precisely to imply that the property of being identical with O is an essential
property which only O can possess. So there is at least one essential prop
erty which only one object can possess, which is what we set out to show.
It may seem that I have made rather heavy weather of this argument. But
it is advisable to spell it out in some detail, because it is not incontestable.
The thesis of the necessity of identity is clearly a crucial, but contestable,
premise of the argument. Suppose, contrary to that thesis, that there is
something, X, which is identical with O in this, the actual world, but which
is not identical with O in some other possible world in which O exists.
Then, it seems, the property of being identical with O is possessed by X in
this, the actual world, but is possessed by something different from X in
some other possible world. Hence, the property of being identical with Ois
not possessed by the same object in every possible world in which some
thing possesses it. It follows that the property of being identical with O is
not an essential property which only one object can possess, for we con
cluded earlier that such a property cannot be possessed by different objects
in different possible worlds.
As well as depending on the thesis of the necessity of identity, the argu
ESSENTIALISM 99\n100
NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
ment we are examining makes another important and contestable assump
tion. This is that, in any possible world in which O exists, the property of
being identical with O exists and is possessed by something--in particular,
by O. But why should we suppose that there is any such property as the
property of being identical with O, even in a world in which O exists? We
may accept that the proposition that O is identical with O is a necessary, a
priori truth, which is therefore true in every possible world, or at least in
every possible world in which O exists. We may even accept that the prop
osition that O is identical with O is itself a necessary being, which therefore
exists in every possible world. But none of this suffices to guarantee the
existence of the property of being identical with O in any world whatever.
Here we have hit upon a difficult question which we cannot really hope to
resolve in the present chapter: the question of what properties are and, if
there are indeed such entities, what their existence conditions and identity
conditions are. These are matters whose fuller treatment will have to be
postponed until we reach Part VI of this book. But one point is worth
emphasizing already: it cannot be the case, on pain of contradiction, that
every meaningful predicate expresses an existing property. We know this as
a matter of logic, because the predicate 'is non-self-exemplifying' is mean
ingful and yet cannot be taken to denote the property of being non-self
exemplifying: for such a property, if it existed, would exemplify itself if and
only if it did not exemplify itself, thereby giving rise to a contradiction. ?
Hence, it cannot be the case that, if we have a meaningful sentence of the
form`a is F', there must therefore exist the property of being F. And so, in
particular, we cannot assume that, just because 'O is identical with Oʻis a
meaningful and indeed true sentence, the property of being identical with
Otherefore exists and is possessed by O. It is very plausible to suppose
that some meaningful predicates express existing properties, but how to
ascertain which of them do is a very difficult and contentious matter.
Essential properties and the problem of
transworld identity
Why should it matter whether or not there are any essential properties
which only one object can possess? For the following reason: if there are,
See further Michael J. Loux, Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction (London: Routledge,
1998), 34-5. See also Ch. 19 of the present book. \nESSENTIALISM | 101
they may help us to solve the problem of transworld identity. We have been
speaking quite freely of one and the same object existing in different pos
sible worlds, as though there were no difficulty in principle about identifying an object existing in one possible world with an object existing in
another possible world. As we shall see in the next chapter, some theorists
of possible worlds maintain that there really is no such difficulty and that
questions of transworld identity are trivial, because we can and must sim
ply stipulate the answers to such questions. Others consider, quite to the
contrary, that there is never identity between objects existing in different
possible worlds, because no object can exist in more than one possible
world. And yet others hold that, although it makes perfect sense to speak of
identity between objects in different possible worlds, it is not a trivial
business to determine which such identities obtain. It is the latter theorists,
who are probably in the majority, for whom it especially matters whether
there are any essential properties which only one object can possess: for
they may hope to appeal to such properties for the purpose of determining
the answers to questions of transworld identity. Clearly, if, as I have just
explained, such a property is one which, of necessity, is possessed by the
same object in every possible world in which it is possessed by anything at
all, we may hope to appeal to such a property to answer a question of
transworld identity as follows. Suppose that P is a property which only one
object can possess and that it is an essential property of whichever object it
is that possesses it. And suppose that O possesses P in this, the actual
world. Then, faced with the question of which object, if any, in another
possible world is identical with O, we may say, quite simply, that the object
in question is that object, if any, which possesses P in the other world.
There will either be one such object, or else none. If there is one, then that
is the object, in that world, which is identical with O; if there is none, then
nothing in that world is identical with O and so O does not exist in that
world.
Individual essences and haecceities
It may be, of course, that for any object O, there is more than one such
property P. Let us call the set of all such properties of O, in deference to
See further Roderick M. Chisholm, 'Identity Through Possible Worlds: Some Questions
Nous 1 (1967), 1-8, reprinted in Michael J. Loux (ed. ), The Possible and the Actuak: Readings in the
Metaphysics of Modality (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1979). \n102 NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
tradition, O's individual essence. O's individual essence, then, comprises all
those essential properties of O which are properties which only one object
can possess. So far, we have encountered only one candidate for such a
property of an object O; the property of being identical with O, if indeed
such a property exists. However, if O's individual essence were to consist
solely of the property of being identical with O, it might seem that it would
be useless, because circular, to appeal to O's individual essence in order to
identify O in any other possible world. For if we say that the object that is
identical with O in any other possible world is the object which, in that
world, possesses the property of being identical with O, it seems that this
already presupposes an answer to the question of which object is O in that
world.
But it is in fact open to question whether this complaint is justified. First
of all, it should be emphasized that the problem of transworld identity, if
there really is such a problem, is not primarily an epistemological problem:
it is not a problem about how we know, or can tell, which object in another
possible world, if any, is identical with a given object O which exists in this,
the actual world. Rather, it is an ontological problem: the problem of what
makes it the case that one rather than another of the objects existing in
some other possible world is identical with a given object O which exists in
this world. In short, it is a problem about what grounds transworld identity.
Secondly, just because the property of being identical with O, assuming
that it exists, is standardly expressed by means of the predicate 'is identical
with Ơ, we should not assume that this property is simply a relational
one--the property of standing in the relation of identity to the object O. It
may be more appropriate to think of this property as being a special kind
of intrinsic property. (For more on the distinction between intrinsic and
relational properties, see Chapter 3 of this book. ) We might think of each
object as having a special and necessarily unshareable intrinsic property of
being the very thing that it is--the property of being that thing--and hold
that it is just such a property that is expressed by the predicate 'is identical
with O. For historical reasons, such a property is called a haecceity
literally, a 'thisness? --and so we may say that the property of being identi
cal with O is O's haecceity. According to this way of thinking, there need
be no vicious circularity in saying that the object, if any, that is identical
with O in another possible world is the object, if any, that possesses the
property of being identical with O in that world, for this property is now
* See further Gary S. Rosenkrantz, Haecceity: An Ontological Essay (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993). \nESSENTIALISM 103
conceived to be an intrinsic one whose possession by an object is not
constituted by its standing in a certain relation to an already identifiable
object O.
The necessity of origin
a
It must be acknowledged that many metaphysicians are not happy with the
notion of a haecceity, finding it intolerably obscure and mysterious. But if
we abandon that notion, it seems that individual essences will only be of
any use in solving the problem of transworld identity if they comprise
other properties besides ones like the property of being identical with O.
What other suitable properties might there be? Here we may turn to two
further essentialist theses, which have been advanced in addition to the
thesis of the necessity of identity: the thesis of the necessity of origin and
the thesis of the necessity of constitution. According to the thesis of the
necessity of origin, if an object, O, originated from a certain source in this,
the actual world, then O also originates from that same source in any other
possible world in which O exists. According to the thesis of the necessity of
constitution, if an object, O, had a certain original constitution in this, the
actual world, then it also has the same original constitution in any other
possible world in which O exists. It must be conceded that the notions of
'originating from a certain source' and having a certain original constitu
tion' require some clarification, which I shall now try to provide. The best
way to do this will be by means of illustrative examples.
Let us consider first the thesis of the necessity of origin. Suppose that I
is a certain oak tree existing in this, the actual world, and that T originated
from a certain acorn, A. The claim then is that, in any other world in which
T exists, T originates from A. In other ways, it may be supposed, T is verydifferent in these other worlds from the way it is in the actual world: it may
be taller or shorter, for instance, and it may be growing in a different place.
The implication is that, if an acorn different from A had been planted
exactly where A was planted and had grown into a tree exactly like T in
respect of its size, location, and so forth, then that tree would none the less
not have been T. By contrast, if A had been planted elsewhere and had
grown into a tree very unlike T in respect of its size, location, and so forth,
Much of the inspiration for these theses comes from the work of Saul Kripke: see especially hisNaming and Necessity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980). See also Colin McGinn, 'On the Necessity ofOrigin', Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 127-34. \n104 NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
then that tree would none the less still have been T. That being so, it seems
that we can identify T in any possible world in which it exists as the tree
which originates from A in that world, if any tree does; if no tree does, then
T does not exist in that world. Hence, the property of originating from
acorn A belongs to the individual essence of T and can be invoked to
answer questions of transworld identity concerning T. (I am assuming
here, of course, that only one tree can originate from a single acorn. This
may be queried as a matter of biological fact, but let us ignore that compli
cation, since we are only concerned with the example for purposes of
illustration. )
A four-worlds argument for the necessity
of origin
Why, however, should we think that the thesis of the necessity of origin is
correct? We might attempt to argue for it, in the case just described, by
employing what may be called a four-worlds argument, which goes as fol
lows. We are given that T originates from acorn A in this, the actual world,
which we may call world wo. Suppose, then, that there is another possible
world, w, in which A does not exist and a tree, T, originates from a different
acorn, B. And suppose that we maintain, contrary to the thesis of the
necessity of origin, that T, is identical with T. Then the following problem
seems to arise. There is, it seems, yet another possible world, w, , in which
both acorn A and acorn B exist and grow into exactly similar trees--let us
call them T, and Typ respectively. If we ask which of these two trees is
identical with T, it seems that we should say that it is Tza, rather than Tyb,
that is identical with 1-because Txand Tzb being otherwise exactly simi
lar to one another, I, , more closely resembles T in virtue of having grown
from the same acorn, A. So far, then, we have claimed that T, is identical
with T and that I is identical with Tza, from which it follows by the
transitivity of identity that T, is identical with Tg. But now consider a
fourth possible world, w, , which is just like w, except that acorn A does not
exist and so does not grow into a tree. Since w, is just like w, except that
• A somewhat similar line of argument is developed by Graeme Forbes in his The Metaphysics of
Modality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985), 138 ff. , but my own discussion is not directed at his
argument, the merits of which I leave readers to judge for themselves. See also the discussion in
Nathan U. Salmon, Reference and Essence (Oxford: Blackwell, 1982), 197 ff. , which criticallyexamines another, closely related argument by Kripke for the necessity of origin. \nESSENTIALISM 105
acorn A does not exist, the tree which originates from acorn B in w; , which
we may call T. , is identical with 1. 6--and Tab, we know, is not identical
with T2. So it follows that T, is not identical with Tg. But if T, is not
identical with T. , and yet, as we have just concluded, T, is identical with T,
it follows that T, is not identical with T, . However, for all that we have said
so far, world w, and world w, are indistinguishable from one another, both
being worlds in which acorn A does not exist and a certain tree grows from
acorn B. Yet we have been compelled to conclude that those worlds do
differ, in that numerically different trees grow from B in the two worlds.
That seems absurd, for two worlds surely cannot differ merely in respect of
the identity of a certain object. The only way to avoid this absurdity, it
seems, is to reject the supposition that Tis identical with T, and so uphold
the thesis of the necessity of origin.
However, this argument may certainly be challenged. In the first place,
why should either of the two trees in w, , Tand Tyb, be identical with T? If
we say that neither of these trees is identical with T, as it seems we may
quite coherently do, we can quite consistently reject the thesis of the neces
sity of origin. Secondly and more importantly, even if we suppose that one
of these trees is indeed identical with T, it is questionable whether it is T,
that has the stronger claim to be identified with T. After all, T, and Tub)
being numerically distinct trees existing at the same time in the same
possible world, must differ from one another in various ways in addition to
their difference of origin--for instance, they must occupy different loca
tions in space, since no two trees can occupy exactly the same place at the
same time. Even if Tga and Tzb are exactly similar in respect of their intrinsic
properties at any given time, they must differ in respect of many of their
relational properties, as well as having the different historical properties of
having grown from acorn A and acorn B respectively. So, in judging which
of Tza and Tzb more closely resembles T, why should we assign special
weight to the fact that T, resembles T more closely than Tzb does in respect
of its origin and ignore other respects in which Tzu might resemble T more
closely than Ta does? Of course, if we already had reason to believe that I's
property of having originated from A was included in its individual
essence, this preferential treatment would be justified: but whether it is
reasonable to believe this is the very question at issue. In short, it may be
objected that the four-worlds argument implicitly assumes precisely what
it sets out to prove.
Here it may be retorted that we can and should choose world w, in such
a way as to ensure that T. , and Tub both resemble T to exactly the same. .. MMMMM1111111\nNECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
W
degree in respect of all their properties except those which concern their
origins--so that it really is the case that Tya's having originated from A
rather than B is the only respect in which one of the two trees in w,
resembles T more closely than the other does. For example, we can specify
that T. , and Typ are located equidistant from the location of T and in
exactly similar environments. However, if we are to do this completely
rigorously, we must specify that Tza and Tz inhabit a perfectly symmetrical
universe, the two symmetrical halves of which differ from one another
solely in respect of the identities of the objects contained in them. And
then we are faced with the difficult metaphysical question of whether such
a universe is really possible. If it is not, then w, is not a possible world at all,
in which case it should not be invoked in any argument for the necessity of
origin. Moreover, we can see that the difficulty which has now been raised
is, in fact, precisely the same sort of difficulty as was raised, in the four
worlds argument itself, against the suggestion that T, is not identical with
T. . Recall that it was said to be absurd to suppose that two worlds could
differ from one another merely in respect of the identity of a certain object.
But if this is absurd, then it is surely equally absurd to suppose that the two
halves of one world could differ from one another merely in respect of the
identities of the objects contained in them. In each case, the claim of
absurdity is based upon the principle that there cannot be a numerical
difference where there is exact similarity in respect of all properties which
do not involve mere numerical difference. We could call this the principle of
no bare numerical differences. (It is in fact one interpretation of the prin
ciple of the identity of indiscernibles. ) And then the point is that since this
principle had to be invoked in the four-worlds argument itself, a propon
ent of that argument should not violate the principle in the course of
defending the argument against the objection that I raised earlier. We seem
to have created a dilemma for proponents of the four-worlds argument: if
they abandon the principle of no bare numerical differences, they cannot
get the four-worlds argument to deliver their desired conclusion, but if
they adhere to the principle they cannot respond satisfactorily to the
objection that the argument implicitly assumes what it sets out to prove.
The necessity of constitution
If the four-worlds argument, or something like it, is the best argument that
can be mustered in favour of the thesis of the necessity of origin, then it
106\nESSENTIALISM |
2 3 100
seems that that thesis has no adequate proof. This is not to deny that the
thesis may, for all that, be correct. Moreover, it would seem that, quite
generally, essentialist theses are not capable of being deduced from prem
ises which do not already include, even if only implicitly, an essentialistthesis--in which case at least some such theses must be incapable of dem
onstration. Perhaps, then, in the end, it is enough that we should find the
thesis of the necessity of origin intuitively compelling, if indeed we do so
find it. But it may be that we can do a little bett than this in the case of
the other essentialist thesis mentioned previously, the thesis of the neces
sity of constitution, to which I now turn. As I stated it earlier, this is the
thesis that if an object, O, has a certain original constitution in this, the
actual world, then it also has the same original constitution in any other
possible world in which O exists. Again, the best way to understand the
thesis is with the aid of an illustrative example. Recalling the case of the
ship of Theseus that we discussed in Chapter 2, suppose that a certain ship,
S, which exists in this, the actual world, first came into existence when a
certain number of ship parts (planks, spars, ropes, and so on) were put
together at a certain time. Suppose, for simplicity, that there were one
hundred such parts and call them P, P, , P, .. . Pico. It is these parts, then,
that originally constituted ship S in this, the actual world. Now, in our
discussion of the case of the ship of Theseus, we agreed that a ship can
persist through a change in its parts over time, so that it is perfectly con
ceivable that, following a sequence of such changes, S should come to be
composed of a wholly different set of parts. However, what we are now
concerned with is not the question of whether S can undergo a change in
its parts over time, but the question of whether S could have been com
posed of a different set of parts when it first came into existence. According
to the thesis of the necessity of constitution, strictly interpreted, the answer
to this question is 'No'. If this answer is correct, then any ship which had
been composed of a different set of parts when it first came into existence
would have been, for that very reason, a numerically different ship from S.
And by a different set of parts', I mean a set of parts differing even
minimally from the set of parts of which S was originally composed. Thus,
for example, if a ship had been originally composed of ship parts P. , P. , P. ,, .. . Po, and one other, different part, Piou then that ship would not have
been S, no matter how similiar in appearance to Sit might have been.
99 101
It seems natural to protest that this thesis is too strong and that it should
be replaced by another, weaker one. Perhaps it will readily be conceded that
any ship which had been originally composed of a completely different set
107\nNECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE words
1 989 101
a
2 102)
of parts from those which originally composed S would therefore have
been a numerically different ship from S, but at the same time it may beurged that S could surely have come into existence for the first time com
posed of a slightly different set of parts. However, the problem is that it
appears to be impossible to set a threshold for how different a ship's
original set of parts could have been without running into contradiction. If
we say, for instance, that could have had an original set of parts differing
by 3 per cent, but no more, from the set of parts which actually composed
it when it first came into existence, then the following absurdity seems to
arise. We must allow that a ship S, existing in a possible world w, which is
originally composed of the one hundred parts P. , P, , P, ,. .. Pys, Pio, P1022 is
identical with ship S existing in the actual world, wo, because these ships
have 98 per cent of their parts in common, which is less than the 3 per cent
threshold. By the same token, we must allow that a ship S, , existing in a
possible world w, , which is originally composed of the one hundred parts
P. , P, , Pz, .. . P, 69 Pov, Pro2P1039 P104) is identical with ship S, existing in world
w, again because these ships have 98 per cent of their parts in common.
However, we seem compelled to deny that S is identical with S, because
they have only 96 per cent of their parts in common, which is more than
the 3 per cent threshold allows. But these judgements collectively conflict
with the principle of the transitivity of identity, which implies that if S is
identical with S, and S, is identical with S, then S is indeed identical with
Sz. And, clearly, the same problem would arise whatever percentage we
were to choose for the threshold, other than o per cent or 100 per cent. It
transpires, then, that no weaker version of the thesis of the necessity of
constitution is available to us: we must either allow that an object could
have come into existence for the first time with a completely different set of
component parts, or else insist that it could not have come into existence
for the first time while differing in respect of any one of its component
parts. However, since the first of these two alternatives seems unreasonably
liberal, it seems that we must adopt the thesis of the necessity of constitu
tion in its strong form. (Notice that this argument for the thesis of the
necessity of constitution relies upon an essentialist premise, namely, that it
is not possible for one and the same ship to have been composed of a
completely different set of parts when it first came into existence; but I
have already remarked that one cannot expect to be able to prove an
essentialist thesis from premises which do not themselves contain any
essentialist thesis. )
108\nA temporal comparison and accessibility relations
It will be recalled that an argument very similar to this one was deployed in
Chapter 2, in order to rule out the proposal that there is some threshold to
the proportion of an object's original parts which it can change over time.
In that case, rather than concluding that an object cannot change any of its
parts over time, I concluded that it can change all of them, provided that
the process of change takes place in a gradual and piecemeal fashion. So it
may be wondered why I chose the liberal option in the case of identity over
time but the illiberal option in the case of identity across possible worlds,
judging in the latter case that an object could not have differed in respect
of any of its orginal parts rather than that it could have differed in respect
of all of them. Is there any relevant difference between identity over time
and identity across possible worlds which justifies this difference of
judgement? I think there is--namely, the fact that the times at which an
object exists may be ordered into a unique linear sequence, whereas there
seems to be no principled way to order the possible worlds in which an
object exists into such a sequence. We may be tempted to overlook this
fact when, as in the example I have just been discussing, worlds are charac
terized only in a very partial and incomplete fashion--for instance, when
we describe world w, as a world in which a ship S, is originally composed of
parts P1, P2, P3, .. . PgsPiove Pioz. The point is that there is not just one such
possible world, but infinitely many, which differ from each other in infin
itely many other respects. And just because ship S is very similar to ship S. ,
which is in turn very similar to ship S, and indeed more similar to S, than S
is, it doesn't follow that any three worlds in which these ships exist can be
ordered into a unique linear sequence on account of those similarities: for
there will be other similarities and differences between any three such
worlds in virtue of which they can be ordered in other ways. Nor does it
appear that there is any other basis on which possible worlds can be
ordered into a unique linear sequence analogous to the sequence of times
in the temporal domain. The consequence is that there seems to be noth
ing, in the modal case of identity across possible worlds, which corres
ponds to the notion of a gradual and piecemeal change in the temporal case
of identity over time.
989 101 102? See further my 'On a Supposed Temporal/Modal Parallel', Analysis +6 (1986), 195-7. See also
W. V. Quine, 'Worlds Away', Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 859-64, reprinted in his Theories and
Things (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1981).
ESSENTIALISM 109\n110 | NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
1012
100
989
There is, however, a possible response to the foregoing argument, as
follows. Remember that talk of what is the case in a possible world other
than the actual world is a way of talking about what could have been--but
actually is not--the case. Thus, when it is maintained that there is a ship S, ,
existing in a world w, which is originally composed of the ship parts P. , P,
P. ,, .. . Pos Piou Pio, and is identical with ship S, existing in world wo, this is
tantamount to saying that S could have been originally composed of parts
P. , P. , P. ,. .. Po8, Pov, P102, even though S was actually originally composed
of a different set of parts, P. , P, , P, .. . Pico. Our proposed justification for
this modal judgement is that the sets of parts in question do not differ by
more than 3 per cent. But now let us ask the following question. Suppose
that S had been originally composed of the set of parts P. , P, , P, ,. .. Py8, Piove
Proz--which we have just conceded it could have been. Would it then have
been possible for S to have been originally composed of the still more
different set of parts P. , P. , P, ,. .. P6, Pov, P102, P103, Pog? We may be tempted
to answer 'Yes', on the grounds that that set of parts would not have
differed by more than 3 per cent from a set of parts of which, we have just
agreed, S could have been originally composed. The objection to this
answer, developed earlier, is that this compels us to say, by virtue of the
transitivity of identity, that S could have been originally composed of the
set of parts P, P, P, .. . Pgos Pions P102) P103, P104, but that this judgement
conflicts with the proposed 3 per cent threshold for any possible variation
in the set of S's original component parts. However, for this objection to be
valid we must assume, quite generally, that the following principle of
modal logic is correct:
96 101 )
(1) If it is possible that it is possible that p is the case, then it is possible
that p is the case.
In our example, the relevant instance of (1) is this: if it is possible that it
is possible that S should have been originally composed of the parts P, P,
P. ,. .. Pysy Pics P102 P1039 Pios then it is possible that should have been
originally composed of those parts. But perhaps (1) can be challenged. Just
because there is a possible world, different from the actual world, in which
a certain proposition is possibly true, why should it follow that that prop
osition is also possibly true in the actual world? In the technical termin
ology of modal logic, what is at issue here is a question concerning the
969 1019 104)
See further Hugh S. Chandler, 'Plantinga and the Contingently Possible', Analysis 36 (1976), 106-9, and Salmon, Reference and Essence, 238 ff. \naccessibility relation between possible worlds. If we suppose, as we coher
ently may, that not every possible world is 'accessible' to every other pos
sible world, then we may consistently deny (1). More particularly, what we
need to deny, in order to deny (1), is that the accessibility relation between
possible worlds is transitive: that is, we need to deny the claim that if world
w, is accessible to world w, and world w, is accessible to world w, then it
follows that world w, is accessible to world w. .
As for the question of what exactly may be meant by 'accessibility in
this sense, perhaps we can simply say, for present purposes, that one pos
sible world is accessible to another just in case a proposition which is true
in the former world is, for that very reason, possibly true in the latter world.
And then the point is that, by denying that accessibility is a transitive
relation, we can consistently say that there is a possible world in which a
certain proposition concerning ship Sis true, even though that proposition
is not possibly true in the actual world. This, in turn, means that we shall
have to refine the way in which we characterize the possible truths of any
world: instead of saying, without qualification, that a possible truth is any
proposition which is true in some possible world, we shall have to say that
a proposition is possibly true in any given world just in case that prop
osition is true in some possible world which is accessible to the given
world. If every possible world is accessible to every other possible world,
these two characterizations of possible truth collapse into one another, but
they do not if, for example, the accessibility relation between possible
worlds is non-transitive. The condition which must be satisfied if every
possible world is to be accessible to every other possible world is that the
accessibility relation between possible worlds be an equivalence relation
that is, a relation which is not only transitive but also reflexive (every world
is accessible to itself) and symmetrical (if one world is accessible to
another, then the latter world is also accessible to the former world).
The upshot of this discussion is that there does, after all, appear to be a
way in which, technically at least, one can allow that a ship could have been
originally composed of a slightly, but not a completely, different set of
parts, without falling into contradiction. However, one may doubt whether
such a strategy can be provided with any very convincing metaphysical
motivation. When we are using the language of possible worlds to talk
about metaphysical possibility, why should we suppose that the accessibility
relation between possible worlds should be regarded as anything other
than an equivalence relation? It may be urged that talk of metaphysical
possibility is talk of what is absolutely possible, without qualification--not
ESSENTIALISM 111\nNECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
talk of what is relatively possible, or possible given some further assumption. If there is a possible world in which S is originally composed of a
completely different set of parts, then, surely, it just is metaphysically pos
sible, without qualification, that S should have been originally composed
of those parts.
A brief stock-taking
Let us now briefly take stock of our discussion of the theses of the necessity
of origin and of constitution. We saw that it is not easy to provide an
independent argument for the correctness of the first of these theses, but
that the second thesis may perhaps be more amenable to demonstration
(albeit only from premises which themselves contain an essentialist thesis).
Both theses have some intuitive plausibility, which may be enough to con
vince some metaphysicians of their correctness--though we have also seen
that there is plenty of scope to resist either thesis in various ways, even if it
may be questioned how well motivated such resistance may be. I confess
that I also left rather vague the question of what, in general, might be
meant by talking of the origin' or 'source' of an object in articulating the
content of the thesis of the necessity of origin. In the example I used, that
of an oak tree, I took the source to be a certain acorn--and, more gener
ally, in the case of plants and animals the source will typically be a certain
fertilized seed or egg. But in the case of an artefact, such as a ship, it is
perhaps less clear what we should describe as being its 'source', in the
relevant sense: it might perhaps be a plan drawn up for the ship's
construction, or maybe just an intention in the mind of its designer.
Despite a number of uncertainties surrounding the issue, we have seen
that some sense can be made of the idea that objects have individual
essences which may, in principle, help us to identify those objects across
possible worlds (assuming that such help is needed). But such help will at
best be rather limited, for both the thesis of the necessity of origin and the
thesis of the necessity of constitution can only serve to identify an object
across possible worlds given that the transworld identities of certain other
objects are already assured-namely, those objects which constitute the
sources or original component parts of the objects whose transworld iden
tity is in question. For example, it may help us to identify a certain tree
across possible worlds to know that that tree originates from the same
acorn in every possible world in which it exists, but this still leaves open the
112\nESSENTIALISM | 113
question of how to identify that acorn across possible worlds. Clearly, a
regress looms here, whose terminus, if it has one, is problematic.
Essence and conventionalism
I should not conclude this chapter without recalling that objects may
possess other essential properties beside those, if any, which comprise their
individual essences--namely, certain essential properties which can be
possessed by more than one object. In the case of an oak tree, for example,
such a property is, very plausibly, its property of being an oak tree: for
although there are many objects which possess this property, it is plausible
to maintain that any object which does possess it in this, the actual world,
also possesses it, at all times, in any other possible world in which that
object exists. In short, it is true of any particular oak tree that it could not
have failed to be an oak tree--it could not have been, say, a horse or a
rubber ball. Why not? That is a surprisingly difficult question to answer in
a completely non-question-begging way. It won't do to point out that an
oak tree cannot change into a horse or a rubber ball, even granting that that
is true: for our concern now is with counterfactual rather than with tem
poral possibility. However, I am strongly tempted to say that I simply don't
understand what it could really mean to say that a certain oak tree--that
very object--could have been a horse or a rubber ball. Conventionalists
who reject talk of 'essence' altogether or who regard it at best as reflecting
malleable human interests and prejudices will be unimpressed by such an
attitude. They will say that to describe a certain physical object as being
'essentially' an oak tree but only 'accidentally' situated in a certain place is
just to betray a greater practical concern for this object's biological char
acter than for its geographical position. Another culture, with different
interests, might well reverse our judgements, describing the object as being
'essentially' situated in a certain place but only 'accidentally' an oak tree.
But what is this 'object which is supposedly so freely redescribable without
its identity, apparently, ever coming into question? What, indeed, do the
conventionalists themselves understand in speaking of the world as
containing identifiable 'objects' at all? How could there be something
some identifiable particular thing--which was not by its very nature,
and thus essentially, an object of some quite specific kind? The whole
world, for the conventionalist, seems doomed to merge into an amorphous
lump in which there is no real individuality or distinctness, no genuine\n114
NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORDS
a
differentiation into a multiplicity of particulars, apart from the divisionswhich we or people of other cultures impose or project upon the worldthrough the filter of our thought and language. And then we must ask: what place can we ourselves have in such a world, seemingly so much ofour own making? For we can hardly be supposed to make ourselves, in thesense in which, for the conventionalist, it seems we have to make the other
objects of which we speak. If the only way to avoid the 'amorphouslump' conception of the world is to embrace essentialism, then at leastessentialism has common sense on its side, for what that is worth.
o
For a conventionalist approach, see Alan Sidelle, Necessity, Essence, and Individuation: ADefense of Conventionalism (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989). \n7
POSSIBLE WORLDS
The language of possible worlds
In the preceding two chapters, I have made extensive use of the language of
possible worlds in order to state and evaluate various modal claims, includ
ing certain important essentialist theses, such as the theses of the necessity
of identity, the necessity of origin, and the necessity of constitution. Much
of the time, however, I have resorted to more familiar and everyday ways of
expressing modal claims, using modal auxiliary verbs such as 'must, 'can',
and 'could', modal adverbs such as 'necessarily' and possibly', and modal
sentence-modifiers such as it is necessary that and it is possible that'. But
now we need to look more closely into how these two different ways of
expressing modal claims are related to one another and whether the differ
ences between them have any metaphysical significance. In particular, what
are the ontological implications, if any, of resorting to the language of
possible worlds to express modal claims? Can we, and if so should we,
regard that language as no more than a convenient façon de parler, or as
merely a useful heuristic device?
There is one context in which the language of possible worlds is
undoubtedly useful and even illuminating, namely, in the study of formal
axiomatic systems of modal logic. ' Systems of modal logic make use of
modal operators to represent statements of possibility and necessity. For
example, a statement of the form 'It is necessary that p' may be represented
by the formula 'Op, where the box symbol, 'O', is the necessity operator.
Correspondingly, a statement of the form 'It is possible that p may be
represented by the formula 'Op', where the diamond symbol, O', is the
possibility operator. These operators may be iterated so that, for example,
>
See, for example, Brian F. Chellas, Modal Logic: An Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1980), or G. E. Hughes and M. J. Cresswell, A New Introduction to Modal Logic
(London: Routledge, 1996). \n116 | necessity, essence, and possible worlds
the statement 'It is necessary that it is necessary that p' may be represented
by the formula '00 p' and the statement 'It is possible that it is necessarythat p' may be represented by the formula (Op. In systems of quantified
modal logic, the modal operators are used in combination with the famil
iar existential and universal quantifiers ('E' and 'A' respectively) of ordin
ary, non-modal quantifier logic. So, for instance, the statement "There is
something, x, such that it is necessary that x is F' may be represented by the
formula (Ex)Fx'. That statement must, of course, be carefully dis
tinguished from the statement 'It is necessary that there is something, x,
such that x is F, which is duly represented by the formula 'D(Ex)Fx'. (In
the current terminology, the first of these two statements is a statement of
de re necessity whereas the second is a statement of de dicto necessity,
because in the second what falls within the scope of the necessity operator
is itself a complete statement, whereas this is not so in the first. ) Of course,
more complex formulas than these can easily be constructed, using more
than one quantifier and symbols for negation, conjunction, disjunction,
and so forth.
Notice that the modal statements I have been representing symbolically
are ones which make use of the modal sentence-modifiers 'it is necessary
that' and it is possible that, rather than the modal adverbs or the modal
auxiliary verbs mentioned earlier. But this linguistic difference is probably
less significant than the difference between all of these familiar ways of
expressing modal claims and the language of possible worlds, which is an
invention of philosophers and logicians. For instance, it seems relatively
uncontroversial that the statement 'There is something which is such that
it is possible that it is red' is just a rather stilted way of saying 'There is
something which can be/could be/could have been red--though precisely
which auxiliary verb we choose will depend upon what notion of possibil
ity we are trying to express. (Recall here the distinction, introduced at the
beginning of Chapter 5, between 'temporal and 'counterfactual possibil
ity. ) Similarly, 'It is possible that there is something which is red' is just
another way of saying 'It can be/could be could have been the case that
there is something which is red'.
Modal logics and their interpretation
A good many different formal axiomatic systems of modal logic have beendeveloped by modal logicians, just as mathematicians have developed\nPOSSIBLE WORLDS
various axiomatic systems of geometry, of which Euclid's system is just the
best known. Some of these systems of modal logic are 'stronger than
others, in the sense that all the axioms and theorems of one system may be
derived from the axioms of another system whereas the second system (the
stronger of the two) has axioms and theorems which cannot be derived
from the axioms of the first system (the weaker system). Of the many
different systems of modal logic that have been developed, four are par
ticularly important, these being known, for historical reasons, as the Lewis
systems S4 and S5, the Brouwerian system B, and system T. Of these, S5 is
the strongest, because the axioms and theorems of each of the other sys
tems are contained in it, while T is the weakest, because its axioms and
theorems are contained in each of the others. S4 and B are of intermediate
strength, each being contained in S5 and containing T, but neither contain
ing the other. Each of the stronger systems can be obtained by adding
certain axioms to system T. System T itself contains the following two
distinctive modal axioms:
(1) Op → P
(2) O(P→ 9) + (Op 9)
(1) states that if it is necessary that p, then it is the case that p and (2) states
that if it is necessary that if p, then q, then if it is necessary that p, then it is
necessary that 9. System B contains, in addition to (1) and (2), the axiomB
(3) P→ Op
This states that if it is the case that p, then it is necessary that it is possibleP
that p. System S4 contains, in addition to (1) and (2), the axiom
(4) Op → DOP
This states that if it is necessary that p, then it is necessary that it is
necessary that p. Finally, S5 contains, in addition to (1) and (2), the axiom
(5) Op → Op
This states that if it is possible that p, then it is necessary that it is possible
that p. Axioms (3), (4), and (5) are the characteristic' axioms of systems B,
S4, and S5 respectively--that is to say, they are the axioms which need to be
added to axioms (1) and (2) of system T in order to generate, respectively,
systems B, S4, and S5.
Let us now recall how the language of possible worlds is used to charac
terize possible truths and necessary truths. As I explained in the previous
117\nNECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
chapter, we need to take into account the accessibility relation betweenpossible worlds if we are to do this in a perfectly general way. What we thensay is that a proposition is possibly true in a given possible world just incase that proposition is true in some possible world that is accessible to thegiven world. Correspondingly, we say that a proposition is necessarily truein a given possible world just in case that proposition is true in everypossible world that is accessible to the given world. And, of course, to saythat a proposition, p, is possibly true or necessarily true in a given world isjust to say that, in that world, it is possible that p or it is necessary that p. We must remember, however, that we have some room for choice concerning the properties of the accessibility relation between possible worlds. Inparticular, it is important which of the following properties we take that
relation to have: reflexivity, symmetry, and transitivity. The accessibilityrelation is reflexive if it is the case that every possible world is accessible toitself. It is symmetrical if it is the case that, whenever a world w, is accessibleto a world w, , world w, is also accessible to world w, . And it is transitive if it
is the case that, whenever a world w, is accessible to a world w, and world
w, is accessible to a world w; , world w, is also accessible to world Wz
is relatively easy to establish the following relationships between
systems T, B, S4, and S5 and certain possible combinations of properties of
the accessibility relation between possible worlds. If we specify merely that
the accessibility relation is reflexive, we get system T. If we specify that the
accessibility relation is reflexive and symmetrical, we get system B. If we
specify that the accessibility relation is reflexive and transitive, we get system S4. And if we specify that the accessibility relation is reflexive, sym
metrical, and transitive, we get system S5. (Note here that no relation can be
symmetrical and transitive but not reflexive, so that we also get system S5 if
we specify merely that the accessibility relation is symmetrical and transitive. ) This explains the relative strengths of the various systems and why
they have the characteristic axioms they do. For example, we can explainthe characteristic axiom of S5, axiom (5) above, as follows. The axiomstates that if it is possible that p, then it is necessary that it is possible that p. In order to see why this is so, observe first of all that what axiom (5) states
is logically equivalent to the following: if it is possible that it is necessarythat p, then it is necessary that p. That is to say, the formula Op →00pof (5) is logically equivalent to the formula 'DO P→ Op'. (To prove thislogical equivalence, we need only to draw on the fact that 'Opis, bydefinition, equivalent to nonp: to say that it is possible that p is equivalent to saying that it is not necessary that it is not
Now, it
the case that p. ) Suppose,
118\nPOSSIBLE WORLDS
now, that "It is possible that it is necessary that p' is true in a given world,
wo. What this means, in the language of possible worlds, is that there is
some possible world, call it w, which is accessible to w. , such that 'It is
necessary that p' is true in w. This in turn means that p is true in every
possible world that is accessible to w. However, if we assume that the
accessibility relation between possible worlds is reflexive, symmetrical, and
transitive (in other words, if we assume that it is an equivalence relation),
then it is evident that every possible world is accessible to every other
possible world. It follows that, since p is true in every possible world that is
accessible to w, p is true in every possible world that is accessible to w, , for
the worlds that are accessible to w, are precisely the same worlds as those
that are accessible to w, namely, all the worlds there are. But this in turn
means that 'It is necessary that p' is true in world w. . So we have shown
that from the fact that "It is possible that it is necessary that p is true in wo,
it follows that "It is necessary that p' is true in w. , which is precisely what
axiom (5) requires.
Accessibility relations and essentialist theses
w
At this point, it is instructive to recall two controversial issues concerning
essentialist theses that were discussed in the preceding two chapters. In
Chapter 5, I pointed out that it is possible to accept the thesis of the
necessity of identity while rejecting the thesis of the necessity of diversity.
And in Chapter 6, I explained how it was technically possible to defend a
weakened version of the thesis of the necessity of constitution, allowing
that a composite object might have been composed of a slightly, but not a
completely, different set of original component parts when it first came
into existence. In each case, the tenability of the position in question rests
upon the acceptability of a system of modal logic weaker than S5: that is to
say, in the language of possible worlds, it rests upon our being able to
construe the accessibility relation between possible worlds as failing to
have all the properties of an equivalence relation. In the first case, what
must be denied is that the accessibility relation is symmetrical. In the sec
ond case, what must be denied is that it is transitive. I hope that I made the
latter fact sufficiently clear in my discussion of the second case in Chapter
6. But the former fact is equally easy to appreciate. For suppose that it is
maintained that the thesis of the necessity of diversity is incorrect. This is
to maintain that even if 'a is not identical with b' is true in a certain
119\n120 NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE Worlds
possible world, wcherished modal thesis from attack. ,, it may none the less be the case that 'It is possible that ais identical with b' is true in w. . This in turn means, in the language ofpossible worlds, that there is some possible world, call it w, which isaccessible to w, and in which 'a is identical with b' is true. Now, however, suppose that the thesis of the necessity of identity is correct. This impliesthat 'It is necessary that a is identical with b' is true in world w, which inturn means, in the language of possible worlds, that`a is identical with b'istrue in every possible world which is accessible to world w. But we havealready assumed that world w, is accessible to world w, so that if we also
assume that the accessibility relation between possible worlds is symmetrical, we must accept that, conversely, world w, is accessible to world w, .
However, we have just agreed that 'a is identical with b'is true in every
possible world which is accessible to world w, so that if world w, is indeedone of those worlds, it follows that 'a is identical with b' is true in world wo,
But this contradicts our initial supposition that 'a is not identical with b' is
true in world wo. Clearly, then, in order to avoid this contradiction, while
accepting the thesis of the necessity of identity but not the thesis of the
necessity of diversity, we must deny that world w, is accessible to world w,
and hence deny that the accessibility relation between possible worlds is
symmetrical. This means, of course, that we cannot accept either system B
or system S5 as our preferred system of modal logic. Similarly, if we deny
that the accessibility relation between possible worlds is transitive, in order
to uphold a weakened version of the thesis of the necessity of constitution,
we cannot accept either system S4 or system S5 as our preferred system of
modal logic. But a word of caution is called for here. As I implied when
discussing the thesis of the necessity of constitution in Chapter 6, any
choice of a system of modal logic weaker than system S5, when we are
concerned with the concepts of metaphysical possibility and necessity, may be difficult to motivate in a principled way--so that we should nottoo lightly assume that, where the metaphysical modalities are concerned,
we are free to choose our system of modal logic simply with a view toprotecting some
a
How should we understand talk of possibleworlds?
I hope that the discussion so far in this chapter has borne out my suggestion that the language of possible worlds is useful and even illuminating\nPOSSIBLE WORLDS |
w
for the purpose of studying formal axiomatic systems of modal logic. In
essence, the utility of that language in this context arises from the fact that,
when we translate into the language of possible worlds modal claims ori
ginally stated with the aid of modal operators or their ordinary English
equivalents--the expressions 'it is possible that and it is necessary that'
we are able to eliminate those modal operators in favour of quantifier
expressions whose variables of quantification range over possible worlds.
Thus, instead of saying 'It is possible that p', we say 'There is some possible
world, w, such that w is accessible and p is true in w, or something to that
effect. The second sentence is certainly more long-winded than the first,
but, from a logical point of view, it has the great advantage of enabling us
to utilize the familiar resources of ordinary, non-modal quantifier logic. As
far as its logical form is concerned, this sentence is indistinguishable from
one such as "There is some wooden box, x, such that x is nearby and y is
located in x". Non-modal quantifier logic is a very well-understood system,
so that translating modal claims into a language governed by that logic and
devoid of modal operators can, not surprisingly, help us to understand
logical relations between modal claims and assist us in formulating and
evaluating arguments which involve such claims. But the deeper question
which should concern us, from a metaphysical point of view, is whether
translating modal claims into the language of possible worlds can help us
in any way to understand the content or meaning of modal claims. How we
answer this question will depend on what we think talk of "possible worlds?
itself means, whether we think that there really are any such entities as
possible worlds and, if we do, what we think their nature is. In all of these
matters, a broad range of options faces us.
A deflationary view
One option would be to maintain that talk of possible worlds is nothing
more than a convenient way of rephrasing modal claims which draws its
entire meaning from the independently constituted meanings of more
familiar ways of expressing modal claims--those which exploit modal aux
iliary verbs, modal adverbs, and modal sentence-modifiers. On this thor
oughly deflationary view, we should not invest talk of possible worlds with
any ontological significance, as though it were a way of talking about some
special class of entities whose intrinsic nature awaits further description.
However, against this suggestion it may be urged that if sentences in the
121\n122 NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
language of possible worlds are true--which many must be, if such sen. tences simply paraphrase more familiarly expressed modal claims andmany of the latter are true--then possible worlds must surely exist. formany such possible-worlds sentences quite explicitly state that there arepossible worlds. For instance, the possible-worlds sentence which translates'It is possible that I am rich'--"There is some possible world in which it istrue that I am rich'--clearly entails the simpler sentence "There is somepossible world', which says that at least one possible world exists. (Here Iam setting aside, for the sake of simplicity, any mention of accessibilitybetween possible worlds. ) It seems, then, that possible-worlds talk cannotbe construed as being ontologically innocent: by indulging in it, we appearto commit ourselves to acknowledging the existence of a certain class ofentities, possible worlds--and the only question remaining for us is whatthese entities are.
But this line of objection is surely too quick and too slick. The view
under examination maintains that the possible-worlds sentence "There is
some possible world in which it is true that I am rich' is nothing more than
a paraphrase of the more familiar modal sentence 'It is possible that I am
rich'and derives its meaning entirely from the meaning of the latter, which
itself makes no reference to any entity whatsoever apart from me--an
object of a perfectly familiar kind. So how can it fairly be alleged that that
view does after all commit its adherents to the existence of entities of a
further and unfamiliar kind? But what, then, it may be asked, does the
sentence "There is some possible world' mean, on the view under examin
ation? For that sentence surely is entailed by 'There is some possible world
in which it is true that I am rich' and is therefore true if that other sentence
is true. This seems a fair question, but it also seems to have an obvious
answer: "There is some possible world simply means 'It is possible that
something is the case'. For the latter, translated into the language of possible worlds, means "There is some possible world in which some proposition is true' and this is trivially equivalent to "There is some possibleworld', because it is trivially true that every possible world is a world inwhich some proposition is true.
One seeming advantage of the deflationary view of possible-worlds talknow under consideration is that it may appear to eliminate the supposed
is being appealed to here, in effect, is W. V. Quine's criterion of ontological commitment, encapsulated in his famous slogan, "To be is to be the value of a variable". See further"Existence and Quantification', in his Ontological Relativity and Other Essays (New York: ColumbiaUniversity Press, 1969).
- What\nPOSSIBLE WORLDS
problem of transworld identity which was discussed in the previous chap
ter. If, in all ontological seriousness, there are no possible worlds, conceived
as real entities of some kind yet to be described--because to say that "There
are possible worlds' is really just to say that it is possible that some proposi
tions are true--then, surely, there can be no problem as to how the same
object can exist 'in' different possible worlds and be identified across'
possible worlds. Let us see how this train of thought might be developed,
before we go on to evaluate it.
Transworld identity again
Suppose that we are talking about some actually existing object, such as a
certain oak tree, T, which is actually growing in a certain field and is
flourishing there. And suppose the question is raised as to whether I could
have flourished just as well if it had been growing on higher ground.
Expressed in the language of possible worlds, our question is whether there
is another possible world, accessible to this, the actual world, in which I is
growing on higher ground and is flourishing just as well as it actually is.
Now, this may seem to prompt the further question of how we can deter
mine that, in this other possible world, it is indeed T that is growing on the
higher ground and not some other, numerically distinct tree. We may be
satisfied that there is a possible world in which an oak tree, similar in many
ways to T, is growing and flourishing on higher ground: but what would
make it the case that such a tree is, or is not, identical with T? Don't we
need some principle, or criterion, of 'transworld identity' in order to
answer such a question--a principle which will tell us, regarding T and
some tree existing in another possible world, whether or not they are one
and the same tree? Those philosophers who regard talk of possible worlds
as no more than a façon de parler may want to reply to this question with a
firm "No'. By their account, to ask whether there is another possible world
in which T is growing on higher ground and flourishing is to ask nothing
more than whether T could have flourished if it had been growing on
higher ground. And, in order to understand the latter question, the only
question of identity that needs to be settled is the question of which tree T
actually is. Once this is settled--say, by identifying T as the tree which is
actually growing in a certain location--there is simply no further question
to be addressed. of identity
Hence, according to this way of thinking, when it is asked how we can
123\nNECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
determine whether, in some other possible world, it is indeed T that isgrowing on higher ground and not some other tree, the answer is that thisis an entirely spurious question, for the only genuine question of identityconcerning T has already been settled by considerations which solely concern its actual properties. Having fixed T's identity in the only sense that iseither possible or required, what makes it the case that T' is the tree said toexist in some other possible world' is simply the fact that this is the tree wehave chosen to talk about. In effect, it is we who stipulate that the tree inquestion is T--which we are perfectly entitled to do, because there is nofurther fact of identity to be established.
One may worry, however, that this short way with the problem of transworld identity is superficial and inadequate, failing to recognize that agenuine difficulty does exist. For one thing, it may be asked how we can beentitled to assume that I could have existed at all in a location other than
the one in which it actually does exist. Surely, it may be said, we can onlyinquire into what properties T could have had if we are in a position to sayin what circumstances T--that very tree--would still have existed. Doesn't
this require us to have some grasp of T's 'individual essence? And doesn't
such a grasp amount, in effect, to a grasp of a principle or criterion of
transworld identity for objects of T's kind--in this case, oak trees? This
seems to be a reasonable objection. The thought that there can be no
genuine problem of transworld identity if there really are no such entities
as possible worlds does indeed seem mistaken. Certainly, it may be that the
problem is not most perspicuously articulated in terms of identity across
possible worlds'--but that doesn't mean that the questions we may be
tempted to articulate in those terms aren't genuine questions which
require substantive answers and cannot be settled by mere stipulation. I
strongly suspect that this is indeed the case.
Another deflationary view
Now, even if the deflationary view of possible-worlds talk that we have justbeen examining cannot be credited with dissolving the problem of transworld identity, there may be other reasons for favouring it--not least thefact that it is ontologically parsimonious. But against this view, one mayobject that it threatens to leave unexplained why familiar
Compare Saul A. Kripke, Naming and Necessity (Oxford: Blackwell,
modal sentences
1980), 42 ff.
124\n125POSSIBLE WORLDS
should be paraphrasable in terms of possible-worlds sentences, especially
since this fact is generally unknown to ordinary users of those familiar
modal sentences. There is, admittedly, nothing especially strange in the
notion that a sentence may be paraphrased, in a way which entirely
preserves its meaning, by another sentence with a very different logical
structure. Thus, to use a famous example of Frege's, the sentence "The
direction of line a is the same as the direction of line b' may be para
phrased by the sentence 'Line a is parallel to line b', despite the fact that
the two sentences seem to be attributing different relations to different
pairs of objects. However, this example does not provide a very helpful
model for adherents of the view of possible-worlds talk now under exam
ination: for not only will the Fregean paraphrase come as no surprise to
users of either of the sentences involved, but also we have no reluctance
to say that directions exist if lines do, and vice versa. The fact that the
sentence concerning directions can be paraphrased by one concerning
lines is not naturally taken to imply that directions do not really exist,
whereas the deflationist is suggesting that, because possible-worlds talk is
just a paraphrase of familiar modal language, possible worlds do not really
exist.
The view of possible-worlds talk that we have just been examining is
not, however, the only deflationary view of such talk that is available.
Another deflationary view, in some ways even more extreme than the first,
is to regard talk of possible worlds as nothing more than a convenient
heuristic device. According to this view, when we 'translate'a familiar
modal sentence into a sentence in the language of possible worlds, our
'translation' does not even preserve, much less explain, the meaning of our
original modal sentence. Rather, it provides us with a surrogate for that
original modal sentence which is more amenable to the familiar kinds of
logical manipulation made available by non-modal quantifier logic. We do
not have to ask, and indeed should not ask, what sort of entities are the
values of the possible-worlds variables in the surrogate sentences, because
those sentences are not to be regarded as literally true or false, but merely
as providing convenient linguistic objects for the purposes of formulating
and evaluating modal arguments. If, in the course of manipulating such
surrogate sentences, we engage in certain flights of fancy, imagining pos
sible worlds as 'alternative realities' of some sort, this is harmless enough
and may even help us in our reasonings, rather as coloured beads or
* See Gottlob Frege, The Foundations of Arithmetic, trans. J. L. Austin (Oxford: Blackwell, 1953),
74. \n126 NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE worlds
pebbles may help a child in carrying out arithmetical calculations. But-soit may be urged--such imaginings have nothing to do with the meaningsof the surrogate sentences formulated in the language of possible worlds, for those sentences do not have determinate meanings at all and do notneed to have them in order to fulfil the purposes for which they are constructed. Against this view it may be objected, however, that it leaves uswith a mystery as to why the language of possible worlds should prove so
useful for formulating and evaluating modal arguments, given thatpossible-worlds sentences are devoid of meanings that are in any way
related to the meanings of the familiar modal sentences for which they aresupposed to be surrogates.
Modal fictionalism
Both of the deflationary views of possible-worlds talk that we have looked
at so far may seem attractive because they are ontologically parsimonious,
apparently allowing us to indulge in the convenience of talking in terms of
possible worlds but without incurring any obligation to say what possible
worlds are, because the term "possible world is not taken to express the
concept of any distinctive kind of object or entity. However, both of these
views should be clearly distinguished from another view which hopes to
reap the benefits of possible-worlds talk without incurring any ontological
cost--a view which is commonly known as 'modal fictionalism'. ' Accord
ing to this view, the term "possible world' does indeed express the concept
of a distinctive kind of object or entity, but one which has no real
instances that is to say, it is the concept of a certain kind of fictional entity,
somewhat as the concept of a unicorn is the concept of a certain kind of
fictional entity. Just as we can say what a unicorn would be, if there were
such a thing, we can, on this view, say what a possible world would be, if
there were such a thing--but it is just that there are no such things. Even
so, it is suggested, the meaning of modal claims can be illuminated bytalking in terms of these fictional entities.
a a
However, this view requires that we modify the usual scheme for trans
lating familiar modal sentences into possible-worlds sentences. Instead ofsaying, for instance, that 'It is possible that p' means There is at least onepossible world in which p is true', we must say that the former sentence
See especially Gideon Rosen, 'Modal Fictionalism', Mind 99 (1990), 327-54. See also JohnDivers, 'A Modal Fictionalist Result', Nous 33 (1999), 317-46. \nPOSSIBLE WORLDS
means something like this: According to the fiction of possible worlds,
there is at least one possible world in which pis true'. The reason for this is
that the modal fictionalist contends that possible worlds are fictional, non
existent entities, so that, on this view, the sentence "There is at least one
possible world is simply false, just as the sentence 'There is at least one
unicorn' is simply false. Therefore, on the fictionalist's view, the sentence
"There is at least one possible world in which p is true' is also false, no
matter what proposition p might be--and yet, of course, he does not want
to say that the sentence 'It is possible that p' is false, no matter what
proposition p might be. So he must deny that the latter sentence is
adequately translated by the former. Instead, he must translate 'It is pos
sible that p' by something like "According to the fiction of possible worlds,
there is at least one possible world in which p is true', which, of course, can
perfectly well be true--just as the sentence According to Greek mythology,
there is at least one unicorn' is true, even though the sentence "There is at
least one unicorn' is false.
The contrast between modal fictionalism and the first deflationary view
discussed earlier is clearly brought out by the fact that, according to that
other view, the possible-worlds sentence 'There is at least one possible
world' is not only true, but trivially so, since it means quite simply "It is
possible that at least one proposition is true". Other things being equal, it
would seem that this view is preferable to modal fictionalism, since it does
not require us to say what kind of thing a possible world would be and
does not require us to modify the usual translation scheme between famil
iar modal sentences and sentences of the language of possible worlds.
However, it may be that modal fictionalism can exploit to its advantage
certain features of some realist theory of possible worlds, without incur
ring the ontological commitments of such a theory. This would give it, in
the memorable words of Bertrand Russell, all the advantages of theft over
honest toil. In particular, it may be urged that there are modal truths which
can be adequately articulated only in the terms made available by such a
realist theory and which therefore cannot be adequately articulated solely
with the aid of the more familiar modal locutions, such as the modal
sentence-modifiers 'it is possible that and it is necessary that. If that
were so, modal fictionalism would certainly be preferable to either of the
other deflationary views discussed earlier. And if it could achieve all of
This is the contention of David Lewis: see his On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell,
1986), 13 ff.
127\n128
NECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
this without incurring the ontological commitments of a realist theory ofpossible worlds, it would surely deserve our allegiance in preference to anyother approach, whether realist or deflationary.
Realist theories of possible worlds
But it is now time that we looked at some realist theories of possible
worlds. Recall that when I first began to talk about possible worlds, in
Chapter 5, I introduced them as being possible situations of a special
kind-namely, maximal possible situations. It will be remembered that I
characterized a possible situation as being maximal just in case it satisfies
the following condition: for any proposition, p, either it is the case that pis
true in the situation in question, or else it is the case that p is not true (and
hence that not-p is true) in the situation in question. I did not say much
about the general notion of a situation' in that chapter, but, as I was using
this term, it is synonymous with the term 'state of affairs'. In what follows,
I shall say a little about what metaphysicians have typically conceived states
of affairs to be, though without wishing to imply that I endorse the inclu
sion of such entities in our ontology.
Traditionally, a state of affairs is conceived to be something closely
related to, but not the same as, a proposition. In particular, it may be said
that a state of affairs which actually obtains is a fact and that facts are what
make propositions true or false. For example, it may be said that the
proposition that Mars is red is made true by the fact that Mars is red.
Mars's being red, then, is a state of affairs which actually obtains and is
consequently a fact. A state of affairs which does not actually obtain but
which could have obtained is not a fact, but it could have been a fact: it is, if
you like, a possible fact. An example of such a state of affairs is Mars's
having an ocean. Clearly, we have to distinguish carefully between saying
that a certain state of affairs exists and that it obtains. The state of affairs of
Mars's having an ocean does not obtain, because it is not a fact that Mars
has an ocean: but this does not mean that that state of affairs does
not exist. There is a parallel with propositions here: the proposition that
Mars has an ocean is not true, but this does not mean that that proposition
does not exist. It would seem, then, that states of affairs are, like proposi
tions, necessary beings: in the language of possible worlds, any state of
affairs which exists in any possible world exists in every possible world. Since we are now treating possible worlds as maximal possible states of\nPOSSIBLE WORLDS
affairs, this amounts to saying that any state of affairs which exists in any
maximal possible state of affairs exists in every maximal possible state of
affairs. This may sound odd, but is not paradoxical. It implies, for instance,
that every possible state of affairs exists in the maximal possible state of
affairs which actually obtains, that is, in the actual world: but this doesn't
mean that every possible state of affairs obtains in the actual world, which
would imply a contradiction.
States of affairs, if they are indeed necessary beings, would appear to be
abstract entities, just as propositions are. So to regard possible worlds as
maximal possible states of affairs is to regard them as abstract entities of a
special kind. Assuming that one is a realist concerning abstract entities in
general, to regard possible worlds as being abstract entities of a special
kind is certainly to adopt a realist view of possible worlds. But, on reflec
tion, it may strike one as being an unpalatable and ontologically extrava
gant view. In the first place, it may be wondered why we should need to
include both maximal possible states of affairs and propositions in our
ontology. If possible worlds are abstract entities, like propositions, why
don't we simply say that they are propositions, or, more precisely, maximal
consistent sets of propositions--where a set of propositions is consistent
just in case the conjunction of those propositions could be true? In short,
why not simply identify a possible world with the set of propositions that
are true 'in' it? This would mean identifying the actual world with the set
of all propositions that are actually true. And some philosophers have
indeed advocated precisely this position. At this point, however, it may
strike us forcefully how odd it is to say that possible worlds, including the
actual world, are abstract entities, whether states of affairs or sets of pro
positions. Certainly, we may be very resistant to the idea that the world we
actually inhabit is an abstract, necessary being. On the contrary, it seems to
be a concrete, contingent being, consisting at least in part of numerous
objects existing in space and time, including ourselves.
Robust realism and the indexical conception
of actuality
This last thought prompts a quite different but robustly realist conception
of possible worlds: not as being abstract entities, but as being, as it were,
Compare Alvin Plantinga, The Nature of Necessity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974), Hit
7
129\n130 necessity, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
not an
universes, each quite as concrete as the actual physical universe weinhabit, but each spatiotemporally and causally isolated from all of theothers. Against this view, it may be objected that what it offers isaccount of what possible worlds are, but just a grossly inflated account ofwhat physical reality actually includes--in short, that it is a contribution tospeculative cosmology rather than to the metaphysics of modality. It maybe replied that this objection rests upon a misunderstanding of the meanings of the words 'actual and 'actually'. In particular, it may be contendedthat the term 'the actual world' is an indexical expression, analogous to theexpressions 'now' and 'here". Just as the word 'now' refers, on any occasionof its use, to the time at which it is uttered and the word 'here' refers, onany occasion of its use, to the place at which it is uttered, so, it may be said, the term "the actual world' refers to the world in which it is uttered. Consequently, the many concrete worlds being postulated cannot all be seen asparts of one enormous actual world, since each of these worlds is the
actual world to its inhabitants, just as each time is 'now' to the peopleexisting at that time. On this view, our world's being 'actual is not a matterof its being somehow more real than other worlds, which are 'merelypossible: rather, it is just a matter of its being our world--a fact which does
not confer upon it any special ontological status. All possible worlds, then, are ontologically
parallel
on an equal footing, according to this way of thinking.
If this view of possible worlds is correct, it seems clear that we cannotliterally speak of one and the same concrete object existing in two differentpossible worlds: transworld identity is impossible for concrete objects, because concrete objects exist in space and time--and each possible worldhas its own space-time, which is spatiotemporally unrelated to the spacetime of any other world. The most we can hope to say is that a concreteobject existing in one possible world has 'counterparts' existing in otherpossible worlds-objects which are similar to the object in question incertain especially significant ways.
But this prompts the objection that it is mysterious why modal statements about objects existing in one world should have anything to do withquite different objects existing in other worlds. When it is said, forinstance, that a certain oak tree, T, which exists in our world could havebeen taller than it is, this is taken to be true in virtue of the fact that anotheroak tree, existing in another space-time continuum but in some waysThis is the
Lewis, who also inspired the indexical conception of actualitydescribed below and the theory of 'counterparts' as an alternative to the postulation of literal'transworld' identity: see his On the Plurality of Worlds.
view of David\nPOSSIBLE WORLDS |
similar to T, is taller than T. But why should facts about another tree have
anything to do with how this tree, T, could have been? It is true enough
that the other tree is not just any arbitrarily chosen tree, but is T's 'coun
terpart in the world in question. But since the counterpart relation is
merely a matter of similarity, not of identity, it is perhaps hard to see how
invoking it helps to solve the problem that has been posed. Indeed, how
would it make any difference to us, existing in this world--the one we call
'actual--if none of the other worlds existed at all? We would be none the
wiser, since those worlds are, in any case, alleged to be causally isolated
from ours, so that their existence or non-existence can have no causal
impact on us. If none of those other worlds existed, we would go on
believing that objects in our world had certain modal properties--for
instance, that a certain tree could have been taller than it is--and these
modal beliefs would go on being justified or not, as the case may be, for the
same reasons as before. It seems that the existence of other possible worlds,
conceived along the lines now under consideration, would simply be
irrelevant to the very area of discourse--modal discourse--which talk of
possible worlds is supposed to illuminate.
Moderate realism and actualism
versus possibilism
Can we combine a moderate realism concerning possible worlds--one
sufficient to acknowledge their explanatory usefulness--with the view that
the actual world alone contains the whole of concrete reality? Perhaps we
can. So far we have looked only at realist views of possible worlds which
treat all possible worlds, including this, the actual world, as belonging to
the same ontological category. On one view, all worlds are abstract, neces
sary beings--maximal possible states of affairs, or maximal consistent sets
of propositions. On another view, all worlds are concrete beings, each with
its own space-time continuum and population of material objects. But
what we would like to say, perhaps, is that the actual world, and it alone,
contains concrete objects existing in space and time, whereas other pos
sible worlds are entities of quite another nature, most probably abstract
entities of some sort. If we are content to allow that the actual world
includes not only concrete objects existing in space and time, but also
abstract entities, such as numbers, sets, and propositions, then we can say,
for instance, that other possible worlds are indeed maximal consistent sets
131\nNECESSITY, ESSENCE, AND POSSIBLE WORLDS
--each of them characterizing, as it were, a way the actualworld could have been. One maximal consistent set of propositions isdistinctive in that all of the propositions belonging to it are true. But thisset of propositions cannot, of course, be identified with the actual world,
because it is only one object amongst many existing in the actual world. This set of propositions characterizes the way the actual world is. According to this view, when we say of some actually existing object that it alsoexists 'in' some other possible world, all we mean is that if all of themembers of a certain maximal consistent set of propositions had been
true, then that object would still have existed. Put more loosely, we meanthat if that possible world had been (or, more strictly, had characterized)the actual world, then the object in question would still have existed. (Recallthat I mentioned this sort of proposal in Chapter 3, where I compared itwith a proposal that a 'presentist' theory of time might endorse. )
of propositions
The view just described is a form of actualism: that is to say, it is committed to the doctrine that the only entities which exist are entities whichactually exist. Possible worlds other than the actual world are, on this view, actually existing entities, because they are just parts of the actual world,
namely, certain abstract entities which actually exist. Opposed to actualismis possibilism, the view that certain possible entities exist which do not
actually exist. Why should anyone believe in possibilism? To say that something exists which does not actually exist sounds very close to being selfcontradictory--though, of course it isn't, if 'actually' is understood to be
an indexical expression. After all, it isn't contradictory to say that something exists which does not exist now (provided, of course, that we read theverb 'exists' tenselessly, rather than as being in the present tense), or whichdoes not exist here. But it may be doubted whether the indexical interpretation of actually' is correct. Of course, we can say, without fear of selfcontradiction, that something could have existed which does not actuallyexist, but this is perfectly consistent with actualism (provided, of course, that we don't mean by this that there is something which could haveexisted but which does not actually exist, but only that there could haveexisted something which does not actually exist). For example, the actualistcan allow that there could have existed a tenth planet orbiting the Suninside the orbit of Mercury, even though no such planet actually exists. Thepossibilist will maintain, however--with how much plausibility is a matterfor debate--that there are modal truths which actualism simply cannotaccommodate, because there are more things than are dreamt of in theactualist's ontology: for example, "alien' properties which no actual object
132\nPOSSIBLE WORLDS
possesses or could ever have possessed, but which are possessed by objects
in some other possible world. I shall not attempt to resolve this dispute
here, though my own sympathies lie with the actualist. "
• See Lewis, On the Plurality of Worlds, 159 ff.
For further discussion of the issues raised in this chapter, see Robert C. Stalnaker, 'Possible
Worlds', Nolls 10 (1976), 65-75, reprinted in the very useful volume edited by Michael J. Loux, The
Possible and the Actual: Readings in the Metaphysics of Modality (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press, 1979); Colin McGinn, 'Modal Reality', in Richard Healey (ed. ), Reduction, Time and Reality
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981); Nathan Salmon, "The Logic of What Might Have
Been', Philosophical Review 98 (1989), 3-34; and Graeme Forbes, The Metaphysics of Modality
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985). For another approach to modality not discussed in this chapter,
see David M. Armstrong, A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1989)
133\n\nPART INI
CAUSATION AND
CONDITIONALS\n\n8
COUNTERFACTUAL
CONDITIONALS
Subjunctive versus indicative conditionals
I have spoken a good deal, in recent chapters, about the notion of counter
factual possibility', which I first introduced at the beginning of Chapter 5.
It is this notion of possibility that is in play when we speak of what
properties an object could have had, in contrast with the properties that it
actually does have. Very often, however, we also want to say what proper
ties an object would have had, if circumstances had been in some way
different from how they actually are. We may judge, for instance, that a
certain oak tree, T, would have been taller if it had been growing in more
fertile soil. The conditional sentence used to express this judgement--'If T
had been growing in more fertile soil, then T would have been taller'--is a
so-called counterfactual conditional. The characteristic hallmarks of such a
conditional are generally taken to be, first, that its antecedent (the if-clause)
expresses a state of affairs which is 'contrary to fact, that is, which does not
actually obtain, and, second, that the auxiliary verbs appearing in its ante
cedent and consequent (the then-clause) are 'subjunctive' in mood. For
the latter reason, such conditionals are also called 'subjunctive con
ditionals', in contrast with so-called 'indicative conditionals', whose verbs
are in the 'indicative mood. An example of an indicative conditional
would be 'If T has shed its leaves, then winter has arrived. Someone
asserting this conditional would not ordinarily be taken to imply that its
antecedent expresses a state of affairs which is contrary to fact--that I has
not shed its leaves. A few words of caution are in order here, however. First,
some logicians and linguists are unhappy with the claim that English pos
sesses a subjunctive mood which is clearly distinguishable from the indica
tive mood, even though many other languages--such as Italian, French, \n138 CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
a
and Latin-certainly do. ' Second, there are many so-called subjunctiveconditionals which are not counterfactuals, as they are typically assertedwithout any implication that their antecedents express states of affairswhich are contrary to fact (such subjunctive conditionals are sometimescalled 'open' subjunctive conditionals). And, third, there are some socalled indicative conditionals which, technically, are counterfactual conditionals according to this criterion, standard examples being indicativeconditionals whose consequents are something like I'm a Dutchman' orI'll eat my hat' (as in 'If that painting's a Picasso, then I'll eat my hať)--for, in asserting conditionals such as these, a speaker most certainly doeswant to imply that the antecedent of the asserted conditional is false. However, in what follows I shall ignore all of these complications andsimply talk about 'counterfactual conditionals' as if this term denoted aperfectly clear-cut class of conditionals, of which a paradigm examplewould be the conditional cited earlier, 'If I had been growing in morefertile soil, then I would have been taller'.
There are some very good reasons why a survey of metaphysics, such asthe present book is intended to be, should have a close concern with themeaning of counterfactual conditionals. One is simply that, because theyare statements which are, in a broad sense, modal in character, the properinterpretation of counterfactual conditionals raises important questions inthe metaphysics of modality. Even more significant, however, is the factthat many metaphysicians have made use of counterfactual conditionals intheir accounts of other metaphysically important notions, especially thenotion of causation. Some have even maintained that causal statements canbe analysed in terms of counterfactual conditionals. Whether or not such aview can be sustained is a question which we shall have to postpone untilChapter 10, but it is surely indisputable that counterfactual conditionalsand causal statements are at least intimately related to one another. Forinstance, someone who asserts "The explosion caused the collapse of thebridge' would normally take this causal statement to imply the counterfactual conditional 'If the explosion had not occurred, then the bridge wouldnot have collapsed'. As we shall see in Chapter 10, matters are not in factquite so straightforward as this, for in some circumstances the effect of a
theorist is V. H. Dudman: for his distinctive approach to conditionals, see his'Interpretations of "IP®-Sentences", in Frank Jackson (ed. ), Conditionals (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991). See also Jonathan Bennett, 'Farewell to the Phlogiston Theory of Conditionals', Mind 97 (1988), 509-27, although Bennett has since retracted the view expressed in that paper: seehis "Classifying Conditionals: The Traditional Way is Right, Mind
One such
104 (1995), 331-54. \nCOUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS
given cause would still have occurred even in the absence of that cause,
because in its absence something else would have caused the effect in
question. But this sort of complication is not something that need concern
us at present.
Counterfactual conditionals and possible worlds
So what, then, do we mean when we assert a counterfactual conditional?
Let us take as the general form of a counterfactual conditional the
sentence-form 'If it had been the case that p, then it would have been the
case that q'. This is slightly misleading, in that a sentence of this form is a
past-tense counterfactual conditional, whereas there can perfectly well be
present-tense and future-tense counterfactual conditionals--though in
practice most of the counterfactual conditionals which people assert are in
the past tense, simply because we know more about the past than we do
about the present and the future and are consequently better placed to
judge that the antecedents of past-tense conditionals are contrary to fact
than that the antecedents of present-tense and future-tense conditionals
are. So this is another complication that I shall ignore for the time being.
Of course, it is hardly very idiomatic English to say "If it had been the case
that I was growing in more fertile soil, then it would have been the case
that T was taller', instead of the much simpler 'If I had been growing in
more fertile soil, then I would have been taller'But the advantage of the
more complex mode of expression is that it conforms to an easily general
izable pattern, namely, that exhibited by the general sentence-form pre
sented above--'If it had been the case that p, then it would have been the
case that q', where p and q are any two propositions that we may care to
choose.
Now, in reply to our question--what do we mean when we assert a
counterfactual conditional? --many philosophers have offered answers
which appeal to the notion of possible worlds, which we have already
explored in considerable depth in previous chapters. We shall examine
some of these answers in due course. But first let us be clear about what is
being looked for as an answer to our question. What we are looking for,
primarily, is an account of the truth conditions of counterfactual con
ditionals. That is to say, we are looking for a statement of a logically
necessary and sufficient condition for the truth of a sentence of the form
'If it had been the case that p, then it would have been the case that q
139\n140 CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
question that many
and, moreover, a logically necessary and sufficient condition which canitself be stated without using any counterfactual conditional. This qualifi. cation is clearly needed if we are to avoid both triviality and circularity inan account of the truth conditions of counterfactual conditionals. Withthese desiderata in mind, then, one answer to our
philosophers have been inclined to give is, to a first approximation, something like this:
(1) 'If it had been the case that p, then it would have been the case thatq' is true if and only if q is true in the closest possible world in whichp is true.
This analysis of the meaning of a counterfactual conditional introducesonly one notion which we have not hitherto encountered, that of onepossible world's being `closer' to the actual world than another possibleworld is--and I shall say more about this notion in a moment. Indeed, analysis (1) assumes that, for any proposition p, there is, relative to the
actual world, a closest possible world in which p is true. But this assumption may certainly be queried. Since, presumably, no world is as close to the
actual world as the actual world is to itself, if the actual world is itself a
world in which p is true, then there is such a world as the closest world in
which p is true-namely, the actual world. But if, as is normally assumed to
be the case with a counterfactual conditional, p is not actually true but
contrary to fact, then it seems at least conceivable that there should be no
closest world in which p is true--either because there are two or more
worlds in which p is true that are equally close to the actual world and
closer than any other such world, or else because, for any world in which p
is true, there is a closer world in which p is true, so that there is an infinite
series of ever-closer such worlds.
In order to overcome these potential difficulties, analysis (1) above is
rejected by some philosophers and replaced by something like this:
(2) 'If it had been the case that p, then it would have been the case that
g' is true if and only if q is true in all of the closest possible worlds in
which p is true.
If it should turn out that of all the worlds in which p is true there is just
- See Robert C. Stalnaker, 'A Theory of Conditionals', in Nicholas Rescher (ed. ), Studies inLogical Theory, American Philosophical Quarterly Monograph 2 (Oxford: Blackwell, 1968), reprinted in Jackson (ed. ), Conditionals.
See David Lewis, Counterfactuals (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973). \nCOUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS
a
one that is the closest, then analysis (2) effectively reduces to analysis (1).
But if two or more worlds in which p is true are equally close and no such
world is closer than them, then (2) requires that all of these worlds be
worlds in which q is true if the counterfactual conditional in question is to
be true. And if there is an infinite series of ever-closer worlds in which pis
true, then (2) requires that all of the worlds after a certain point in the
series be worlds in which q is true if the counterfactual conditional in
question is to be true. One consequence of (2) is that 'If it had been the
case that p, then it would have been the case that must be deemed true if
there is no world in which p is true--that is to say, if p is impossible
because in that case it is vacuously true that q is true in 'all of the closest
worlds in which p is true, there being no such worlds. But this seems
harmless enough. We can say that the counterfactual conditional itself is
vacuously true in such circumstances, to distinguish such a case from the
more interesting ones which arise when p is possible.
Conditional excluded middle and
'might counterfactuals
One important difference between analysis (1) and analysis (2) is that only
the former implies the truth of a principle known as "conditional excluded
middle' where counterfactual conditionals are concerned. * If we use the
formula 'p → q' to represent a counterfactual conditional of the form 'If
it had been the case that p, then it would have been the case that q', then
this principle may be represented as follows:
(CEM) pqVpChina
It is easy to see why (CEM) fails according to analysis (2). For suppose that
q is true in some but not all of the closest possible worlds in which p is true,
so that not-q is true in all the remaining closest possible worlds in which p
is true. In that case, (2) implies that "If it had been the case that p, then it
would have been the case that q' and 'If it had been the case that p, then it
would have been the case that not-q' are both false, whereas (CEM)
requires that if one of these conditionals is false then the other is true.
* For discussion, see Robert C. Stalnaker, 'A Defense of Conditional Excluded Middle', in the
very useful volume edited by W. L. Harper, R. C. Stalnaker, and G. Pearce, Ifs (Dordrecht: D. Reidel,
1981).
141\n142
CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
a
However, this means that, if we accept analysis (2), we cannot regard acounterfactual conditional of the form 'p qas being logically equivalent to the negation of one of the form pana', that is, as beingequivalent to a statement of the formu (phug)'. But then we may askwhether a statement of the latter form is equivalent to any form of counterfactual conditional at all. Many philosophers think that the answer is'Yes', calling the kind of counterfactual conditional involved a ' might'counterfactual. This is a counterfactual conditional of the form 'If it hadbeen the case that p, then it might have been the case that q', which may berepresented by the formula 'p + q. So, the proposal is to accept thefollowing logical equivalence as defining the logical relationship between'might' counterfactuals and would counterfactuals:
(DMC) p0qHn (png)
(DMC) defines the 'might counterfactual 'If it had been the case that P.
then it might have been the case that q as having the same truth conditionsas 'It is not the case that: if it had been the case that p, then it would havebeen the case that not-q'. Thus, for example, "If I had tossed this coin, thenit might have landed heads' is taken to be logically equivalent to 'It is notthe case that if I had tossed this coin, then it would not have landed heads'. Obviously, however, analysis (1) leaves no scope for such a distinctionbetween 'would and 'might counterfactuals: effectively, it treats allcounterfactuals as 'would' counterfactuals.
The question of transitivity
Despite this important difference between analyses (1) and (2), the twoanalyses have several other important features in common--which is why Ishall focus chiefly on the simpler analysis (1) from now on. In particular, both analyses imply that certain patterns of inference which are arguablyvalid for indicative conditionals are not valid for counterfactual conditionals. For example, both analyses imply that would counterfactualsare not transitive, are not contraposable, and are not subject to strengthening. That is to say, both analyses classify as invalid the following three inferencepatterns:
(Trans) p O994r, therefore por(Contr)pq, therefore ng coup
р\nCOUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS
(Stren) p q, therefore (p & r) (9
That (Stren) is invalid is certainly intuitively plausible, as the following
apparent counterexample demonstrates: one may surely accept as true the
'would counterfactual 'If I had struck this match, then it would have
caught fire' without having to accept as true the would counterfactual 'If I
had struck this match and at the same time held it under water, then it
would have caught fire'. Apparent counterexamples to (Trans) and (Contr)
can also be constructed, though it is more debatable how plausible these
alleged counterexamples are. As we shall see in Chapter 10, the alleged
invalidity of (Trans) is crucial for certain counterfactual analyses of caus
ation, so what is at issue here is no mere technicality. What is indisputable,
however, is that (Trans) is invalid according to both analysis (1) and analy
sis (2), so that one can uphold the validity of (Trans) only if one is pre
pared to reject both of these analyses and adopt some alternative analysis.
Take analysis (1), for instance. According to (1), p => q' and 907 rare
both true just in case q is true in the closest world in which p is true and ris
true in the closest world in which q is true. Suppose, then, that both of
these 'would counterfactuals are in fact true. Even so, if the closest world
in which p is true is not as close as the closest world in which q is true, it
may none the less be the case that r is not true in the closest world in which
p is true--and if this happens to be the case, then, according to analysis (1),
the 'would counterfactual 'p 17 p is not true, contrary to what (Trans).
demands.
One of the most famous putative counterexamples to (Trans) is the
following, which is due to Robert Stalnaker and concerns J. Edgar Hoover,
one-time head of the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the United States:
'If J. Edgar Hoover had been born in the Soviet Union, then he would have
been a communist; and if J. Edgar Hoover had been a communist, then he
would have been a traitor; therefore, if J. Edgar Hoover had been born in
the Soviet Union, then he would have been a traitor'' It may seem plaus
ible to accept the premises of this argument as true and yet to reject the
conclusion as false, contrary to what (Trans) demands. And according to
analysis (1) the explanation, once again, would be that all the worlds in
which Hoover is born in the Soviet Union, including the closest such
world--which is a world in which he is a communist--are less close than
the closest world in which Hoover is a communist: so that even though he
is a traitor in the latter world--for it is a world in which he is a United
a a
a
s See Stalnaker, 'A Theory of Conditionals'.
143\nCAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
States citizen holding a high public office that is incompatible with allegiance to communism--it need not follow that he is a traitor in the closestworld in which he is born in the Soviet Union.
Of course, we are not really in a position to evaluate this explanationuntil we have a clearer idea of what it might mean to say that one world is'closer' than another to the actual world, which is a matter we shall lookinto shortly. But, even in advance of doing this, we may suspect that theproposed explanation is incorrect, because we may suspect that what iswrong with the inference under examination is just that it involves anambiguity. According to this diagnosis, the inference concerning Hoover isnot an illustration of the supposed fallacy of transitivity, but simplyinvolves a straightforward fallacy of equivocation. Roughly speaking, thesuggestion is that the consequent of the first conditional in the Hooverargument does not really express the same proposition as is expressed bythe antecedent of the second proposition in that argument, because bothof the clauses concerned are elliptical or abbreviated--and are abbreviations of different sentences. Thus, it may be said, what we really mean bythe first premise of the Hoover argument is something like this: 'If J. EdgarHoover had been born in the Soviet Union, then he would have been a
Soviet citizen and a communist--whereas what we really mean by thesecond premise is something like this: 'If J. Edgar Hoover had been a
communist and had (still) been a United States citizen, then he would have
been a traitor'. If this diagnosis is correct, then, clearly, the fact that the
premises of the Hoover argument are plausibly true while its conclusion is
plausibly false cannot be taken to show that (Trans) is an invalid form of
inference for 'would' counterfactuals, since, on this diagnosis, the Hoover
argument does not really constitute an inference of the form specified by(Trans).
a
However, it may be urged against the foregoing diagnosis of the error in
the Hoover argument that it is suspiciously ad hoc and that it gives us noassurance that similar diagnoses will be able to explain away all other
putative counterexamples to (Trans). Even if we sympathize to some extentwith the diagnosis that has been offered in this case, what we really need todo, if we are to challenge the putative counterexamples to (Trans) in asystematic way, is to advance and defend an alternative analysis of 'wouldcounterfactuals which does not have as a consequence the invalidity of(Trans). I shall suggest such an alternative analysis later, after we havediscussed the notion of closeness between possible worlds. And again Iremark that one important reason why we should be concerned with the
144\n145COUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS /
status of (Trans) is that it bears directly on the adequacy of certain
counterfactual analyses of causation.
The notion of closeness' between possible worlds
a
It is now high time that we examined the notion of closeness' between
possible worlds. Whatever view we may take as to what possible worlds
are--if indeed we think that they really exist at all--we may agree that
worlds may be distinguished from one another in terms of the proposi
tions that are or are not true 'in' them. Clearly, if w, and w, are two distinct
worlds, the same propositions cannot be true in both of them. But, even so,
it may be that a vast majority of the propositions that are true in w, are also
true in w, and vice versa--in which case, we may say that w, and w, are,
overall, very similar to one another. (Of course, it may still be true that w,
and w, differ from one another in respect of the truth or falsity of infinitely
many propositions, so that there is a sense in which there are no more
propositions in respect of whose truth or falsity these worlds differ than
there are propositions in respect of whose truth or falsity they agree. But
this is rather like the fact that a line of finite length can have a large part
which is very similar in length to the whole line, even though the whole
line contains both infinitely many points that are contained within the part
and also infinitely many points that are not. ) Conversely, it may be that
worlds w, and w, differ with respect to the vast majority of propositions
that are true in them, in which case we may say that w, and w, are, overall,
very dissimilar to one another. In between these extremes, we can envisage a
spectrum of intermediate cases, so that any two worlds can, in principle, be
compared with one another as to their degree of overall similarity. And
then we can say, quite simply, that one world, w, is closer to the actual
world than is another world, w, , just in case w, is, overall, more similar to
the actual world than w, is. Of course, it may be that, in many cases, we
cannot easily judge which of two worlds is in fact closer to the actual
world--but that, it seems, is a purely epistemological problem, not a meta
physical one. The utility of our talking in terms of closeness between
possible worlds does not depend upon our always being able to determine
which of two worlds is closer to the actual world, but only upon our being
able to do this in many of the cases which matter--and perhaps this is an
ability we do have.
However, things are not really as simple as I have represented them so\n146
far, because
| CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
not all propositions may be of equal weight when it comes toassessing the overall similarity between different possible worlds. Considerfor instance, those propositions which concern the laws of nature whichobtain in a certain possible world, and contrast these with the propositionswhich concern individual matters of fact in that world-facts about whatindividual objects exist, what properties they have, and what relations theystand in to one another. We may be able to envisage two different possibleworlds which are very similar to one another in respect of individualmatters of fact and yet which differ significantly in respect of their laws ofnature. Even more easily, we may be able to envisage two different possibleworlds which are very similar to one another in respect of their laws ofnature and yet which differ greatly in respect of individual matters of fact. Should we say that a difference between two worlds in respect of their lawsof nature is more important than a difference between them in respect ofindividual matters of fact, when we are judging how similar these worlds
are to one another overall? It may seem obvious that our answer to thisquestion should be 'Yes'. But in fact it may be that our answer should
depend on the purposes for which we are comparing the worlds in question. In other words, it may be that our judgements of overall similarity
between worlds should be sensitive to our motives for making such
judgements. That in turn would mean that such judgements do not have a
purely objective basis in the nature of the worlds we are comparing, but a
partly subjective basis in our motives for wanting to compare them.
The problem of deterministic worlds
An example may help to make vivid what is at stake here. Suppose that I
have in my hand a stone and that I am wondering whether or not I shouldregard as true the following counterfactual conditional: "If I had let go ofthis stone a moment ago, then it would have fallen to the ground'. According to analysis (1), what I must do is to consider whether, in the closest
possible world in which I let go of this stone a moment ago, the stone fellto the ground--where, by the closest such possible world is meant thatworld, of all the worlds in which I let go of this stone a moment ago, whichis most similar to the actual world in respect of the truth-values of thepropositions which matter most for the purposes of this comparison. Butwhich propositions are those? Obviously, there are many possible worlds inwhich I let go of the stone a moment ago but it did not fall to the ground\nCOUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS |
because in these worlds, for example, somebody else caught the stone as
soon as I let it go, or the stone was attached by a piece of string to the
ceiling, or a net was suspended between my hand and the floor, or. .. . The
list of such possibilities is clearly infinite. But, on the assumption that none
of the possibilities appropriately listed here obtains in the actual world, it
seems natural to say that none of these worlds is the closest possible world
in which I let go of the stone a moment ago. Notice that all of these
possibilities concern individual matters of fact. But consider now the laws
of nature which obtain in this and other possible worlds. Clearly, there are
possible worlds in which our law of gravitation does not hold and in some
of these worlds, too, the stone does not fall to the ground when I let it go,
even though no one else catches it, it is not attached to the ceiling by a
piece of string, there is no net suspended beneath it, and so on. However,
once again, it seems natural to say that none of these worlds, either, is the
closest possible world in which I let go of the stone a moment ago, because
a difference in the laws which obtain in different worlds is a very important
difference, outweighing a great deal of similarity between them in respect
of individual matters of fact.
But now we begin to approach a difficulty. If the laws of this, the actual
world, are deterministic in character, and thus permit no exceptions, then
any world which is exactly similar to the actual world in respect of its laws,
but which differs from the actual world in respect of any individual matter
of fact which obtains at a certain time, must also differ from the actual
world in respect of individual matters of fact which obtain at all earlier
times--and thus must differ in respect of a great many individual matters
of fact. For example, assuming the laws of the actual world to be determin
istic, any possible world in which the laws of the actual world obtain but
which is unlike the actual world in that I let go of the stone a moment ago
must also be unlike the actual world in respect of individual matters of fact
at all preceding times. Consequently, if such a world is judged to be the
closest possible world in which I let go of the stone a moment ago, then
analysis (1) is committed to the truth of infinitely many counterfactual
conditionals of the form: 'If I had let go of this stone a moment ago, then
such-and-such would have been different at an earlier time t'. But it may
strike us as being far from natural to say that all of these counterfactuals
are true.
The obvious way around this problem is to insist that, when it comes to
judging overall similarity between worlds for the purposes of evaluating
a counterfactual conditional, the closest possible world in which the
147\n| CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
antecedent of the conditional is true should be regarded as a world whichis indistinguishable from the actual world in respect of individual mattersof fact up to the time at which the state of affairs mentioned in the antecedent obtains--thus, in our example, up to the time at which I let go ofthe stone. However, the consequence of insisting upon this is that one canno longer regard the closest world in which the state of affairs mentionedin the antecedent of the counterfactual obtains as being a world in whichthe laws of the actual world hold without exception: for, assuming theselaws to be deterministic, any world which is indistinguishable from theactual world in respect of individual matters of fact up to the time at whichthe state of affairs mentioned in the antecedent is supposed to obtain andin which the laws of the actual world hold without exception must be aworld which is also indistinguishable from the actual world in respect of
what subsequent individual matters of fact obtain--so that it must be a
world in which, as in the actual world, the state of affairs mentioned in the
antecedent of the counterfactual conditional does not obtain.
It seems, then, that we are compelled to deny that similarity in respect of
the laws which hold in the actual world and another possible world always
outweighs in importance any amount of difference between these worlds
in respect of individual matters of fact when we are concerned to evaluate
a counterfactual conditional. It seems that we must say that exact similarity
in respect of past individual matters of fact (past, that is, with respect to the
time of the state of affairs mentioned in the antecedent of the conditional)
always outweighs in importance a minor dissimilarity in respect of the
laws which obtain in the two worlds, where this dissimilarity is required
in order to allow the worlds to differ in respect of the state of affairs
mentioned in the antecedent of the conditional. "
Backtracking counterfactuals and
context-dependency
However, we have not yet reached the bottom of this issue, for it seems
clear that sometimes, at least, we do want to assert as true certain so-called
'backtracking counterfactual conditionals, of the form 'If so-and-so had
See further David Lewis, 'Counterfactual Dependence and Time's Arrow', Nolls 13 (1979), 455-76, reprinted in Jackson (ed. ), Conditionals, and also Jonathan Bennett, 'Counterfactuals andTemporal Direction', Philosophical Review 93 (1984), 57-91.
148\nCOUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS | 149
happened at time t, then such-and-such would have been different at a
time earlier than ť. For example, we may want to assert as true something
like this: 'If I had let go of this stone a moment ago, then I would have
decided a little while earlier to do so'. Clearly, though, if we insist that the
closest possible world in which I let go of this stone a moment ago must be
one which is indistinguishable from the actual world in respect of indi
vidual matters of fact obtaining up to a moment ago, then we must main
tain that such a world is one in which I did not decide a little while earlier
to let go of the stone. And according to analysis (1), that will require us to
judge the counterfactual conditional now at issue to be false, contrary to
our original intention. We should not, then, insist on the point in question,
but must be prepared to be more flexible.
In fact, matters get even more complex than this. It may be that, for
certain purposes, we want to judge as true our original counterfactual
conditional, 'If I had let go of this stone a moment ago, then it would have
fallen to the ground', while for other purposes we want to judge as true the
counterfactual conditional whose consequent is the negation of the con
sequent of the first conditional, namely, "If I had let go of this stone a
moment ago, then it would not have fallen to the ground. Why might we
want to judge the latter as true? Well, suppose that the stone is a precious
one which is fragile: in that case, we may judge that if I had let go of the
stone, I would have made an effort to catch it and would have succeeded in
doing so--so that it would not have fallen to the ground. (Indeed, we may
judge that I would have made this effort on the grounds that if I had let go
of the stone, I would have done so with a prior intention of catching it
this last counterfactual being, of course, a backtracking one. ) Now, accord
ing to analysis (1), it cannot be the case that both of these counterfactual
conditionals are true--that is, both "If I had let go of this stone a moment
ago, then it would have fallen to the ground' and 'If I had let go of this
stone a moment ago, then it would not have fallen to the ground. At least,
they cannot both be true if the same possible world is selected as the closest
possible world in which I let go of the stone, for the purposes of evaluating
these conditionals. But, for different reasons, we may indeed want to
evaluate both of these conditionals as true. We may want to judge as true
the conditional 'If I had let go of this stone a moment ago, then it would
not have fallen to the ground', for the reason that, the stone being precious,
I would have made a successful effort to catch it. But, equally, we may want
to judge as true the conditional 'If I had let go of this stone a moment ago,
then it would have fallen to the ground', for the reason that the stone is a\n| CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
heavy object and that heavy objects which are unsupported fall to theground. It seems silly to insist that I must choose between these two judgements, because both of them seem perfectly reasonable things to say inappropriate conversational contexts. Certainly, I shouldn't assert bothconditionals in the same conversational context. But the lesson seems to bethat, when we are concerned to compare possible worlds for overall simi
larity to the actual world for the purposes of evaluating counterfactualconditionals, different features of those worlds count as more important indifferent conversational contexts. ?
Thus, in the case of our stone, when the focus of our conversation is thenatural behaviour of heavy objects, it is reasonable to use a standard of
similarity between worlds which allows us to evaluate the counterfactual
conditional (If I had let go of this stone a moment ago, then it would have
fallen to the ground' as being true. But when the focus of our conversation
is the natural human propensity to save precious objects from harm, it is
reasonable to use a standard of similarity between worlds which allows us
to evaluate that same counterfactual conditional as being false. Now, of
course, in a perfectly good sense, this is not in fact the 'same' counterfac
tual conditional in the two conversational contexts: it is the same con
ditional sentence that is being used in the two conversational contexts, but
given that in one context it is judged to express a true proposition while in
the other it is judged to express a false proposition, we must clearly say that
the same conditional sentence expresses different propositions in these
different contexts of its use. In short, counterfactual conditional sentences
are, in respect of their propositional content or meaning, context
dependent. It seems that we must say this whether or not we endorse a
possible-worlds analysis of counterfactual conditionals such as analysis (1)
or analysis (2). But if we do endorse either of those analyses, we must
accommodate the context-dependency of counterfactual conditionals by
acknowledging the context-dependency of the standards whereby we judge
one possible world to be more or less similar to the actual world than
another possible world is. This in turn means that 'similarity' between
possible worlds is not a purely objective matter which rests solely on the
nature of the worlds in question, but is a partly subjective matter which
turns on the conversational purposes for which we assert counterfactual
conditional sentences. This is not to say that the truth or falsity of a
See further my 'The Truth about Counterfactuals', Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995), 41-59, where the theoretical background to much of what follows is explained in detail.
150\nCOUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS
counterfactual conditional is partly a subjective matter, only that appropri
ate standards of similarity between possible worlds for evaluating counter
factual conditionals must be selected on a partly subjective basis: once
those standards have been selected, however, the question of whether or
not a given counterfactual conditional is true by those standards may be a
purely objective matter.
The question of transitivity again
We are now in a position to return to some earlier business. Earlier on, I
suggested that putative counterexamples to the transitivity of
counterfactuals--that is, to the inference pattern (Trans)--may be diag
nosed as involving a fallacy of equivocation rather than as genuine coun
terexamples to (Trans). But I conceded that it looks suspiciously ad hoc to
press this charge by claiming that, where such putative counterexamples
are concerned, some of the counterfactual conditionals involved have ellip
tical or abbreviated antecedents or consequents. However, we are now able
to offer an alternative and more sustainable version of this sort of diag
nosis. We can urge that, whenever we are presented with a putative coun
terexample to (Trans), we are only able to judge the premises to be true
and the conclusion to be false if we adopt a shifting standard of similarity
between possible worlds for the purpose of evaluating the counterfactual
conditionals concerned--and that the use of such a shifting standard
amounts to a kind of equivocation.
Consider again the Hoover argument: "If J. Edgar Hoover had been born
in the Soviet Union, then he would have been a communist; and if J. Edgar
Hoover had been a communist, then he would have been a traitor; there
fore, if J. Edgar Hoover had been born in the Soviet Union, then he would
have been a traitor'. If we are to judge the premises of this argument to be
true and its conclusion to be false, must we not vary our assumptions as to
which features of a possible world are more important for the purpose of
assessing its degree of overall similarity to the actual world? For example,
in evaluating the first premise as true, we must be regarding as relatively
unimportant the fact that, in the actual world, Hoover was a United States
citizen: for we are assuming that a world in which Hoover is born in the
Soviet Union and remains a Soviet citizen is significantly closer to the
actual world than is a world in which he is born in the Soviet Union and
later becomes a United States citizen. On the other hand, in evaluating the
151\n152 | CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
second premise as true, we must be regarding as far from unimportant thefact that, in the actual world, Hoover was a United States citizen: for we areassuming that a world in which he is a communist and a United Statescitizen is significantly closer to the actual world than is a world in which heis a communist and emigrates to another country with a communistregime. There is nothing inevitable about that assumption, however: onecan perfectly well imagine a conversational context in which it would benatural to judge as true the counterfactual conditional 'If J. Edgar Hooverhad been a communist, then he would have emigrated to the Soviet
Union'. In fact, for virtually any counterfactual conditional we can envisage some conversational context in which it would be natural to judge that
conditional as being true. But the point about the Hoover argument is thatwe cannot--I suggest--envisage a single conversational context in which it
would be natural to judge its premises to be true and its conclusion to befalse. If that is so, then the Hoover argument, construed as having true
premises and a false conclusion, does indeed involve a kind of equivocation. And that means that it cannot fairly be represented as constituting a
genuine counterexample to (Trans).
An alternative analysis of counterfactuals
However, we cannot leave matters there. If (Trans) is not an invalid infer
ence pattern, then neither analysis (1) nor analysis (2) can be correct, for
both of these analyses imply that (Trans) is invalid. We can only uphold
(Trans) if we are prepared to uphold an alternative analysis--one which
implies that (Trans) is valid. One such alternative analysis that might be
proposed is the following: ®
(3) 'If it had been the case that p, then it would have been the case that
' is true if and only if (a) in every sufficiently close possible world
P→q is true and (b) either there is some sufficiently close possible
world in which p is true or else in every sufficiently close possibleworld q is true.
In clause (a), 'P→means "It is not the case that both p and not-q', or,
equivalently, 'Either not-p or else d--that is to say, 'p →q' is a so-called
material conditional. Analysis (3) may look complicated, but it is not so
See again my "The Truth about Counterfactuals', where I also explain in more detail why wehave reason to doubt that there are any genuine counterexamples to (Trans). .\nCOUNTERFACTUAL CONDITIONALS | 153
really. Clause (b) of analysis (3) requires of a true counterfactual con
ditional either that its antecedent be, in an appropriate sense, a possible
truth or else that its consequent be, in an appropriate sense, a necessary
truth. In most ordinary cases, the first of these alternatives will obtain. As
for clause (a) of analysis (3), this requires of a true counterfactual con
ditional that it implies the corresponding 'strict conditional, that is, that it
implies that the corresponding material conditional be, in an appropriate
sense, a necessary truth. The senses of possibility' and 'necessity' in oper
ation here are not those of unqualified metaphysical possibility and neces
sity, however, for we are only concerned with truth in 'sufficiently close
possible worlds, not with truth in possible worlds without any restriction
(although, in some contexts, every possible world without restriction will
count as 'sufficiently close"). But what do we mean by "sufficiently close? ?
The answer, of course, is that what counts as sufficiently close depends on
the conversational context. For a given conversational context, there will be
a single standard of similarity between possible worlds and, relative to that
standard, a single measure of sufficient closeness. It is easy to verify that
analysis (3) implies that (Trans) is a valid inference pattern. It is also easy to
verify that analysis (3) implies that neither (Contr) nor (Stren) is a valid
inference pattern, that is, that counterfactual conditionals are not contrap
osable and are not subject to strengthening. It is worth noting, too, that
analysis (3), like analysis (2) and unlike analysis (1), supports the distinc
tion between 'would' and 'might counterfactuals as defined by (DMC)
and does not support the principle of conditional excluded middle,
(CEM).
This is not the place for me to mount a full-scale defence of analysis (3).
I mention it simply to show that there is a feasible analysis of counterfac
tual conditionals which represents them as being transitive and which can,
with some plausibility, be appealed to in support of a diagnosis of the
alleged counterexamples to transitivity as involving, in reality, a fallacy of
equivocation. The most important lesson of the present chapter, however,
is that counterfactual conditionals have a context-dependent propositional
content and that any analysis of such conditionals which appeals to the
notion of 'closeness' between possible worlds will have to accommodate
this context-dependency by acknowledging the context-dependency of our
standards of similarity between possible worlds. To the extent that this
implies that there is a subjective element amongst the factors which deter
mine the propositional content of a counterfactual conditional sentence
on any given occasion of its use, we may harbour some doubts as to
a\n154 | CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
whether counterfactual conditionals provide suitable materials for theanalysis of various kinds of statement--such as causal statements anddisposition statements--which are ordinarily thought of as reportingpurely objective matters of fact. This is an issue to which I shall return inChapter 10, where we shall be looking at counterfactual analyses ofcausation. \n9
CAUSES AND CONDITIONS
Causal statements and the relata of causation
a
Early in the previous chapter, I remarked that there seems to be an intimate
relation between counterfactual conditionals and causal statements--that,
for example, someone who asserts 'The explosion caused the collapse of
the bridge would normally take this causal statement to imply the coun
terfactual conditional 'If the explosion had not occurred, then the bridge
would not have collapsed'Even so, it may be doubted whether the relation
between these statements is strictly one of entailment--that is, that it is
logically impossible that the causal statement be true and the counterfac
tual conditional be false--and it may also be doubted whether a relation of
entailment holds between these statements in the opposite direction. If the
two statements entailed one another, it would be open to us to maintain
that the causal statement can be analysed by means of the counterfactual
conditional and thus be regarded as having the same propositional content
or meaning as the latter. But it is most implausible to maintain this. As we
shall see in the next chapter, this still leaves open the possibility that a
causal statement such as this is analysable with the help of counterfactual
conditionals in some more complex way. But before looking into that
possibility, we need to examine some more general issues concerning the
nature of causation and discuss some other views about the meaning or
analysis of causal statements.
One very important question that we must ask concerning causation is
this: given that causation is a relation, what is it a relation between? In
other words, what are the relata of the relation of causation? --assuming,
indeed, that we can properly speak of the relation of causation, for it may
be possible to urge, on the contrary, that the verb 'to cause' is not univocal
and does not always signify the same relation on every occasion of its use.
In the case of the causal statement we considered a moment ago-- The\n156 | CausatiON AND CONDITIONALS
explosion caused the collapse of the bridge'--it seems clear that the puta
a
a
tive causal relata being referred to are particular events, the explosion being
said to be the cause, or at least a cause, of which the bridge's collapse is said
to be an effect. And, indeed, many philosophical accounts of causation
assume that causal relata--causes and effects--are always and only par
ticular events. But not all philosophers of causation agree with this view.
For instance, as we shall see in Chapter 11, some wish to draw a funda
mental distinction between "event causation', which is a relation between
particular events, and what they call agent causation, which they generally
conceive to be a relation between an agent, such as a particular human
being, and a particular event. Other philosophers maintain that causation
is a relation between states of affairs, or facts, rather than between events, or
at least that 'fact causation' is a basic and irreducible species of causation,
even if event causation should also be recognized as a genuine species of
causation in its own right. ' In support of their position, such philosophers
would point to our use of such statements as "The victim died because he
swallowed poison', which entails both 'The victim swallowed poison' and
'The victim died', where each of the latter two statements expresses a state
of affairs which the speaker takes to be a fact. The suggestion, then, is that
what is being stated in such a case is that one fact caused another that the
fact that the victim swallowed poison caused, or brought about, the fact
that the victim died. Other philosophers, however, would urge that when
such a statement is made, what is really being offered is a causal explan
ation rather than an account of what caused what. For these philosophers,
there is a fundamental distinction to be drawn between causation and
causal explanation, with causation being a relation between particular
events whereas causal explanation typically involves a relation between
sentences, statements, or propositions. ? On this view, then, we may causally
explain why it is the case that the victim died by stating that the victim
swallowed poison, but should still insist that the reason why the explan
ation is correct, if it is correct, is that a particular event of the victim's
swallowing some poison caused the particular event of the victim's death.
See, for example, D. H. Mellor, The Facts of Causation (London: Routledge, 1995) and Jonathan
Bennett, Events and their Names (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988), 21 ff.
See, for example, Donald Davidson, 'Causal Relations', Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), 691
703, reprinted in his Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980) and also in
Ernest Sosa and Michael Tooley (eds. ), Causation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). \nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS |
Event causation
Later in this chapter, I shall return to the issue of whether or not causation
can ever properly be regarded as a relation between facts or states of affairs.
For the time being, however, I shall concentrate on issues concerning
statements of event causation, that is, statements of the form 'Event c
caused event e', where c is said to be the cause, or at least a cause, of e. What
does a statement of this form mean? What we are ideally looking for, in
answer to this question, is a way of expressing the truth conditions of such
a causal statement in terms which do not themselves involve any causal
concepts--the point of the latter requirement being that an analysis of
causation should not be circular. It may be, of course, that no such answer
to our question is possible, because it may be that the concept of 'cause' is
basic and unanalysable. But, it seems, the only way to find out whether or
not this is so is to try to answer our question: if we discover that, despite
our best efforts to do so, we fail, then that will give us some reason to
suspect that the concept of 'cause' is indeed basic and unanalysable.
Before we look at some putative answers to our question, I should say
something about the distinction, implicit in what I have just said, between
speaking of the cause of a given effect, e, and speaking of a cause of e.
Clearly, there is a perfectly good sense in which an effect may have more
than one cause, not least because causation is a transitive relation: if c
caused e and d caused c then d caused e--and yet c and d must clearly be
different causes of e in such a case, because no event can be a cause of itself.
Of course, on the assumption that a cause must precede its effect, c and d
will, in such a case, be events occurring at different times. However, it is
also possible for each of two or more events occurring at the same time to
be causes of a given effect, e--although, barring some kind of over
determination of e by these causes, no one of these causes will be a suf
ficient cause of e. By a 'sufficient cause of an event, e, I mean an event, or
conjunction of events, whose occurrence causally necessitates the occur
rence of e. It may perhaps be, of course, that a given event, e, has no
sufficient cause in this sense, because it is conceivable that some events
occur at least partly by chance. But let us ignore this complication for now:
we shall return to it later, when we come to consider probabilistic concep
tions of causation. Then, one thing that we could mean in speaking of the
cause of an event, e, is its sufficient cause at a certain time, t--which might
be a single event, s occurring at t, or might be a conjunction of several
a
C,
e
a
157\n158 | Causation and Conditionals
different events occurring at t, each of which was only a 'partial cause of e. There are some further complications involved in this issue, which I shalldiscuss later. For the moment, however, it will be easier if we restrictourselves to the notion of one event's being a cause of another event, without concerning ourselves with the question of when and in whatsense it is proper to speak of the cause of any given event. That understood, our original question reduces to this: what are the truth conditionsof a statement of the form 'Event c was a cause of event e'?
The 'Humean'analysis of causation and its
problems
Perhaps the most famous answer to this question was given by DavidHume, though it is open to debate whether he actually accepted thisanswer himself. The answer is as follows:
(1) Event c was a cause of event e if and only if (a) cpreceded e and (b) c
and e are, respectively, events of types T, and T, such that every eventof type T, is followed by an event of type Tz.
(1) expresses what is commonly called the 'constant conjunction' analysis
of event causation, so called because it implies that what makes one event a
cause of another, over and above the fact that the first event precedes the
second, is the fact that events of the first kind are 'constantly conjoinedwith--universally followed by--events of the second kind. It certainlyappears that analysis (1) meets the main desideratum of an answer to our
question, because no causal concept is explicitly employed in its explanation of what it means to say that one event was a cause of another, so that
the analysis cannot apparently be charged with circularity (unless, perhaps, it can be argued that the analysis implicitly relies in some way upon causalconcepts for its interpretation). However, despite this virtue, analysis (1) isfaced with many difficulties, some of which appear to be fatal.
One such difficulty is the problem of determining how the types ofevents mentioned in (1) are to be individuated. Clearly, not every feature ofthe particular events c and e can be deemed relevant to determining the
Hume, Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principlesof Morals, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge and P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), 76. For doubtsabout whether Hume accepted this definition himself, see Galen Strawson, The Secret Connexion: Causation, Realism, and David Hume (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989).
· See David\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS
с
a
types to which they may be said to belong, for the purposes of the analysis
offered by (1). For if we deem every such feature to be relevant, then we
must allow that there are types to which cand e can be said to belong of
which c and e, respectively, are the sole members. And then the truth of
clause (b) of (1) will follow trivially from the truth of clause (a), implying,
absurdly, that any two events occurring at different times are related as
cause to effect. But which features of c and e can be deemed relevant to
determining to which types they may be said to belong, for the purposes of
analysis (1)? This may not be a question that is easy to answer without
compromising the analysis of causation that is being offered. Consider, for
instance, the fact that if event c is indeed a cause of event e, then one
feature of c is that it is a cause of an event of some type to which e belongs.
(There must presumably be some type to which e belongs--but if there is
not, then analysis (1) is doomed in any case. ) Suppose, then, that e is an
event of a certain type, TỪ. That being so, there is a perfectly good sense in
which c is an event of the following type: 'event that is a cause of an event
of type T, '. Call this type, to which c belongs, T. Now, assuming that a
cause always precedes its effects, it is evidently the case that every event of
type T, --that is, every event that is a cause of an event of type T--is
followed by an event of type Ty, so that clause (b) of analysis (1) is satisfied.
However, regarding clause (b) as being satisfied for this sort of reason
would obviously render analysis (1) completely trivial and hence incapable
of revealing anything interesting about the concept of causation. The root
of the problem here lies, of course, in the fact that type T, in this case has
been individuated in terms of a feature of c which involves its causal
relationship to e. So, in order to avoid this sort of problem, we must
apparently stipulate that, for the purposes of analysis (1), the types T, and
T, invoked in that analysis should not be individuated in terms of any
features of cand e which involve a causal relation between them. In effect,
this may be seen as reinforcing the requirement that analysis (1) should not
be circular. However, what right have we to assume, quite generally, that
any two causally related events belong to types which can be individuated
without reference to the causal relation between those events?
Even if this potential difficulty with analysis (1) can be overcome, other
difficulties remain. In some cases, it seems, clauses (a) and (b) of analysis
(1) may be satisfied in respect of a pair of events c and e, even though cand
e are causally quite unrelated, because c and e belong, respectively, to cer
tain types T, and T, which happen to have very few instances, all of which
happen, quite accidentally, to stand in the relation of temporal precedence
159\n| CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
required
how it actually is.
a
с
by clause (b) of (1). For instance, it might be that T, is a rare typeof subatomic event and T, is a rare type of astronomical event, but that itjust so happens that every event of type T, is followed by an event, somewhere in the universe, of type Ty. The charge being raised against analysis(1) here, then, is that it fails to distinguish between genuinely causal conjunctions of events and purely accidental conjunctions of events. Indeed, the cogency of this charge, while made vivid by examples involving raretypes of event, is not dependent upon the availability of such examples. Itstill has force even if we suppose that the event-types to which c and ebelong are frequently instantiated. The objection, in effect, is that analysis(1) misrepresents a causal relation between two events as holding in virtueof what may be nothing more than a cosmic accident or coincidence. Theobjection may be pressed home by asking why facts concerning other pairsof events quite distinct from cand e should have any bearing on the issueof whether or not c and e stand in a causal relation to one another, sincecausation seems to be a relation which connects a given cause with a giveneffect quite independently of their relations to other events (unless, ofcourse, those other events are intermediate events in a chain of causationlinking the given cause with the given effect, which is beside the point asfar as the present objection is concerned). The objection may also besupported by the observation that the analysandum of (1), 'Event c was acause of event è', plausibly implies the counterfactual conditional 'If c had
not occurred, then e would not have occurred', whereas the analysans of(1), 'c preceded e and c and e are, respectively, events of types T, and T, such that every event of type T, is followed by an event of type Tı', plainlydoes not imply that counterfactual conditional. The reason why the analysans of (1) cannot imply that counterfactual conditional is simply that theanalysans only has implications regarding what is actually the case, whereas the counterfactual conditional concerns what would have been thecase if the world had been in some respect different from
a
The counterfactual approach to event causation
In the face of these difficulties, most philosophers now hold out little hopefor analysis (1) or anything much like it. But what may be offered in itsplace? One obvious suggestion would be, quite simply, to appeal to thecounterfactual conditional just mentioned, giving us as our sought-foranalysis the following:
160\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS | 161
(2) Event c was a cause of event e if and only if c occurred and e
occurred and if c had not occurred, then e would not have occurred.
a(2) is a counterfactual analysis of event causation, but a particularly simple
one which is, fairly evidently, inadequate. It is inadequate not least because,
although in many ordinary circumstances it is plausible to maintain that a
causal statement of the form 'Event c was a cause of event é implies a
counterfactual conditional of the form 'If chad not occurred, then e would
not have occurred', circumstances can also arise in which, if an actual
cause, s of a certain event, e, had not occurred, then some other event, ch
would instead have caused e and so e would still have occurred. We shall
examine this kind of circumstance and its implications for counterfactual
analyses of causation more fully in Chapter 10. Another difficulty with
analysis (2), however, is that its analysans, 'c occurred and e occurred and if
c had not occurred, then e would not have occurred, does not necessarily
imply its analysandum, 'Event c was a cause of event é', because such a
counterfactual conditional can be true even if cand e are, plausibly, events
which are not related as cause to effect. For instance, let c be the event of
Napoleon's birth and let e be the event of Napoleon's death: the counter
factual conditional 'If Napoleon's birth had not occurred, then Napoleon's
death would not have occurred is plainly true--and yet it would be
unnatural to say that Napoleon's birth was a cause of Napoleon's death.
Of course, it might be urged in reply that although this would not be a
natural thing to say, it may none the less be true. Consider, then, another
kind of counterexample to analysis (2). Sometimes, one event is a part of
another event: for instance, the event of my arm's going up on a certain
occasion apparently includes, as a part, the event of my hand's going up on
that occasion, since my hand is a part of my arm. Consequently, it seems
that the following counterfactual conditional is true: 'If my arm's going up
had not occurred, then my hand's going up would not have occurred.
Indeed, the following counterfactual conditional also seems to be true: 'If
my hand's going up had not occurred, then my arm's going up would not
have occurred. But if both of these conditionals are true, analysis (2)
implies that each of these events is a cause of the other--which cannot be
the case, because causation is an asymmetrical relation. Indeed, it seems
right to say that neither event can be a cause of the other, since, plausibly, a
part cannot be a cause of a whole of which it is a part, nor can a whole be a
cause of one of its own parts. It seems right to insist, in fact, that a cause
and any one of its effects must be wholly distinct events, having no part in
a\n| Causation AND CONDITIonals
SO
common-and analysis (2) fails to imply this. Of course, this defect couldeasily be remedied, in one way or another, but since we have reason tobelieve that (2) has other, fatal flaws, there is little point in making thenecessary revision. Notice, by the way, that analysis (1) does not suffer fromthis particular defect, on the assumption that clause (a) of (1) means 'cwholly preceded e': so one option would be to add this clause to analysis(2). But against that suggestion it may be urged that it cannot be part of theconcept of causation that a cause precedes its effects, since 'backward'causation--the causation of an earlier event by a later event--is notinconceivable. Whether or not backward causation is metaphysically possible is another matter, however-since not everything that is conceivableis metaphysically possible--and that is a question we shall examine furtherin Chapter 18.
Probabilistic event causation
One defect from which both analysis (1) and analysis (2) appear to suffer isthat they leave no scope for the possibility that at least some causation maybe irreducibly probabilistic in character. Modern quantum physics seemsto require that we admit this possibility, because it implies that the occurrence of subatomic events of various kinds cannot, even in principle, bepredicted with certainty from prior states of affairs and the laws of physics. The 'probability with which such an event may be predicted to occur isnot, then, merely a measure of our ignorance of the event's underlyingcauses, for even if all of the causal factors relevant to its occurrence or non
occurrence could be taken into account, it would still remain to somedegree a matter of chance whether or not that event would occur. More
over, whether or not quantum physics demands that we operate with aconcept of probabilistic causation, the idea that a cause might not necessitate its effects but only affect the chances of their occurrence in some way isperfectly intelligible, and so arguably ought to be accommodated by anyadequate analysis of causality.
might this demand be met? It apparently will not do simply tosay something like the following:
But how
* For two recent
accounts of causation which attempt to accommodate probabilistic causation, see Paul Humphreys, The Chances of Explanation: Causal Explanation in the Social, Medical andPhysical Sciences (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1989) and D. H. Mellor, The Facts ofCausation (London: Routledge, 1995). For an influential earlier account, see Patrick Suppes, AProbabilistic Theory of Causality (Amsterdam: North Holland, 1970).
162\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS
(3) Event c was a cause of event e if and only if c occurred and e
occurred and the occurrence of c made the occurrence of e probable
to some degree.
For it might be that c made e probable to a very low degree, that is, made e
very improbable. On the other hand, it surely will not do to insist that c
made e probable to a very high degree, because e might be an event which,
in the absence of a would have been extremely improbable, but which the
occurrence of c made more probable, although still not highly probable
and in that case, it would still seem natural to say that c had a causal
influence upon e. So, in place of (3) we might want to propose something
like this:
(4) Event c was a cause of event e if and only if c occurred and e
occurred and the occurrence of c raised the probability of the
occurrence of e by some amount.
But what, exactly, does (4) mean? What does it mean to say that the
occurrence of c raised the probability of the occurrence of e by some
amount? Perhaps it can be taken to mean something like this: 'If chad not
occurred, then the probability of e's occurring would have been less than it
actually was'. This interpretation effectively makes analysis (4) a more
general version of the simple counterfactual analysis of causation, analysis
(2). For analysis (2) can then be seen as constituting a special case of
analysis (4), arising when it is true that, if c had not occurred, then the
probability of e's occurring would have been zero, so that e would not have
occurred. (Clearly, given that e did in fact occur, the actual probability of
e's occurring was not zero: so if it is true that, if c had not occurred, then
the probability of e's occurring would have been zero, then it is a fortiori
true that, if c had not occurred, then the probability of e's occurring would
have been less than it actually was--which implies, according to analysis
(4) under its present interpretation, that c was a cause of e. ) However, if (2)
is defective, as we have already seen, then so too, it seems, is (4), because it
includes (2) as a special case.
Perhaps, however, the lesson to be learnt here is merely that (4) should
not be interpreted in the counterfactual fashion just suggested. As an alter
native, we could appeal to the notion of conditional probability, interpret
ing 'the occurrence of c raised the probability of the occurrence of e by
some amount to mean something like this: 'The conditional probability of
e's occurring given the occurrence of c was higher than the conditional
163\n| CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
probability of e's occurring given the non-occurrence of 2. The notion ofconditional probability in play here is a perfectly familiar one. We frequently talk of the conditional probability of one event's occurring giventhe occurrence of another event. We say, for instance, that the conditionalprobability of my throwing a six, given a single throw of a fair die, is onein six, or one sixth. However, there are some difficulties attending thenotion of the conditional probability of one event's occurring given thenon-occurrence of another event: for the non-occurrence of an event isnot itself an event of any kind. So, if we cannot intelligibly talk of theconditional probability of e's occurring given the non-occurrence of g itseems that we shall have to talk instead of the conditional probability ofe's occurring given the occurrence of some alternative event distinct from5 and compare this with the conditional probability of e's occurringgiven the occurrence of c, in order to judge whether or not the occurrence of c can be said to have 'raised the probability of the occurrence ofe by some amount', in the sense now being mooted. This other eventwill, evidently, have to be some event whose occurrence was incompatiblewith the occurrence of a so as to exclude the possibility both events
occurring. However, in any given case we shall be able to envisage manyother events whose occurrence was incompatible with the occurrence ofevent s but which could have occurred instead of c. For instance, if c is a
certain event of my throwing a fair die, then, instead of c occurring, any
one of the following events, each of them incompatible with the occurrence of s could have occurred in place of it: I could have left the dieuntouched on the table, I could have crushed it, I could have put it in my
pocket, I could have thrown the die having loaded it beforehand. .. . Thelist is endless. How, then, do we decide with which conditional prob
ability we should compare the conditional probability of e's occurringgiven the occurrence of c, for the purposes of analysis (4)? Differentchoices of an alternative event to contrast with c may well result indifferent verdicts as to whether or not the occurrence of c 'raised theprobability of the occurrence of e by some amount, in the sense nowbeing proposed--and yet it surely cannot be the case that whether or notc was a cause of e depends upon such a choice of ours. It may perhaps bethat, in every conceivable case, there is just one correct and natural wayto make such a choice, but unless that is so, analysis (4), interpreted interms of the notion of conditional probability, would seem to face adifficult problem. My own suspicion is that this problem cannot besolved in any convincing way. But there, for present purposes, I shall
c
a
164\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS |
leave the issue of how best to understand the notion of probabilistic
causation.
Contributory causes and background conditions
So far, we have chiefly been concerned with the notion of what may be
called a 'contributory cause'--an event which is a cause of a given effect,
but not necessarily its complete' cause at any given time. Earlier, I used the
term "partial cause' to express this notion. The 'complete cause' at a given
time, t, of a given effect, e, will comprise all of e's contributory or partial
causes at t. Such a complete cause of e will be a sufficient cause of e, in the
sense explained earlier, if its occurrence causally necessitates the occur
rence of e. But, in view of the possibility of probabilistic causation, we
should allow that even a complete cause of e may leave open some chance
of e's not occurring. Now, I have been implicitly assuming that all of the
contributory causes which comprise an event's complete cause at any given
time are themselves events occurring at that time. But this assumption may
certainly be challenged. Consider, for instance, the complete cause, at a
time t, of a certain explosion, e, occurring immediately after t. Perhaps the
explosion occurred because an electric spark occurred at t in a room con
taining inflammable gas. However, the spark was certainly not a sufficient
cause of e, nor, plausibly, was it a complete cause of e. apparently, it was at
most a contributory or partial cause of e. Why? Because other causal fac
tors surely played a role in bringing about e--factors such as the presence
of both inflammable gas and oxygen in the room. But the presence of
inflammable gas in the room and the presence of oxygen in the room do
not seem to be aptly described as being events of any kind, since they
involve no kind of change. They are 'static conditions, or 'standing condi
tions, which seem to be more appropriately categorized as 'states of affairs'.
Against this, it may perhaps be said that we need to understand the term
'event' in a broad sense when we are dealing with the topic of causation:
and that "events', in a suitably broad sense of the term, include not only
changes but also what might be called 'unchanges' or 'non-changes". A
non-change, in this sense, is not to be confused with the non-occurrence of
an event, which I earlier declared not to be an event of any kind: rather, it
may be said, a non-change consists in some thing or things continuing to be
s For further discussion of this highly technical area of the philosophy of causation, see Daniel
M. Hausman, Causal Asymmetries (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998).
165\n166 | CausatiON AND CONDItionals
the same in respect of some property or relation, whereas a change consistsin some thing or things becoming different in respect of some property orrelation. Of course, it may be suspected that the dispute here is a merelyverbal one without any substantive ontological significance. I am not at allconvinced that this is so, but I will not attempt to adjudicate on the matterjust now, in view of its controversial nature. Let it simply be said that thereis a prima facie case for maintaining that at least some of the contributorycauses of an event such as our explosion, e, are not events of any kind but
entities belonging to a quite distinct ontological category--perhaps, indeed, 'states of affairs'. Later on, I shall look into an important objectionto this proposal, but before doing so I want to explore another issue whichthe example of the gas explosion can be used to raise.
e
I remarked earlier that we sometimes speak of the cause of a particular
event, such as our explosion, e. I also said that one thing we might mean bythis is e's sufficient cause at a certain time, t, if e has one. We might alsomean e's complete cause at t. But, ordinarily, we would mean neither of
these things in speaking of the cause of e. Rather, we would typically be
referring to some particular event or state of affairs which was at most a
contributory or partial cause of the given effect--in the case of our explo
sion e, something such as the electric spark. But why should we single out
such an event or state of affairs for special treatment in this way, when it is
only one of many contributory causes of the given effect? Is there really
something distinctive about an event such as the electric spark, in the case
of the explosion, which differentiates it objectively from other causal fac
tors equally responsible for that effect, such as the presence of inflammable
gas and oxygen in the room?
In answer to this question, one might be tempted to say that these other
causal factors were merely 'background conditions', whereas the occur
rence of the spark constituted a departure from the natural course of
events and thereby "triggered the explosion. But in response to this it may
be urged that what we regard as 'background conditions and what we
regard as a 'departure from the natural course of events', in any given case, is determined more by our attitudes and interests than it is by any purelyobjective feature of the situation at hand. A room in which inflammable
gas and oxygen are regularly present, such as, perhaps, a chemical labora
tory, is one in which every effort will be made to prevent the occurrence ofelectric sparks. A spark in such a room will be an 'unusual event andtherefore might be singled out by us as the cause of an explosion if oneshould occur. By singling out the spark in this way, we identify a kind of
a
a\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS |
a
causal factor over which we can try to exercise more careful control in
future, in otherwise similar situations. However, it is easy to envisage
another case in which an explosion is caused in exactly the same way, but
in a room in which electric sparks are a regular occurrence and the pres
ence of inflammable gas is something 'unusual-for example, an electron
ics laboratory into which gas has begun to leak from an underground pipe,
despite every effort to prevent this from happening. In such a case, it
seems, we would single out the presence of inflammable gas in the room as
being the cause of the explosion, in the colloquial sense now under scru
tiny. And yet, in respect of the causal factors present just prior to the
explosion, it seems that the two cases could be exactly similar to one
another. The implication appears to be that our singling out something as
being the' cause of a given effect, in the colloquial sense, does not reflect
any special causal role which the event or state of affairs in question played
in bringing about that effect, but merely reflects the practical importance
to us of that causal factor as one over which we could have exercised more
control. However, it is important not to let this subjective or pragmatic
aspect of our talk about the cause of an effect deceive us into imagining
that causation itself is not a wholly objective relation between events or
states of affairs which obtains quite independently of our attitudes and
interests. In order to avoid this danger, it is probably better, in metaphysical
and scientific contexts--as opposed, say, to legal and moral contexts
simply to avoid altogether any talk of the cause of an effect, in the col
loquial sense, and restrict ourselves to talk of contributory causes and
complete causes.
Fact causation
I now want to return to the important question of whether events, or states
of affairs, or entities of both of these ontological categories, can be causes
and effects. Recalling from Chapter 7 that a state of affairs which obtains is
a fact, what is at issue here is whether causation is exclusively a relation
between events or exclusively a relation between facts, or whether, alter
natively, it is a relation in which either a fact or an event can stand to either
a fact or an event. However, what I shall focus on, for present purposes, is
the narrower claim that at least sometimes one fact can be the cause of
* See further J. L. Mackie, The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1974), 34 ff.
167\n| CausatiON AND CONDITIONALS
a
another fact, for this claim has come under severe attack by a number ofphilosophers. ? A statement of fact causation, if we can allow such a thing, would be a statement of the form "The fact that p caused the fact that q'; or,
equivalently, one of the form 'The fact that p caused it to be the case that qThese are, admittedly, hardly the sorts of thing that anyone would actuallysay in everyday speech, but there are everyday statements which do appearto come quite close to these forms. One might say, for instance, somethinglike this: "It was because I dropped a vase of flowers that water was lying allover the floor', or, in slightly more stilted language, 'What was responsiblefor the fact that water was lying all over the floor was the fact that Idropped a vase of flowers'. It may seem to be a harmless regimentation ofsuch idioms to recast them in either of the uniform patterns that have justbeen proposed, giving rise to such sentences as "The fact that I dropped avase of flowers caused the fact that water was lying all over the floor' and"The fact that I dropped a vase of flowers caused it to be the case that waterwas lying all over the floor'. For the sake of simplicity and despite itsugliness, let us adopt the first of these two forms--The fact that p causedthe fact that q--as our canonical form for a putative statement of factcausation.
In order to see what is problematic about putative statements of factcausation, we need first to appreciate that causation is, very plausibly, apurely extensional relation--by which is meant that it is a relation whichholds between two entities, if it holds between them at all, independentlyof how those entities may happen to be described or designated. Thus, thetruth-value of a causal statement should not be affected by the way wechoose to refer to the entities which, according to that statement, arerelated as cause to effect. Consequently, one would suppose that, given atrue statement of fact causation of the form 'The fact that p caused the factthat q, one can transform this statement into another true statement offact causation in accordance with either of the following two principles. First, one ought to be able to replace 'p by any sentence logically equivalent to 'p-such as, for example, 'If not-p, then p (where this is understood as being a material conditional)--and likewise for 'q. Second, oneought to be able to replace any singular term occurring within 'p byanother singular term having the same reference--and likewise for 'q". Toillustrate the latter principle, consider the following statement of fact causation, which for present purposes we may presume to be true: "The fact
See, for example, Davidson, Causal Relations'.
7
168\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS |
that Napoleon was defeated in battle by the allied armies caused the fact
that the First French Empire collapsed. Now, since 'Napoleon' and 'the
victor of Austerlitz' denote one and the same person, the following, accord
ing to our second principle, should also be a true statement of fact caus
ation: 'The fact that the victor of Austerlitz was defeated in battle by the
allied armies caused the fact that the First French Empire collapsed. And,
indeed, this does seem to be a true statement, given that the first statement
was true, so that our second principle seems to be vindicated.
However, it appears that, by suitable applications of our two principles,
we can transform any putatively true statement of fact causation, of the
form 'The fact that p caused the fact that q, into another statement of fact
causation of the form 'The fact that r caused the fact that s', which we
would have to regard as likewise being true, where the only constraint on
Pand's' is that both of these sentences should themselves be true. In other
words, it appears that, if any statement of fact causation is true, then every
statement of fact causation which refers to any two facts whatever is true.
Thus, for instance, since it is a fact that grass is green and likewise a fact
that the earth is round, we shall have to accept that if any statement of fact
causation is true, then so too is the following statement of fact causation:
'The fact that grass is green caused the fact that the earth is round? And
this is plainly absurd. Consequently, it seems that we must deny that there
is any such thing as fact causation, for only if we do this can we deny that
there are any true statements of fact causation and so avoid the absurdity
just described.
a
The Slingshot Argument
I now need to demonstrate how our two principles give rise to the fore
going surprising result. There are several different ways in which this
can be done, but all of them involve a version of what is sometimes called
the "Slingshot Argument, which has wider application than merely to
statements of fact causation. Here is one version of that argument,
applied specifically to statements of fact causation. Let us start with the
assumption that the following is a true statement of fact causation:
* For a wide-ranging discussion of the Slingshot Argument in its many forms and applications,
see Stephen Neale, The Philosophical Significance of Gödels Slingshot', Mind 104 (1995), 761-825.
See also my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity and Time (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1998), ch. 11.
169\n170 | CAUSATION AND CONDItionals
(i) The fact that p caused the fact that q.
=
Now, elementary logic tells us that "p' is logically equivalent to 'p and a is
identical with a', whatever object 'a' may happen to name, because it is a
logical truth that everything, and thus also a in particular, is self-identical.
Equally, if slightly less obviously, `p' is logically equivalent to'a is identical
with the object, x, such that p and x is identical with a'. The latter can be
written using standard logical notation as 'a= (ix) (x = a & p)'. This is an
identity statement with the singular term "a' on one side of the identity
sign and a definite description, '(1x) (x = a & p)', on the other side. That "p
is logically equivalent to'a = (1x) (x = a & p) can be shown using Russell's
Theory of Descriptions, for according to that theory, this identity state
ment is analysable as being logically equivalent to the following statement,
again using standard logical notation: "(Ex) (x = a & p)'. And this in turn is
logically equivalent to'a= a & p', which, as we have already observed, is
logically equivalent to "p". Hence, applying the first of the two principles
discussed earlier, we can say that if (i) is a true statement of fact causation,
then so also is the following, for it arises from (i) simply by replacing 'p' in
(i) by the logically equivalent sentence 'a = (ix) (x = a & p)':
(ii) The fact that a = + (1x) (x = a & p) caused the fact that q.
Now, the second of the two principles discussed earlier permits us to
replace, in any true statement of fact causation, a singular term by any
other singular term denoting the same object, so as to produce another
true statement of fact causation. But it is easy to see that if is any true
sentence whatever, then the definite description (1x) (x = a & r)' denotes
the same object as is denoted by the definite description which appears in
(ii), '(1x) (x= a & p)', because both of these definite descriptions denote
the object a. For, just as we can prove that 'p is logically equivalent to
'a= (1x) (x = a & p)', so we can prove, in exactly the same way, that 'P is
logically equivalent to'a= (1x) (x = a & r)'. Hence, given that "p' and I are
both true, 'a= (1x) (x = a & p)' and 'a= (1x) (x = a & r) are likewise both
true, whence we can infer that the definite descriptions '(1x) (x = a & p)?
and (1x) (x = a & r)' both denote the same object, namely, a. Con
sequently, our second principle permits us to replace the first of these two
definite descriptions in (ii) with the second to produce the following
statement of fact causation, which must be true if (ii) is true:
=
(iii) The fact that a = (1x) (x = a & r) caused the fact that q.
Finally, drawing on the already established fact that P is logically\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS | 171
equivalent to 'a = (ix) (x = a & r)', we can once again apply our first
principle and replace the latter sentence in (iii) with P, resulting in:
(iv) The fact that r caused the fact that q.
Obviously, by a similar sequence of transitions, we can replace 'q in (iv)
with any true sentence '3', to produce, as a statement of fact causation
which must be true if (i) is true, the following:
(v) The fact that r caused the fact that s.
So what we have shown is that by successive applications of our two prin
ciples, we can derive (v) from (i) and therefore if (i) is true so, too, must (v)
be true, no matter what true sentences 'p and 3 may happen to be. Since
(i) was any arbitrarily chosen statement of fact causation which we
assumed to be true, we have thus established our surprising and seemingly
absurd result that if any statement of fact causation is true, then every
statement of fact causation which refers to any two facts whatever is true.
Possible responses to the Slingshot Argument
Although technically quite complicated, the foregoing argument seems, on
the face of it, to be relatively straightforward. Can we then conclude, as
some philosophers would like us to, that the notion of 'fact causation' is
absurd and hence that facts, unlike events, cannot be the relata of caus
ation? Of course, one alternative possibility might be to deny that caus
ation is an extensional relation. It might even be suggested that causation
as a relation between facts is a non-extensional relation, whereas causation
as a relation between events is an extensional relation, so that there are
really two quite different kinds of causation. But against this it may be
protested that any relation deserving of the name 'causation' must be a
purely objective relation between entities which holds quite independently
of how we describe or refer to the entities in question, and so cannot be a
non-extensional relation. The relation of causal explanation is non
extensional, it may be said, because an explanation is meant to confer
understanding and so may be sensitive to our ways of describing the facts
that we seek to explain. That being so, we can happily allow that a Slingshot
Argument cannot be used to reduce to absurdity the notion of one facts
causally explaining another fact (or of one true proposition's causally
explaining another true proposition, if that formulation is preferred). But, \n| CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
according to this way of thinking, causation and causal explanation mustbe sharply distinguished from one another, with causation beingexclusively an extensional relation between events.
Another possibility, however, is to challenge the Slingshot Argumentagainst fact causation while accepting that causation between facts willhave to be an extensional relation. The weak point in the Slingshot Argument lies, perhaps, in the transition from (ii) to (iii). For the legitimacy ofthis step depends upon our assuming that the definite description in (ii)and the definite description in (iii) which replaces it are both singularterms which possess the same reference, namely, the object a. However, the
reasoning which enabled us to make the earlier transition from (i) to (ii)appealed to Russell's Theory of Descriptions--and according to this the
ory, as interpreted by Russell himself, definite descriptions are not genuinesingular terms which refer to particular objects. Rather, Russell maintains
that a definite description is an incomplete symbol, which has no
independent meaning of its own and can only be understood within the
context of some sentence in which it appears. ? On Russell's view, when a
sentence which contains a definite description is analysed in accordance
with his Theory of Descriptions, the definite description disappears with
out trace and no singular term remains which could be thought of as
preserving any referential role that we might have been tempted to ascribe
to the definite description. Thus, for Russell, a sentence of the form "The
object which is F is G', in which we might be tempted to see the definite
description 'the object which is F' as a singular term, is analysed as mean
ing 'There is exactly one object which is Fand every object which is Fis G',
a sentence containing no term which makes singular reference to any
object whatever. So, it seems, if we appeal to Russell's Theory of Descrip
tions in order to legitimate the step from (i) to (ii), we cannot consistently
treat the definite descriptions in (ii) and (iii) as co-referential singular
terms, as we need to do in order to legitimate the step from (ii) to (iii).
This way of blocking the Slingshot Argument against fact causation
does, however, raise some further questions. In particular, how can we now
explain why it seemed perfectly satisfactory to make the transition from
"The fact that Napoleon was defeated in battle by the allied armies causedthe fact that the First French Empire collapsed to "The fact that the victor
of Austerlitz was defeated in battle by the allied armies caused the fact that
See Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathematica, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1927), introd. , ch. III.
172\nCAUSES AND CONDITIONS |
the First French Empire collapsed, relying simply on the fact that Napo
leon was indeed the victor of Austerlitz? One answer might be that in this
case we are assuming that the definite description the victor of Austerlitz'
is playing a genuinely referential role and nothing more than that, so that
the sentence containing it is not to be analysed in accordance with Russell's
Theory of Descriptions. " Another answer, compatible with the first, might
be that we can in fact construe these two statements of fact causation in
such a way that we might dispute the transition from one to the other
and that we can do this precisely when we construe the definite description
'the victor of Austerlitz' in the second statement as being amenable to
Russell's analysis. This is more evident if, in uttering the second statement
of fact causation, we stress or emphasize the definite description by our
tone of voice, saying "The fact that the victor of Austerlitz was defeated in
battle by the allied armies caused the fact that the First French Empire
collapsed'--for this then suggests that it was not merely the fact that Napo
leon was defeated which brought it about that the Empire collapsed, but
rather the fact that he was victorious at Austerlitz and later defeated.
Altogether, then, it seems that the Slingshot Argument against fact caus
ation can be effectively challenged or, at the very least, called sufficiently
into question for the notion of fact causation to remain worthy of serious
consideration alongside the notion of event causation.
W
10 For the view that definite descriptions can sometimes play a purely referential role, see Keith
Donnellan, 'Reference and Definite Descriptions', Philosophical Review 75 (1966), 281-304,
reprinted in Stephen P. Schwartz (ed. ), Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kinds (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1977).
173\n10
COUNTERFACTUALS AND
EVENT CAUSATION
The simple counterfactual analysis of
event causation
We saw in the previous chapter that it is a debatable matter whether causation is exclusively a relation between particular events, since there issomething to be said for the view that there can be causal relations between
facts. However, in the present chapter I shall be concerned solely with the
notion of event causation and more especially with the question ofwhether statements of event causation can be analysed with the help of
counterfactual conditionals. We have already looked at one possible counterfactual analysis of event causation, analysis (2) of the previous chapter, which I shall now refer to as the 'simple' counterfactual analysis, namely:
(SCA) Event c was a cause of event e if and only if c occurred and e
occurred and if c had not occurred, then e would not have
occurred.
с
I remarked, when discussing this proposal in the previous chapter, that one
of its defects is that it seems to imply that an event which is a part ofanother event may be a cause of the latter event, and likewise that an event
may be a cause of another event which is a part of the former event. So thefirst amendment that needs to be made to (SCA) is to include on its righthand side a clause stipulating that c and e are wholly distinct events, togive:
(SCA+) Event c was a cause of event e if and only if (a) cand e are whollydistinct events, (b) c occurred and e occurred, and (c) if c hadnot occurred, then e would not have occurred. \nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION | 175
Of course, this raises the question of what we mean by describing two
events as being wholly distinct. The obvious and correct thing to say is
that two events are wholly distinct just in case there is no event which is a
common part of both of them. (Here we should understand 'part in a
liberal sense, to mean 'proper or improper part': a proper part of some
thing is not identical with that thing, whereas an improper part of some
thing is identical with that thing--so that there is a trivial sense in which
everything is a part of itself, because everything is identical with itself. ) But
when, exactly, is one event a part of another, distinct event? Clearly, if one
event wholly precedes another event, then neither is a part of the other: but
this does not get us much further forward, since to say that one event
'wholly precedes' another event is just to say that every part of the first
event precedes every part of the second. In any case, we cannot necessarily
assume that, when an event c causes an event e, c wholly precedes e-on
the one hand because 'backward causation' may be possible and on the
other because simultaneous causation may be possible. Evidently, we can
not rule out simultaneous causation by claiming that no two wholly dis
tinct events can occur at the same time, for the latter claim is utterly
implausible. Indeed, it would seem, on the face of it, that two wholly
distinct events could occur not only at the same time but in the same place.
Whether or not that is really so is a matter to which we shall return in
Chapter 12, when we come to discuss the individuation of events and
various different possible criteria of identity for events. For the time being,
let us set aside such questions, however, and pretend that we have a suf
ficiently clear grasp of what is required for one event to be, or not to be, a
part of another, distinct event. '
Some difficulties for the simple analysis
Even setting aside such questions, the amended simple counterfactual
analysis of event causation, (SCA+), appears to have difficulty in dis
tinguishing between cause and effect and also in distinguishing between a
pair of events related as cause and effect and a pair of events which are
merely different effects of a common cause. The first sort of difficulty,
which is more profound than it may initially appear, may be illustrated as
For an extensive discussion of part-whole relations amongst events, see Judith Jarvis
Thomson, Acts and Other Events (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977). \n176 | CausatiON AND CONDITionals
follows. Suppose that a certain bomb contains a reliable mechanism whichenables it to be exploded, but only by pressing a certain button, and that, on a certain occasion, the button is pressed and the bomb duly explodes. Inthat case, the right-hand side of (SCA+) seems to be satisfied where c isthe explosion of the bomb and e is the pressing of the button: for these arewholly distinct events, both of which occurred, and it is surely true to saythat if the explosion of the bomb had not occurred, then the pressing ofthe button would not have occurred. (To deny the truth of this counterfactual conditional would be to imply that the pressing of the button mighthave occurred even if the explosion of the bomb had not occurred, whichis incompatible with the assumption that the bomb's mechanism was areliable one. ) But, according to (SCA+), this means that the explosion of
the bomb caused the pressing of the button, whereas what we want to say is
quite the reverse of this--that the pressing of the button caused the explosion of the bomb. Of course, (SCA+) allows us to say this too, because it is
surely also true that if the pressing of the button had not occurred, then
the explosion of the bomb would not have occurred (given, as we are, that
the bomb could only be exploded by pressing the button). However, we
should clearly not say that each event caused the other, first because caus
ation is an asymmetrical relation and secondly because we do not want to
say, without good reason, that a later event caused an earlier event, since
backward causation--even if it is possible--is surely not a commonplacephenomenon.
a
One answer to this apparent difficulty would simply be to add to the
right-hand side of (SCA+) a clause stipulating that c occurred earlier than
e. but this would have the disadvantage of ruling out backward causation
by definition, which we surely should not do. Another answer would be to
stipulate that the counterfactual conditional appearing in (SCA+) should
not be a so-called backtracking counterfactual (recalling our discussion
of such counterfactuals in Chapter 8). That is to say, in evaluating the
counterfactual conditional appearing in (SCA+) as being true or false, in
any given case, we should consider whether or not, in the possible world(s)
in which c does not occur but everything else happens just as in the actual
world up to the time of d's occurrence, e also occurs. In the case of our
bomb example, the counterfactual conditional 'If the explosion of the
bomb had not occurred, then the pressing of the button would not have
occurred turns out to be false according to this method of evaluation:
because, according to this method, the following counterfactual conditional, which contradicts the counterfactual conditional just mentioned,
е\nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND Event CAUSATION | 177
is plainly true: 'If the explosion of the bomb had not occurred, then the
pressing of the button would (still) have occurred. However, it is obvious
that this answer will again rule out backward causation by definition,
which we have already seen to be undesirable. Backward causation will be
ruled out because, if c occurs later than e, the proposed method of evalu
ation will assume that e occurs in the relevant possible world(s) in which c
does not occur, for any such world is stipulated to be one in which every
thing happens just as in the actual world up to the time of c's occurrence
and this will include the occurrence of e, given that e occurs before c. What
is required, clearly, is some account of the direction of causation which
does not simply identify this with the direction of time, that is, which
explains which of two events that are related as cause to effect is the cause
and which is the effect, without simply stipulating that the earlier of the
two is the cause and the later the effect. I shall not attempt to provide such
an account here, though I shall return to the issue in Chapter 18, when we
come to discuss the direction of time. But we should not underestimate the
difficulty of providing such an account which is both adequate in itself and
capable of being utilized, non-circularly, in a counterfactual analysis of
causation.
The other difficulty for (SCA+) mentioned a moment ago is that it will
not necessarily distinguish between a pair of events related as cause and
effect and a pair of events which are merely different effects of a common
cause. Consider, for instance, the following situation. Suppose that we
again have a bomb fitted with a reliable mechanism which enables it to be
exploded only by pressing a certain button, but that, quite independently,
the mechanism also enables a warning light to be activated, once more
only by pressing the button. The button is pressed and--either simul
taneously or in sequence--the bomb explodes and the warning light
flashes. We want to say that the pressing of the button caused both the
explosion of the bomb and the flashing of the light, but it seems that
(SCA+) commits us to saying, in addition, that the explosion of the bomb
caused the flashing of the light and vice versa, which is clearly mistaken.
Even if we stipulate that a cause must always precede its effect, we shall still
have a difficulty if, say, the flashing of the light precedes the explosion of
the bomb: for in that case, it seems, we shall still have to acknowledge the
truth of the counterfactual conditional "If the flashing of the light had not
a
- For more on the direction of causation, see ). L. Mackie, The Cement of the Universe: A Study of
Causation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1974), ch. 7. See also Daniel M. Hausman, Causal
Asymmetries (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998). \nCAUSATION AND CONDITIonals
occurred, then the explosion of the bomb would not have occurred andso (SCA+) will still require us to say that the flashing of the light causedthe explosion of the bomb, which we know to be false.
However, if we stipulate instead that the counterfactual conditional
appearing in (SCA+) should not be a backtracking counterfactual, then itseems that we can escape the difficulty, because this allows us to evaluate as
false the counterfactual conditional 'If the flashing of the light had notoccurred, then the explosion of the bomb would not have occurred, evenif we assume that the flashing of the light occurred before the explosion of
the bomb. Why? Because if we consider the possible world(s) in which theflashing of the light does not occur but everything else happens just as inthe actual world up to the time at which the flashing of the light occurs, wefind that such a world is one in which the causal processes leading to theexplosion of the bomb are already under way at the time at which the lightfails to flash, so that the explosion still occurs.
But it may be doubted whether this solution to the problem really
redounds to the credit of the counterfactual analysis of causation that is
being proposed. For it will be noted that in explaining how the solution
works, I made reference to certain 'causal processes' that were supposedly
already under way at a certain time. This suggests that we need an
independent grasp of the concept of causation in order to see how the
proposed counterfactual analysis of causation can escape the difficulty that
was raised earlier. But then the pretensions of that proposed analysis to
provide us with a genuine understanding of the concept of causation
seem to be undermined. However, this, I think, points to a more general
problem afflicting all counterfactual analyses of causation--a problem to
which I shall return later in this chapter.
The problem of causal overdetermination
Another serious difficulty, or set of difficulties, facing the amended simple
counterfactual analysis of event causation, (SCA+), arises from the possi
bility of various forms of causal overdetermination. I shall distinguish, in
particular, three types of cases of causal overdetermination, which I shall
call, respectively, cases of actual overdetermination, cases of pre-emption,
See further Marshall Swain, Reasons and Knowledge (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1981), 65 ff. See also Louis E. Loeb, 'Causal Theories and Causal Overdetermination', Journal ofPhilosophy 71 (1974), 525-44.
178\nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION |
and fail-safe cases. The three types of cases may be characterized as follows.
In each type of case, I am assuming that a certain event, s is a cause of
another event, e.
(1) In a case of actual overdetermination, e has another actual cause, d,
in addition to a such that, even if c had not occurred, d would still
have occurred and would still have caused e.
e
For example, suppose that an assassin's shot, s causes the victim's death, e,
but that a second assassin also fires at the same time as the first and that his
shot, d, not only also causes e but would still have caused e even if the first
shot, s had not occurred.
(2) In a case of pre-emption, another event, dy occurs, such that
although d is not actually a cause of e, if c had not occurred, then d
would still have occurred and would then have caused e.
Here we may say that d's causation of e was pre-empted by c's causation of
e. For example, suppose that the first assassin's shot, causes the victim's
death, e, but that a second assassin also fires a split-second later than the
first and that his shot, d, although not actually a cause of e, would have
caused e if the first shot, s had not occurred.
e,
(3) In a fail-safe case, if c had not occurred, then another event,
which did not actually occur--would have occurred and would then
have caused e.
For example, suppose that an assassin's shot, c, causes the victim's death, e,
but that there is a second assassin, who does not actually fire but who
would have fired if c had not occurred and whose shot, dh would then have
caused e.
Clearly, the main difference between the three types of cases lies in the
status of event d. In a case of type (1), d is an event which actually occurs
and which actually causes e. In a case of type (2), d is an event which
actually occurs but which does not actually cause e. In a case of type (3), d
is an event which does not actually occur at all. But in all three types of
case, if c had not occurred, then d would have occurred and would have
caused e, so that e would still have occurred. And this, of course, is why all
such cases, if they are possible, provide counterexamples to the amended
simple counterfactual analysis of causation, (SCA+): for they are all cases
in which the left-hand side of (SCA+) is true, because event c was a cause
of event e, and yet the right-hand side of (SCA+) is not true, because it is
179\n180 | CAUSATION AND CONDITionals
not true that, if c had not occurred, then e would not have occurred (sinceit is true, on the contrary, that if chad not occurred, then e would still haveoccurred).
Some possible responses to the problem
с
Of course, these putative cases of causal overdetermination only provide
convincing counterexamples to analysis (SCA+) if we can reasonably sup
pose such cases really do occur. But perhaps it can be argued that we
cannot. For example, it may be objected against putative cases of type (1)--
that is, putative cases of actual overdetermination--that the events c and d
in such cases, which are purportedly both actual causes of a given event es
are in fact merely parts of a compound event, call it c+d, which actually
causes e. Now, we must presumably acknowledge that if either cor d had
not occurred, then c+d would not have occurred. But we have already
been given that if chad not occurred, then d would still have occurred and
would have caused e. And we may presume, likewise, that if d had not
occurred, then c would still have occurred and would have caused e. So it
turns out that if we regard c + das actually causing e, we are still faced with
a problem of overdetermination, albeit now one of type (2), pre-emption.
For now, it seems, we must concede that even if c+d had not occurred,
either c would still have occurred or else d would still have occurred and
that in either case an event would still have occurred which--although not
actually a cause of e--would have caused e, so that e would still have
occurred. And this implies, according to (SCA+), that c+d was not, after
all, a cause of e. It seems, then, that we can save (SCA+) from counterex
amples of type (1) in this way only at the expense of generating further
counterexamples of type (2). In view of this fact, and because it also seems
likely that any defence of (SCA+) against counterexamples of type (2) will
equally serve as a defence of it against counterexamples of type (3), it
seems sensible to concentrate our attention upon counterexamples of
type (2), which is what I propose to do from now on.
e
One way in which we might attempt to defend (SCA+) against coun
terexamples of type (2) is to argue that if c, the actual cause of e, had not
occurred, then the event that d would have caused would not have been e,
but rather some numerically distinct, even though very similar, event.
• For doubts about the existence of genuine overdetermination of type (1), see Martin Bunzl, 'Causal Overdetermination", Journal of Philosophy 76 (1979), 134-50. \nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION | 181
Thus, it may be pointed out that if the first assassin had not fired, so that
only the second assassin had fired a split-second later, then the victim
would have been hit a split-second later than he actually was and would
quite probably have been wounded in a slightly different way, albeit still
fatally. This may encourage us to suppose that the event caused by the
second shot would not have been the very same event as the one that was
actually caused by the first shot. It may sound odd to say that the victim
would have died a different death', but that might literally be true. The
issue that confronts us here raises a question of transworld identity of the
kind discussed earlier, in Chapter 6--although now we are concerned with
the transworld identity of events rather than of material objects. We know
that such questions are difficult and contentious ones. And as yet we
haven't even determined how events are to be individuated or identified in
the actual world, let alone 'across possible worlds'--a matter to which we
shall turn our attention in Chapter 12. However, a few preliminary observa
tions may be in order here. First of all, it would be implausible to contend
that the precise time of an event belongs to its 'individual essence'--that is,
that one and the same event could not have occurred slightly earlier or
later than it actually did occur. It may be absurd to suppose that the Battle
of Hastings--that very conflict-could have occurred during the reign of
Queen Elizabeth I instead of in 1066, but it doesn't seem absurd to suppose
that it could have occurred a day earlier or later than it actually did. (Of
course, this supposition may open the way to a paradox, if we consider a
long series of possible worlds, in each successive member of which the
Battle of Hastings occurs a day later than in the previous one, for at the end
of this series we may have a possible world in which the battle occurs
during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I: but there may be a way to block
such a paradox, as we saw in Chapters 6 and 7, by denying that the accessi
bility relation between possible worlds is unrestrictedly transitive. ) In any
case, however, it would not be impossible, perhaps, to construct a plausible
type-(2) counterexample to (SCA+), that is, a pre-emption example, in
which, if event c had not occurred, the effect of event d would have
occurred at the very same time at which event e actually occurred--so that
it would be unwise to assume that merely by insisting that the precise time
of an event belongs to its individual essence we could defuse all type-(2)
counterexamples to (SCA+). (Indeed, if we try to defuse type- (1) coun
terexamples to (SCA+) in the way proposed earlier, we shall be faced
precisely with type-(2) counterexamples of the kind now being
contemplated. )\nCAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
Instead of insisting that the precise time of an event belongs to itsindividual essence, we might think of insisting instead that all of an event'scauses and effects belong to its individual essence. This would certainlyeliminate all putative type-(2) counterexamples to (SCA+), because nowwe would be saying that event e could not have occurred at all if it had notbeen caused by event c-that, for instance, the victim would have died a
different death if he had been killed by the second assassin rather than bythe first, simply because the death that he would then have died would
have been a death caused by a different shot. But the trouble with trying to
defuse type-(2) counterexamples to (SCA+) in this way, quite apart from
its inherent implausibility, is that it appeals to the very concept of eventcausation which (SCA+) is intended to analyse. Clearly, we need already tounderstand what causation is in order to understand what it means to say
that all of an event's causes and effects belong to its individual essence.
Furthermore, this proposal has the undesirable implication that true pro
positions concerning causal relations between events are metaphysically
necessary truths. That is to say, given that it is true that an event c caused
an event e, it will be metaphysically necessary-true in all possible
worlds-that this is so (or, at least, true in all possible worlds in which
either cor e exists). Why? Because if the property of being caused by event
cis an essential property of event e, then it is a property that e has in every
possible world in which e exists, so that in every such world it is true that
event e is caused by event c. But, however much we may disagree with
certain aspects of David Hume's philosophy of causation (allowing for the
disagreement amongst commentators as to what his true opinions really
were), one thing that Hume has surely taught us is that true propositions
concerning causal relations between events are contingent truths, not
metaphysically necessary ones. The necessity which causation involves is at
most 'natural' or 'physical' necessity, not metaphysical necessity.
The complex counterfactual analysis of
event causation
I shall now turn to a quite different strategy for dealing with type-(2)counterexamples to (SCA+). This strategy accepts that the counterexam
For an opposing view, see Sydney Shoemaker, 'Causal and Metaphysical Necessity', PacificPhilosophical Quarterly 79 (1998), 59-77.
31
182\nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION 183
ples are fatal to (SCA+) and attempts to replace (SCA+) by an alternative
counterfactual analysis of causation. There are many ways in which one
might try to carry out this strategy, but I shall focus on one in particular,
the key idea of which can be credited to David Lewis. A type-(2) coun
terexample to (SCA+), that is, a pre-emption example, presents us with a
case in which an event c causes an event e, even though it is not true to say
that if c had not occurred, then e would not have occurred: e would still
have occurred, because if c had not occurred, another event d would have
caused e. The lesson is that it is not necessary, for c to have caused e, that it
be true that if chad not occurred, then e would not have occurred. Now, let
us say that if it is true that if c had not occurred then e would not have
occurred, then e is 'counterfactually dependent upon' c. Then the lesson is
that it is not necessary, for c to have caused e, that e should be counterfac
tually dependent upon c. However, perhaps what we can propose, in place
of (SCA+), is something like the following analysis, which I shall call the
'complex counterfactual analysis of causation':
(CCA) Event c was a cause of event e if and only if (a) cand e are wholly
distinct events, (b) c occurred and e occurred, and (c) a chain of
counterfactually dependent events linked c to e.
What clause (c) of (CCA) means is this: there was a finite sequence of
actually occurring events, with c being the first member of the sequence
and e the last, such that each member of the sequence was counterfactually
dependent upon the immediately preceding member of the sequence. For
instance, suppose that there was a sequence of events of this kind which
possessed just three members, with c being the first member and e being
the last, and call the intermediate event of the sequence x. Then what is
required by clause (c) is that x should be counterfactually dependent upon
c and that e should be counterfactually dependent upon x. This in turn
means that the following two counterfactual conditionals should be true:
'If c had not occurred, then x would not have occurred' and 'If x had not
occurred, then e would not have occurred'. Now, before we try to see how
clause (c) is supposed to overcome the problem of pre-emption, we need to
appreciate that the solution to that problem which is being offered here
rests on the presumption that counterfactual conditionals are non
transitive (an issue that we discussed in some detail in Chapter 8). Clearly,
6See David Lewis, 'Causation', Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973), 556-67, reprinted with post
scripts in his Philosophical Papers, vol. 2 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986). See also Swain,
Reasons and Knowledge, 47 ff. \nCAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
if counterfactual conditionals are transitive, then the two counterfactual
conditionals just cited entail the following counterfactual conditional: 'If c
had not occurred, then e would not have occurred'. But this is precisely
clause (c) of the now-discredited (SCA+). So, if counterfactual con
ditionals are transitive, clause (c) of the new analysis, (CCA), entails clause
(c) of the old analysis, (SCA+), in which case (CCA) is vulnerable to all
the type-(2) counterexamples which afflict (SCA+). Hence, it is crucial for
the success of (CCA) that counterfactual conditionals may correctly be
regarded as non-transitive. This, however, already presents a difficulty for
(CCA), because, as I tried to show in Chapter 8, it is certainly debatable
whether counterfactual conditionals are non-transitive, my own view
being that they are not. However, I shall set aside such doubts for the time
being and assume, for the sake of argument, that counterfactual
conditionals are indeed non-transitive.
Pre-emption cases
How, then, is (CCA) supposed to overcome the problem of pre-emption?
To see how, consider again our pre-emptive assassination example. We
want to say that the first assassin's shot, c, caused the victim's death, e, even
though it is true that, if c had not occurred, then the second assassin's shot,
d, would have caused e, so that e would still have occurred. However, it
seems that (CCA) can accommodate this situation quite easily. According
to (CCA), the reason why we can say that c caused e is that there was a
chain of counterfactually dependent events linking c to e, which is perfectly
consistent with its being true that, even if c had not occurred, e would still
have occurred (given the non-transitivity of counterfactual conditionals).
Moreover, (CCA) enables us to deny that the second assassin's shot, d, was
actually a cause of the victim's death, e: for we may say that there was not a
chain of counterfactually dependent events linking d to e. At the same
time, we may say that there would have been such a chain linking d to e if c
had not occurred: so that (CCA) licenses us to say, as we want to, that if c
had not occurred, then d would have caused e. Finally, (CCA) even allows
us to uphold the transitivity of causation, which (SCA+), to its discredit,
does not (unless, of course, counterfactual conditionals are transitive). For,
clearly, even given that counterfactual conditionals are non-transitive, it is
still the case that if a chain of counterfactually dependent events links an
event x to an event y, and another chain of counterfactually dependent
184\nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION
events links event y to an event z, then there is a chain of counterfactually
dependent events linking event x to event z.
This way of handling pre-emption cases appears to presume, quite
plausibly, that in a case of pre-emption, some effect of the actual cause, c,
of event e prevents the completion of what would otherwise have been a
chain of counterfactually dependent events linking event d to event e. For
example, in the pre-emptive assassination case, we may suppose that the
entry of the first bullet into the victim's body not only caused certain fatal
tissue-damage but also, by causing the victim's body to move, prevented
the occurrence of the fatal tissue-damage that would have been caused by
the entry of the second bullet.
However, a problem apparently arises for analysis (CCA) in cases of late
pre-emption. These are cases in which the only effect of event c that pre
vents the completion of a chain of counterfactually dependent events link
ing the event d to event e is the event e itself. The problem now is that, in
such a case, it seems that there will not be a complete chain of counterfac
tually dependent events linking the actual cause of e, event c, to event e, so
that analysis (CCA) will not license us to describe event c as being a cause
of event e. Why? Because if the penultimate event in the putative chain of
counterfactually dependent events linking c to e had not occurred, the
occurrence of e would not have prevented the completion of such a chain
linking d to e, so that e would still have occurred. Hence, e is not counter
factually dependent upon the penultimate event in question, so that these
two events do not in fact belong to a chain of counterfactually dependent
events linking c to e. Discussion of late pre-emption cases can become
extremely complicated, however, so I shall not indulge in further discus
sion of them here. Suffice it to say that it is generally recognized that such
cases present a serious problem for counterfactual analyses of causation
along the lines of (CCA). For some philosophers of causation, this dif
ficulty merely provides an incentive to construct yet another, still more
elaborate counterfactual analysis of causation which can accommodate
cases of late pre-emption. But other philosophers, less enamoured of the
counterfactual approach, may be more inclined to see in such problems a
7 For discussion of the problem of late pre-emption and a proposed solution to it, see Lewis,
postscript E to 'Causation', Philosophical Papers, vol. 2, 193 ff. Lewis now rejects the solution
proposed there: see his 'Causation as Influence', Journal of Philosophy 97 (2000), 182-97. The issue
of the Journal of Philosophy in which this paper appears is a special issue on causation and contains
several other interesting papers on the subject. For another problem apparently raised for (CCA)
by pre-emption, see William K. Goosens, ' Causal Chains and Counterfactuals', Journal of
Philosophy 76 (1979), 489-95.
185\n186 CAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
sign that we would do better to abandon the counterfactual approach
altogether.
General objections to the counterfactual approach
So far, we have been trying to assess the merits of various counterfactual
analyses of causation by seeing how well they accommodate certain prob
lem cases. Our strategy has been to try to identify cases in which, plausibly,
the truth-value of a causal statement of the form 'Event c was a cause of
event e differs from the truth-value of the statement in terms of which,
according to a proposed counterfactual analysis, such a causal statement is
to be analysed. So far, we have not discovered a counterfactual analysis of
causation which uncontroversially accommodates every problem case that
we have been able to construct, but this still leaves open the possibility that
some more refined counterfactual analysis will be successful on this score.
But now I want to consider some more general reasons for doubting
whether any sort of counterfactual analysis of causation could be correct
remembering that a successful analysis of any concept should not even
implicitly rely upon the very concept being analysed for its interpretation,
since its doing so would render it circular and in this sense unenlightening.
Another general constraint which it seems reasonable to impose upon any
adequate analysis of causation is that it should represent causation as being
a purely objective relation between its relata, that is, as being a relation
which obtains between certain entities independently of human interests
and independently of how we may choose to describe those entities. How
ever, we have some grounds for suspecting that counterfactual analyses of
causation may not be able to meet either of these general constraints,
because of the very nature of counterfactual conditionals.
The circularity objection
In the first place, it may plausibly be argued that we very often need to
appeal to causal considerations for the purpose of interpreting counterfac
tual conditionals and evaluating them as being true or false. This may not
be immediately obvious if we adopt one popular account of the meaning
of a counterfactual conditional which was described in Chapter 6. Accord
ing to this account, a counterfactual conditional of the form 'If it had been\nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION 187
the case that p, then it would have been the case that q' is true if and only if
q is true in all of the closest possible worlds in which p is true. Nothing in
this statement of the truth conditions of a counterfactual conditional
seems to make any reference, either explicit or implicit, to causality. How
ever, we also saw in Chapter 8 that it is no simple matter to determine
which of various possible worlds in which a proposition p is true is the
closest, or most similar, to the actual world, for the purposes of evaluating
a counterfactual conditional as being true or false. We need to be able to
compare the worlds in question for similarity in various respects-notably,
for similarity in respect of certain particular matters of fact and similarity
in respect of certain natural laws. (We also, of course, need to make a
judgement as to whether similarity in one respect contributes more than
similarity in another respect to the overall similarity or dissimilarity
between any two worlds-a point to which I shall return shortly. ) Now, in
many cases, some of the particular matters of fact in question will surely be
causal matters of fact and some of the laws in question will surely be causal
laws. And this surely presents a problem for counterfactual analyses of
causation, as the following simple example suggests.
Suppose that we seek to evaluate as true or false a counterfactual con
ditional we discussed in Chapter 8, 'If I had let go of this stone a moment
ago, then it would have fallen to the ground'. Then we need to consider
whether, in the closest possible worlds in which I let go of this stone a
moment ago, it fell to the ground. Which are the closest such worlds?
However we decide to answer this question, once we settle upon an answer
to it the question will remain as to whether or not, in the worlds in
question, the stone falls to the ground. But whether or not it falls to the
ground in the worlds in question will clearly depend, at least in part, on
what causal matters of fact and what causal laws obtain in those worlds.
For instance, it will depend on whether or not, in the worlds in question,
the stone is supported by another object, whether or not it is attracted by
the earth's gravitational field, and whether or not the law of gravitation
holds universally, as we suppose that it does in the actual world. Thus,
whether or not the counterfactual conditional in question is actually true
or false will depend, at least in part, on whether or not certain causal
propositions are true in the closest possible worlds in which I let go of the
stone. It seems fair to object that, if this is generally the case with counter
factual conditionals-and more specifically with the counterfactual con
ditionals that are appealed to in counterfactual analyses of causation
then there is an implicit circularity involved in attempting to analyse causal\nCAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
statements in terms of counterfactual conditionals. Is it the case, then, withthe counterfactual conditionals that are appealed to in counterfactualanalyses of causation, that their truth or falsehood depends, at least in part, on what causal propositions are true in certain 'nearby' possible worlds? Surely it is, at least if the proposed account of the meaning of a counterfac
tual conditional is accepted. For a counterfactual analysis of a statement ofevent causation such as 'My letting go of this stone a moment ago was acause of the stone's falling to the ground' would typically appeal to somesuch counterfactual conditional as 'If I had not let go of this stone a
moment ago, then it would not have fallen to the ground'-and the latter
is precisely the sort of counterfactual conditional whose truth or falsehood
depends on what causal propositions are true in nearby possible worlds,
according to the proposed account of the meaning of a counterfactual
conditional. It seems, then, that an implicit circularity is involved in adopt
ing both that sort of account of the meaning of a counterfactual con
ditional and a counterfactual analysis of statements of event causation. At
the very least, it does not appear that someone who did not already grasp
the meaning of causal propositions could hope to acquire a grasp of their
meaning with the aid of such a combination of doctrines. This still leaves
open the question of which of those doctrines we should abandon but, on
balance, it seems more reasonable to abandon a counterfactual analysis of
causation than to abandon a possible-worlds analysis of counterfactual
conditionals, given that we must make a choice between them. I say this
because there are other reasons to doubt the adequacy of counterfactual
analyses of causation.
The objectivity objection
Another feature of the possible-worlds account of the meaning of counter
factual conditionals which apparently renders these conditionals unsuit
able for employment in an analysis of causation is one that was touched on
a moment ago. This is that, when determining which of various possible
worlds should be deemed the 'closest', for the purposes of evaluating acounterfactual conditional as being true or false, we need to make a
judgement as to whether similarity in one respect (say, in respect of certain
past matters of fact) contributes more than similarity in another respect(say, in respect of certain natural laws) to the overall similarity or dissimilarity between any of these worlds and the actual world. As we saw in
→→→
188\n189
Chapter 8, such a judgement is not one whose rightness or wrongness
turns simply on objective features of the possible worlds that are being
compared: it is, rather, a partly subjective judgement, which reflects the
conversational purposes for which we assert or deny a particular counter
factual conditional sentence. In different conversational contexts, one and
the same counterfactual conditional sentence might justifiably be assigned
different truth values by the same speaker, without this indicating any
change of opinion on the part of the speaker. Thus, the very same speaker
who, in one conversational context, is prepared to assert as true the coun
terfactual conditional 'If I had let go of this stone a moment ago, then it
would have fallen to the ground' might well, in another conversational
context, be prepared to assert as true the counterfactual conditional 'If I
had let go of this stone a moment ago, then it would not have fallen to the
ground'. In the first context, he might be making the point that heavy,
unsupported objects fall, whereas in the second context he might be mak
ing the point that sensible people take pains to catch precious, fragile
objects which they let go of. Different ways of assessing members of the
relevant range of alternative possible worlds for comparative 'closeness' to
the actual world enable one to evaluate both of these counterfactual con
ditional judgements as being true in the conversational contexts in which
they are made. Counterfactual conditional sentences are, as I put it in
Chapter 8, highly context-dependent in respect of their propositional con
tent. And, as I also remarked in Chapter 8, the distinctly subjective element
which their kind of context-dependency involves suggests that such sen
tences are ill-suited to capture the propositional content of causal state
ments, given that the latter purport to be purely objective expressions of
matter of fact. At the very least, it seems that one would have to stipulate
that the counterfactual conditionals utilized in any proposed counterfac
tual analysis of causal statements are to be interpreted in a way which is
suited to the sort of conversational context in which causal matters of an
appropriate kind are the subject of discourse. And this would once more
indicate that there is an implicit circularity involved in appealing to coun
terfactual conditionals in order to analyse the content of causal statements.
The more general lesson would once again be that, far from it being the
case that the meaning of counterfactual conditionals can throw light on
the meaning of causal statements, we need already to have a firm grasp of
the notion of causality in order to be able to interpret counterfactual
conditionals in ways that are appropriate to the conversational contexts in
which they are used.
COUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION\nCAUSATION AND CONDITIONALS
Alternative approaches
Where does all of this into which the poker is
any
leave us? It certainly leaves us, so far, without
satisfactory analysis of the meaning of statements of event causation, ofthe form 'Event c was a cause of event e'. Might it be possible to analysesuch a statement in a way which does not appeal to counterfactual conditionals? Perhaps, though I am not optimistic about this. One possibilitymight be to analyse singular causal statements of this form with the help ofstatements expressing causal laws, the suggestion being that any particularcausal relation between events must be an instance of some general causallaw. If laws are simply regarded as regularities or 'constant conjunctions'
amongst events of certain types, this proposal effectively reduces to theunsatisfactory 'Humean' analysis of event causation that we looked at in
Chapter 9. If laws are thought of in some other way-for example, as
involving relations of necessitation amongst universals-then the proposal
may be more promising. But it apparently still falls foul of the plausibleobjection that causation is a relation which either holds or fails to hold
between certain particular events quite independently of what generaltruths may or may not obtain in the world at large. It still seems perfectly
intelligible that there should be cases in which one event causes another
even though there is no general causal law whatever under which such a
case falls. Yet another possibility might be to analyse singular statements
of event causation in terms of statements asserting the transference of
some quantity, such as energy, from one object to another, the suggestion
being that all causal processes involve some such transference. 10 For
example, in the case of a stone whose falling to the ground has amongst itscauses the event of its being released, the stone acquires kinetic energyfrom the earth's gravitational field (although, more strictly, we should saythat the stone's potential energy, owing to its position in the earth's gravitational field, is converted into kinetic energy). Similarly, thermal energy istransferred from a hot poker to some colder water
view of laws favoured by David Armstrong: see his What is a Law of Nature? (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983). See further G. E. M. , 'Causality and Determination', in her Metaphysics and thePhilosophy of Mind: Collected Philosophical Papers, Volume II (Oxford: Blackwell, 1981), reprintedin Ernest Sosa and Michael Tooley (eds. ), Causation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). *For discussion, see Phil Dowe, Physical: Cambridge University Press, 3. Dowe himself distinguishes between a conceptual analysis of causation and an empirical analysis of causation (pp. 1 ff. ) and offers an empirical analysis of his
Causation (Cambridge2000), ch.
own (ch. 5).
190\nCOUNTERFACTUALS AND EVENT CAUSATION 191
plunged. However, these are scientific facts revealed by empirical investiga
tion, rather than suitable ingredients in a conceptual analysis of causation.
It is far from evident that 'transference' of some kind, even in the very
broadest sense of that term, is involved, as a matter of conceptual necessity,
in any process that deserves to be called 'causal'. After all, the 'Cartesian'
dualist who conceives of mind and body as substances of utterly distinct
natures, which none the less interact causally with one another, is ill
equipped to characterize such causal interactions in terms of the 'transfer
ence' of any quantity from mind to body or vice versa-and yet I think it
would be unfair to describe the dualist's proposal as being literally
inconceivable on that account. It may be, in the end, that we must simply
accept the notion of causality as being primitive and irreducible, like the
notions of identity and existence. Given the fundamental role that it plays
in our conception of the world, we should not be altogether surprised if
the notion of causality resists analysis in terms of any more fundamental
notions for it may be that the notion of causality is itself as fundamental
as any of our other notions are. \nTE\nPART IV
AGENTS, ACTIONS,
AND EVENTS
1\n\n11
EVENT CAUSATION AND
AGENT CAUSATION
Agents and agent causation
So far, our discussion of causation has focused chiefly on event causation,
although we have also examined the view that facts (or states of affairs) can
be causes and effects. However, as I mentioned in Chapter 9, many philo
sophers, particularly those concerned with the philosophy of action, con
sider that a further important species of causation is agent causation, in
which the cause of some event or state of affairs is not (or not only) some
other event or state of affairs, but is, rather, an agent of some kind. ' An
'agent', in the sense intended here, is a persisting object (or 'substance')
possessing various properties, including, most importantly, certain causal
powers and liabilities. A paradigm example of an agent would be a human
being or other conscious creature capable of performing intentional
actions. Indeed, some philosophers of action would like to restrict the term
'agent' to entities such as these and, correspondingly, restrict the term
'agent causation' to cases of intentional action. For present purposes,
however, I shall adopt a more liberal view, not least because we are not yet
in a position to distinguish clearly between those things that are, and those
that are not, capable of performing intentional actions, nor even to say
what is distinctive about intentional, as opposed to unintentional, action.
But later we shall see that there plausibly is something special about the
See, for example, Richard Taylor, Action and Purpose (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1966), chs. 8 and 9; Roderick M. Chisholm, "The Agent as Cause', in Myles Brand and Douglas
Walton (eds. ), Action Theory (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1976); and Timothy O'Connor, Persons and
Causes: The Metaphysics of Free Will (New York: Oxford University Press, 2000), chs. 3 and 4. For
an opposing view, see Donald Davidson, 'Agency', in Robert Binkley, Richard Bronaugh, and
Ausonio Marras (eds. ), Agent, Action, and Reason (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1971),
reprinted in Donald Davidson, Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980). \nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
causation of an event by an animate-and, more particularly, by arational-agent.
It cannot be denied that our ordinary ways of talking about actionsupport, at least superficially, the idea that agent causation is a distinctspecies of causation. As well as making statements of event causation, suchas 'The explosion of the bomb caused the collapse of the bridge', we saysuch things as 'The bomber caused the collapse of the bridge'-where, by'the bomber', we might be referring to an individual human being, or wemight be referring to an aeroplane. In short, there is no doubt that the verb'to cause' may take, as its grammatical subject, a noun phrase referring to apersisting object, either human or inanimate, quite as well as a nounphrase referring to a particular event. Moreover, since events and persistingobjects are entities belonging to quite distinct ontological categories, it isstrongly arguable that the verb 'to cause' must have a different sense when
a term referring to a persisting object figures as its grammatical subject
from the sense it has when a term referring to a particular event plays thatrole. This is brought out by the fact that, whereas it would not be
incongruous to say, for example, 'Smith and Jones together caused the
collapse of the bridge', it would indeed be incongruous to say, 'The explo
sion of the bomb and Jones together caused the collapse of the bridge'. The
latter sentence appears to involve a category mistake, rather like the one
that famously occurs in the sentence 'She came home in a sedan chair and
a flood of tears'-the anomaly in the latter case being that the sense in
which a person can be 'in' a sedan chair is quite different from the sense in
which a person can be 'in' a flood of tears. The lesson seems to be, then,
that event causation and agent causation are distinct species of causation,
because the sense in which an event can be a 'cause' is quite different fromthe sense in which an agent can be a 'cause'.
An analysis of agent causation, even if we accept this conclusion, that does not prevent us fromproposing that one or the other of these species of causation is 'reducible'to, or analysable in terms of, the other that agent causation is reducible toevent causation, or that event causation is reducible to agent causation. Areductionist thesis of this sort would maintain either that any statementHoweverof
* See Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind (London: Hutchinson, 1949), ch. 1.
196\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION 197|
agent causation can be analysed in terms of a statement in which no
notion of causation other than that of event causation is employed, or else,
conversely, that any statement of event causation can be analysed in terms
of a statement in which no notion of causation other than that of agent
causation is employed. Opposing either form of reductionism would be
the thesis that both species of causation exist but that neither is analysable
in terms of the other. In order to see what is at issue here, let us first look at
how one might attempt to reduce agent causation to event causation. And
let us take, as the canonical form of a statement of agent causation, the
following: 'Agent A caused event e. (An alternative and perhaps more
colloquial formulation would be 'Agent A brought about event e' or 'Agent
A made event e happen', but I shall adhere to the preceding formulation
because it explicitly employs the verb 'to cause'. ) Then the obvious sugges
tion would be that a statement of this form can be analysed along some
thing like the following lines:
(1) Agent A caused event e if and only if there was some event, x, such
that x involved A and x caused e.
Of course, analysis (1) is no clearer than the notion of 'involvement' which
it exploits. How, precisely, must an event 'involve' an agent A if, in virtue of
that event's causing an event e, A may be said to have caused e? If we
cannot spell out an appropriate notion of involvement, or can only do so
in a way which appeals, either explicitly or implicitly, to the notion of agent
causation, then analysis (1) will have failed. Perhaps, however, we can say
something like the following, at least to a first approximation: an event, x,
'involves' an agent, A, in the sense demanded by analysis (1), just in case x
consists in some change in one or more of the properties of A. (The
properties in question might be, but need not be, intrinsic properties of A:
they might equally be relational properties of A. ) For example, in the case
of an animate agent A, such as a particular living creature, an event which
is a movement of A is an event 'involving' A because a movement of A
consists in A's undergoing changes in the dispositions of its limbs and/or
changes in its spatial relations to its environment. Perhaps this will suffice,
if only for the time being, to clarify the notion of 'involvement' figuring in
analysis (1). (However, I should say that I am rather doubtful whether, in
the end, a satisfactory notion of 'involvement' really can be spelled out. )\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
Causative action verbs and basic actions
to appreciate some of the attractions, as well as some of thepotential limitations, of analysis (1), it is helpful to observe that manytransitive verbs of action have quite specific causal implications. Forinstance, when we describe one person as having killed another, we implythat the first person-the agent of the action-caused the death of the
second person. Even if 'killing' cannot be defined as simply meaning 'causing death', 'killing' does at least imply 'causing death'. Similarly, 'pushing'implies 'causing motion away from the agent', 'stopping' implies 'causingrest or cessation of motion', 'cutting' implies 'causing separation or div
ision', 'crushing' implies 'causing compression or decrease in volume', andso forth. Some of these causative action verbs, as we may call them, also
imply the specific means by which a certain kind of effect is caused by the
agent. For example, 'pushing' implies not merely 'causing motion away
from the agent', it implies 'causing motion away from the agent by the
application of pressure'. Similarly, 'cutting' implies 'causing separation or
division by the transverse movement of a sharp edge', whereas 'ripping'
implies 'causing separation or division by the application of tension in
opposite directions'. Certainly, we can very often say, when we describe an
agent's action by using a causative verb, by what means the agent caused
the kind of effect which that verb implies, even if the verb that we use does
not imply those specific means itself. For example, if we describe an agent
as having killed someone, and thus as having caused that person's death,
we may well also be able to say how the killing was done-say, by shooting,
or stabbing, or poisoning, each of which verbs do imply a certain kind of
means of causing a certain kind of effect.
In order
However, there is a special class of actions which seem to defy descrip
tion in these means-end terms. These are the so-called basic actions, such
as a human agent's spontaneous movement of one of his or her own
limbs. 3 For instance, when a human agent is described as having waved hishand, it is thereby implied that the agent caused a certain kind of motion
in his hand: but nothing is implied as to the means, if any, by which theagent did this. Indeed, if we were to ask such an agent how-in the sense of
he waved
See Arthur C. DantoPress, 1973), ch. 2. , 'Basic Actions', American Philosophical Quarterly 2 (1965), 141-8, andalso his Analytical Philosophy of Action (Cambridge: Cambridge University
198\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION
his hand, very likely his reply would be that he didn't do this by any means
at all: he would probably reply that he simply waved his hand. In contrast, a
human agent will, in general, know precisely how he pushed, pulled,
stopped, cut, crushed, or killed something or someone-that is to say, he
will know by what means he caused effects of the kinds implied by these
action verbs. It is tempting, then, to define a basic action as an action in
which the agent causes an effect of a certain kind, but not 'by' any means
whatever. (Of course, when a human agent waves his hand, certain muscu
lar and neural events will precede the motion of his hand and be causally
related to that motion. But it seems incorrect to say that the agent waves
his hand by means of' causing these muscular and neural events, of which
he is likely to know nothing. Indeed, even if one knows that such events
invariably precede hand motions of the kind occurring when one waves
one's hand, it seems more natural to say that one can cause the muscular
and neural events 'by means of' waving one's hand, rather than vice versa. )
The case for irreducible agent causation
The relevance of these observations to the analysis of agent causation
suggested above, analysis (1), is the following. On the one hand, the fact
that many causative action verbs imply a means-end structure to the
actions they describe seems to favour analysis (1). For the use of such a
verb to describe an action very often suggests an appropriate event, 'involv
ing' the agent, which can be appealed to for the purpose of analysing the
action in the manner proposed by analysis (1). For instance, suppose we
describe a human agent, A, as having killed someone else, B, by poisoning.
This is an instance of agent causation: A caused B's death. But we also
know by what means A caused B's death, namely, by administering poison
to B. But therefore, it seems, we can very easily identify an event, involving
A, which can be said to have caused B's death, namely, A's administration
of the poison to B. So it seems that analysis (1) is vindicated in this
instance. For here, it appears, is a case in which it is true to say that the
agent, A, caused a certain effect in virtue of the fact that a certain event
involving A caused that effect-namely, the event of A's administration of
the poison to B. On the other hand, the existence of the class of basic
actions threatens to defeat analysis (1), for in the case of a basic action, as
* I adopt a different definition of basic action in my Subjects of Experience (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1996), 151, for reasons I shall not go into here.
199\nwe have
AGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
defined it, there appears to be no suitable event involving the agentwhich can be called upon to provide the cause-in the event causationsense of 'cause of the effect which, in performing that action, the agentis said to cause. For example, when a human agent, A, spontaneously waveshis hand, what event, involving A, can we appeal to, for the purposes ofanalysis (1), as having been the cause of a certain kind of motion in A'shand? Nothing analogous to the event appealed to in the poisoning casewill be forthcoming, it seems, simply because, in a case of 'basic' action, theagent supposedly does not cause the given effect 'by' any means whatever: he simply causes it-that is to say, he causes it directly. Moreover, it wouldappear that there must be basic actions, if agents perform any actions at all: for if every action had a means-end structure, this would apparentlygenerate a vicious infinite regress, whereby the means of each action iscompelled to be the end of another.
However, at least in the case of inanimate agents, there appears to be a
way of avoiding such a regress and defending analysis (1). This is because
not all actions demand description in terms of causative verbs, that is, in
terms which imply that the agent, in performing the action in question,
caused some effect. An inanimate object can push or pull another object
and in so doing it causes the latter object to move in certain ways. But
when we ask by what means an inanimate agent can push or pull another
object, our answer is likely to make reference to behaviour of the agent
which is not properly described in terms of causative verbs. For instance,
an inanimate agent can push another object by rolling into it or by falling
on to it: but 'roll' and 'fall' are not causative verbs, so there is no reason to
suppose that the actions which they describe have a means-end structure.
Generally speaking, it is inappropriate to ask by what means an inanimate
object rolled into or fell on to another object. The first object's behaviour
will, of course, be subject to causal explanation, but in all probability we
shall explain why that object rolled or fell by referring to another object's
action upon it, rather than in terms of some further behaviour of the
object in question. Consequently, in the case of inanimate agents, theirnon-causative behaviour provides an obvious terminus to the threatenedregress, and a well-defined class of events involving' those agents to whichanalysis (1) can appeal. For example, if a boulder pushes a tree by rollinginto it, providing us with a case in which an inanimate agent (the boulder)causes motion of a certain kind in another object (the tree), we can plausibly reduce this instance of agent causation to one of event causation, inthe way proposed by analysis (1), by saying that in this case it was the rolling
200\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION 201
of the boulder-an event involving the boulder-which caused the motion
of the tree. And since the boulder's rolling is not itself a matter of the
boulder's causing anything, because 'roll' is not a causative verb, no further
question arises as to 'by what means' the boulder rolled. (Though this, as I
have just pointed out, is not to deny that the boulder's rolling can be
causally explained by reference to some other object's action upon it. )
Consequently, in such a case, no further fact of agent causation by the
boulder remains to jeopardize our claim to have analysed the boulder's
agency wholly in terms of event causation.
But it will be evident that matters are not so simple when we are con
cerned with animate agents, such as animals and human beings. When a
human agent spontaneously waves his hand, thus causing motion in his
hand, this seems not at all like the case of a boulder causing motion in a
tree by rolling into it. In describing the spontaneous waving of one's hand
as being a 'basic' action, we implied precisely that in such a case motion in
the hand was not caused 'by' any means whatever: that is, that there was no
behaviour or activity of the agent by means of which the agent caused
motion in his hand, in the way that by rolling the boulder caused motion
in the tree. Rather, what we seem to have in such a case is an instance of
irreducible agent causation. Animate agents, we may feel tempted to say, are
capable of spontaneous self-movement, which involves an agent's causing
motion in its own limbs or other body parts directly. However, it is likely to
be objected that this view of the matter is incompatible with a wholly
naturalistic conception of animals, including human beings, and their
causal powers. It may be urged that however much it may seem that ani
mals engage in 'spontaneous self-movement', in the sense just proposed, in
reality their agency must always be reducible to event causation, just as the
agency of inanimate objects plausibly is.
The problem of free will
But why 'must' this be so? There seems to be nothing unintelligible or
incoherent about the notion of spontaneous self-movement. Moreover, the
idea that there is this kind of irreducible agent causation holds out the
prospect of a solution to the problem of free will which dogs the reduction
ist approach to human action. If all human agency is ultimately just a
matter of one event's causing another, then, since the causal history of the
events supposedly involved in any instance of human agency will plausibly\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
back, through prior events, to times before the agent's birth. we seem to lose all sense of the agent's being genuinely responsible forthe author of his or her own actions. A human agent must then be seenas no freer, in reality, than the boulder which rolls into the tree, its rollingbeing caused by the action of some other object upon it, which action is inturn caused by yet earlier events--and so on back to the dawn of time. Acknowledging that there is room for a certain amount of probabilisticcausation between events provides no escape from this conclusion, since aboulder's behaviour would be no freer on that account than it would be ina perfectly deterministic universe.
be traceable
But how, exactly, would the existence of irreducible agent causation, inthe case of animate agents, provide a solution to the problem of free will?
In the following way. Suppose that, on a particular occasion, a humanagent, A, caused an event e, such as motion in A's hand, but that this
instance of agent causation is not reducible to one of event causation. That
is to say, suppose that it is not in virtue of some event's causing e that A
may be said to have caused e. Now, this still leaves open the question of
whether or not some prior event or events were causes of e and, if so,
whether or not that prior event or those prior events were causally suf
ficient for the occurrence of e. However, it is perfectly conceivable that no
prior event or combination of events was causally sufficient for the occur
rence of e, but that A's agency on this occasion was causally necessary for
the occurrence of e. That is to say, it may be the case that if A had not
caused e, then e would not have occurred, since prior events alone were not
causally sufficient for the occurrence of e. (This is perfectly compatible
with the suggestion that certain prior events were, none the less, causally
necessary for the occurrence of e. ) In that case, it seems, e occurred as a
consequence of A's agency and yet e was not causally determined by prior
events (nor, we may suppose, e have the probability of its occurrence
fully determined by prior events). Hence, A was causally responsible forwas genuinely the author of-e and in causing e acted freely.
But, it may be asked, was not A's causing e itself caused by some priorevent or events? If so, then was not the occurrence of e, after all, causally
determined by prior events (or, at least, was not the probability of e'soccurrence fully determined by prior events)? And if not, then was not A's? The
See Peter van Inwagenbasically sound. , An Essay on Free Will (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), ch. 3. Althoughvan Inwagen's argument has frequently been challenged, I think that it is
202\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION
proper answer to this question, I suggest, is that if A's causing e was, as is
being supposed, an instance of irreducible agent causation, then we should
not think of it as something which itself had a cause of any kind-but that,
at the same time, we should not think of it as something which, in lacking a
cause, must therefore have been a matter of pure chance. It is open to us to
say, instead, that A's causing e is subject solely to rational, not to causal,
explanation. That is, it is open to us to say that A caused e for a reason, while
denying that anything caused A's causing e. I shall say more about this
possibility in a moment.
Mental causation, rational choice, and freedom
of action
In the preceding few paragraphs, I have been trying to make out as good a
case as I can for the idea that agent causation is irreducible to event caus
ation, on the grounds that there are plausible cases of 'basic' action by
animate agents which involve irreducible agent causation-a basic action
being an agent's causing a certain event and yet not causing that event 'by'
any means whatever. However, an advocate of the thesis that agent caus
ation is always reducible to event causation may urge that, even in what
appears to be a case of basic action as defined above, there still is, in fact, an
event (or conjunction of events) which causes the event, e, which the agent,
A, is said to cause and which, in the appropriate sense, 'involves' A. But, it
may be added, the event (or conjunction of events) in question will be a
mental event (or conjunction of events) of a certain kind-which should
not surprise us, since apparently 'basic' action of the sort with which we
are now concerned is exhibited precisely by animate agents, such as human
beings. In particular, it may be suggested that the events in question will
simply be the onsets of certain cognitive and/or affective states of the
animate agents concerned-in short, the onsets of certain beliefs, desires,
or emotions. Thus, it may be claimed, when a human agent 'spon
taneously' waves his hand or otherwise 'spontaneously' moves some part
of his body, the bodily event which the agent is thereby said to cause is one
which is in fact caused by the onsets of such states as the agent's desire to
Compare O'Connor, Persons and Causes, 52 ff. and
7 This, essentially, is the view of Donald Davidson: see his 'Actions, Reasons, and Causes',
Journal of Philosophy 60 (1963), 685-700, reprinted in his Essays on Actions and Events.
87.
1
203\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
attract someone's attention and his belief that by waving his hand he could
achieve this. (If one adheres to a psychophysical identity theory of mind,
one may also maintain that these mental events are in fact identical with
certain physical events in the agent's brain or nervous system, though it is
not necessary to make this additional claim. )
However, I imagine that the advocate of irreducible agent causation will
object to this proposal on grounds which should now be familiar-namely,
that the proposal leaves no room for genuine free will in human affairs and
that it distorts the relationship between an agent's actions and his reasons
for action. An agent's beliefs and desires may give him a reason to act in a
certain way-for instance, to wave his hand-but if we treat those beliefs
and desires as causing the motion of his hand, we cannot really say that the
agent acts 'for' that reason, because to act for a reason is to be guided by
what one (reasonably) believes and desires but not to be caused to behave
in a certain way by one's beliefs and desires. In short, the proposal under
consideration appears not to leave any room for rational choice on the part
of the agent as to how to act in the light of his beliefs and desires.
However, if this objection is deemed sound, why shouldn't an opponent
of the idea of irreducible agent causation simply say that, in what appears
to be a case of 'basic' action as defined above, it is in fact the choice or
decision of the agent-a mental event-which causes the event, e, which
the agent, A, is said to cause? Another term for this kind of mental event
would be a 'volition' or 'act of will', according to certain philosophers of
action. My own view is that, if one wants to maintain that agent causation
is reducible to event causation, then it is indeed preferable to appeal to
mental events of this kind, rather than to the onsets of states of belief and
desire, for the purpose of analysing apparently 'spontaneous' human
action. But it may still be objected that to analyse spontaneous human
action in terms of causation by mental events of any kind-even the
'choices' or 'volitions' of the agent-is to preclude any satisfactory solution
to the problem of free will. This is because an event must either have or
lack a cause, which on the view under scrutiny would have to be another
event of some kind: and then we are faced with an apparent dilemma-for
if our choices are caused, then we lack genuine freedom; and if our choices
are uncaused, then they seem to be mere chance happenings, so that we
In this way, we may turn on its head Davidson's well-known argument that reasons must becauses: see further my An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press, 2000), 258 ff.
I develop a volitionist theory of action along these lines in my Subjects of Experience, ch. 5.
204\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION 205
once again lack genuine freedom. In contrast, it seems that the advocate
of irreducible agent causation can plausibly resist saying that A's causing e,
in a case of basic human action, is itself something which has a cause,
without thereby implying that A's causing e is a mere chance happening:
for A's causing e is not a happening an event-at all, and is therefore not
the sort of thing that is apt to have an event as a cause. Not being the sort
of thing that is apt to have an event as a cause, its lack of a cause is only to
be expected and can carry no adverse implication that it defies explanation
of any kind, since there may be other kinds of explanation than causal
explanation-notably, rational explanation.
Basic actions and backward causation
At this point I want to return, briefly, to an issue touched upon earlier,
namely the relationship between a human agent's basic actions, such as his
spontaneous hand-wavings, and the muscular and neural events that
invariably precede and are causally related to the bodily motions involved
in such actions, such as the motions of an agent's hand. I remarked that,
while most human agents know nothing of such muscular and neural
events, even if one does know that such events invariably precede the sort
of hand motions that occur when one waves one's hand, it seems more
natural to say that one can cause the muscular and neural events 'by means
of' waving one's hand, rather than vice versa. Some philosophers find this
view puzzling, however, because they think that a kind of backward caus
ation would have to be involved if an agent were to cause a neural event, e1,
'by means of' causing a bodily motion, e2-such as a hand-motion-where
e, occurs before e2. " But in fact no backward causation of any kind need be
involved here. It is not being proposed that the later event, e, , causes the
earlier event, e, , since we are not concerned here with event causation but
rather with agent causation. Indeed, it can readily be accepted that, in such
a case, the earlier event, e, , is a contributory cause of the later event, e-for,
as I have already made clear, an advocate of irreducible agent causation
need not say that no events whatever are (contributory) causes of the event
which is caused by an agent in a case of basic action: all that is being
claimed is that it is not in virtue of its causation by any events whatever that
10 But see further my An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind, 254 ff.
"See G. H. von Wright, Explanation and Understanding (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1971), 76 ff. \nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
the agent may be said to cause that event. Nor can it be complained thatbackward causation must be involved because the agent's causing of eoccurs later than e: for, quite apart from anything else, it simply isn'tobvious when, precisely, the agent's causing of e, may be said to occur, ifindeed it is proper to describe it as 'occurring' at all. (I say 'if' because it isevents that are said to 'occur'-and, according to the advocate of irreducible agent causation, an agent's causing of an event is not itself an event ofany kind. )
The conceptual priority of agent causation
hope I have now done enough to explain why some philosophers ofaction hold, I think with some justification, that agent causation is not
universally reducible to event causation, in accordance with analysis (1) orany similar principle. But what about the suggestion that event causation is
instead reducible to, or analysable in terms of, agent causation? This is a
suggestion that has only rarely been explored-largely, I suppose, because
it is commonly imagined that talk of 'agent causation' is appropriate onlywhere the intentional actions of rational, or at least animate, agents are
concerned. However, as I explained at the beginning of this chapter, we do
not need to use the term 'agent' in a way which restricts its application to
such beings. There is a perfectly good sense in which something as insens
ate as a boulder can be a causal agent. Of course, if agent causation could
only be exercised by rational or animate agents, then the suggestion that all
event causation is reducible to agent causation would amount, in effect, to
the doctrine that nothing is caused to occur in the world save through the
agency of rational or animate beings. It may be that certain 'primitive'
cultures have assumed such a view, attributing all physical events which
lack a human or animal origin to the agency of gods or spirits. Equally,
certain idealist philosophers, notably George Berkeley, have maintained
that only thinking beings can cause anything (but that what they cause are
certain purely mental effects in their own or others' minds). 12 Clearly,
however, if we are prepared to use the term 'agent' in a broader way, to
apply to inanimate as well as animate beings, then there is scope to maintain that event causation is reducible to agent causation without
I. But before I
See George Berkeley, A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, paras. 25-6, inhis Philosophical Works, ed. M. R. Ayers (London: Dent, 1975), p. 84.
206\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION
explore this possibility, I want to discuss a reason which we might advance
for maintaining that the notion of agent causation is at least conceptually
prior to that of event causation, even if it is doubted whether event caus
ation is reducible to agent causation. For this consideration does indeed
focus on the special case of the intentional actions of rational agents.
Although, in a metaphysical study such as the present one, our main
concern is the nature of certain fundamental features of reality, such as
causation, we must inevitably be concerned also with certain epistemo
logical questions: for if we purport to have knowledge of a certain feature
of reality, our account of the nature of that feature should not be such as to
render our knowledge of it impossible or inexplicable. Consider, then, our
claim to have knowledge of at least some relations of causation between
events and consider what mental capacities such a knowledge claim pre
supposes. It is strongly arguable that only a creature capable of intentional
action can acquire knowledge of causal relations between events from
experience. Such a creature must not only be an agent, but must also be
aware of being an agent-and so, it seems, must possess the concept of
agent causation. The argument for this conclusion is as follows. 13
A purely passive being that was capable of observing its physical
environment-something like, perhaps, an intelligent tree, if such a being
is indeed possible-would apparently be incapable of distinguishing
between causal sequences of events and purely coincidental sequences of
events. Such a being might be able to register the existence of certain
regularities or uniformities amongst types of events occurring in its
observable environment, but it would be unable to discriminate between
those regularities that obtained purely by coincidence and those that
obtained in virtue of causal relations between the events concerned. The
being might notice, for instance, that night regularly followed day, that
thunder regularly followed lightning, and that the extinction of flames
regularly followed their dousing by water. All of these sequences, we know,
are causal sequences-although not in every case is the first member of
such a sequence a cause of the second member, since in some cases the two
events are collateral effects of a common cause. But, of course, it is also
possible to experience purely coincidental sequences of events on a regular
basis. It might be, for instance, that, within one's experience, the fall of a
certain kind of object has regularly been followed by a flash of light. How
ever, if one is in doubt as to whether or not such a sequence is causal in
"Here I follow the lead of G. H. von Wright: see his Explanation and Understanding, 60 ff.
207\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
nature, one can attempt to resolve that doubt by means of active intervention and experimentation. For instance, one can attempt to interrupt thefall of the next object of the kind in question, to see whether or not a flashof light will still occur even in the absence of the fall. Again, one canattempt to initiate the fall of such an object oneself, to see whether or notsuch a fall is still followed by a flash of light. Because we are causal agentsourselves and are aware of our ability to intervene in and manipulate thecourse of nature in such ways, we are able to test causal hypothesesexperimentally and thereby hope to distinguish, albeit not infallibly, between causal and non-causal sequences of events. (Clearly, an importantcomponent of this ability to intervene in the course of nature is our capacity to move ourselves at will about our physical environment in accord
ance with our desires, at least within certain limits, rather than having ourspatial location and orientation determined wholly by external factors. )But it seems that a purely passive creature, however acute its powers ofobservation, would be incapable of discriminating empirically between
causal and non-causal sequences of events-from which it seems reason
able to conclude that it would have no concept of event causation, as it
would have no empirical basis upon which to apply that concept. Cer
tainly, it could not acquire the concept of event causation from experience,
if the preceding argument is correct, but nor is it reasonable to suppose
that it would possess the concept innately, since the possession of a concept
which has no application can confer no evolutionary advantage upon a
creature.
An analysis of event causation
The lesson of the preceding argument seems to be that the concept of
agent causation cannot be derived from that of event causation, because
possession of the former concept is a prerequisite of possession of the
latter concept. It cannot be that we first learn to apply the concept of event
causation to observable events and then learn to conceive of ourselves as
agents by grasping the truth of some principle along the lines of analysis
(1) above. It really does seem that agent causation must be, in this sense,
conceptually prior to event causation.
It does not follow from this, however, that agent causation must be
ontologically prior to event causation: it could still be true that analysis (1), or something like it, tells us correctly what agent causation consists in. On
208\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION 209
the other hand, provided that we do not understand the notion of a causal
'agent' in too restricted a way, there is nothing to stop us from proposing
that agent causation is ontologically, as well as conceptually, prior to event
causation. Instead of explaining agent causation in terms of event caus
ation, along the lines suggested by analysis (1), we could attempt to explain
event causation in terms of agent causation, perhaps along something like
the following lines:
(2) Event c caused event e if and only if there was some agent, A, and
some manner of acting, X, such that c consisted in A's Xing and A,
by Xing, caused e.
Consider, for instance, one of our earlier examples of a statement of event
causation, 'The explosion of the bomb caused the collapse of the bridge'.
According to analysis (2), this is true because there was a certain agent (in
the broad sense), namely, the bomb, and a certain manner of acting,
namely, exploding, such that the event which was the explosion of the
bomb consisted in that agent's acting in that manner (that is, it consisted
in the bomb's exploding) and the agent, by so acting, caused the collapse of
the bridge that is to say, the bomb, by exploding, caused the collapse of
the bridge.
Plausible though analysis (2) may be in this sort of case, it may not be
wholly free of difficulties. Some of these difficulties, however, may be rela
tively easy to deal with. For instance, it may be that where analysis (2)
speaks of event cas consisting in a single agent's acting in a certain way, a
more refined version of (2) should allow c to consist in one or more agents'
acting in certain ways, either independently or in unison. But I shall ignore
this sort of problem as one of mere detail. Much more serious would be the
objection, if it is sound, that there are some events which cause other
events and yet which do not consist in any agent's or agents' acting in any
way. However, I shall not pursue this sort of objection here either, as it
raises issues which are more properly the concern of the next two chapters.
Instead, I shall focus on an apparent difficulty for analysis (2) which arises
from my earlier proposal that one can cause the muscular and neural
events which typically precede certain movements of one's hand by means
of' waving one's hand. We want to say that such muscular and neural
events are causes of the hand movements, rather than their effects. Now, if
my earlier proposal was correct, what we have in such circumstances is a
human agent, A, and a manner of acting, namely, waving one's hand, such
that A, by acting in that manner, caused a certain muscular or neural event, \nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
we also want to say that e, caused, rather than was caused by, thehand movement, e, , which occurred on this occasion. Will analysis (2)allow us to say this? Not if we want to say that e, consisted in A's waving hishand. For if the hand movement, e, , consisted in A's waving his hand and(as we have just proposed) A, by waving his hand, caused the muscular orneural event e, then analysis (2) implies that e, caused e, rather than viceversa-it implies that the hand movement caused the muscular or neuralevent, whereas the truth is the reverse of this.
e. But Fortunately
for an adherent of analysis (2), it seems clear that we shouldnot say that the hand movement, e, , consisted in A's waving his hand. A'swaving his hand was an action of A's-it was A's causing a certain kind ofmovement in his hand and so certainly cannot be identified with just sucha movement of his hand. The hand movement, e, , rather than consisting inA's waving his hand, in fact consisted in A's hand's moving in a certainway. We may be confused about this if we do not distinguish, as we clearlyshould, between transitive and intransitive senses of the verb 'to move'. 14 Intalking of a 'hand movement', we might either mean to talk of someone'smoving (in the transitive sense) his hand or alternatively mean to talk ofsomeone's hand's moving (in the intransitive sense): but, in the presentcontext, we should evidently mean the latter. Obviously, a 'hand movement' in the latter sense can occur even if the person whose hand it is doesnot move it that is, even if a 'hand movement' in the former sense is notperformed. A's waving his hand is a 'hand movement' in the former senseand, clearly, in no way can the hand movement which consists in A'shand's moving also be said to consist in A's waving his hand.
So, it may be asked, how does analysis (2) enable us to account for thecausal relation between the muscular or neural event, e, , and the hand
movement, e2? The answer is quite straightforward. Provided that we can
say, as we plausibly can, that the muscular or neural event, e, , consisted in
some body part's acting in a certain way-for instance, it might haveconsisted in a certain muscle fibre's contracting or in a certain neuron'sfiring and that that body part, by acting in that way, caused (albeitindirectly) the hand movement, e, , then analysis (2) allows us to say, as wewant to, that e, caused e2. But notice that the 'agent' to which we must nowappeal, for the purpose of analysing this relationship of event causation, isnot the human agent, A, who waved his hand and, in so doing, performed abasic action. Rather, the 'agent' in question is merely an organic part of A's
See further Jennifer Hornsby, Actions (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980), ch. 1.
210\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION 211
body and so not a rational agent or even an 'animate' agent, in the sense in
which an entire living organism is an animate agent. However, we need see
no conflict here between the agency of the human being, A, and the agency
of A's body parts, such as particular muscle fibres or neurons of A's. On
the contrary, human agency, while not reducible to the agency of human
body parts, clearly depends upon the latter, in the sense that our possession
of a body in working order is a necessary condition of our ability to
exercise physical agency on our own account.
Whether there are any inescapable problems besetting analysis (2), or
any similar attempt to analyse event causation in terms of agent causation,
I leave for others to judge. But in favour of the ontological primacy of
agent causation over event causation I would urge just this. It seems proper
to say that events of themselves possess no causal powers. Only persisting
objects that is, individual 'substances-possess causal powers and,
indeed, causal liabilities. It is such objects that we describe as being mag
netic, corrosive, inflammable, soluble, and so forth. Objects manifest or
display their causal powers and liabilities by acting on things, or being
acted upon, in various appropriate ways-by attracting, corroding, burn
ing, dissolving, and so forth. In describing such activities we use, of course,
the language of agent causation, rather than the language of event caus
ation. We resort to the latter, I suggest, primarily when we are at least
partially ignorant about the causal agents that are at work. Analysis (2)
explains this, for we could be sure that the right-hand side of (2) was
satisfied in certain circumstances, and hence that its left-hand side was
true, even though we could not identify a specific agent and manner of
acting in virtue which the right-hand side of (2) was satisfied on that
occasion. It may be suggested, then, that those philosophers who accord
ontological primacy to event causation are tempted to do so by the fact
that events seem to be, in general, more epistemically accessible than sub
stances are. In short, their approach may simply be the legacy of an empiri
cist epistemology which distrusts all talk of causal machinery at work in
the real world behind the shifting scenes of appearance.
Implications for the notion of causality
If we take agent causation to be both conceptually and ontologically prior
to event causation, what bearing does this have on the question of whether
the notion of causality is ultimately analysable or definable in non-causal\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
terms? At the
Rather
end of the preceding chapter, I surmised that the notion ofcausality might in fact be primitive and irreducible. But nothing that I havesaid in this chapter encourages me to think otherwise. First of allalthough, as I remarked earlier in this chapter, many transitive verbs ofaction are causative verbs, I see no reason to suppose that the actionswhich such verbs describe are simply definable in terms of a generic notionof agent causation. For instance, although 'killing' clearly implies 'causingdeath', it is very doubtful that 'killing' just means 'causing death'. " Why? Because it seems proper to say that an agent may cause the death of a livingcreature without killing that creature-for example, by causing anotheragent to kill that creature. Thus, if a would-be assassin cannot bring himself to kill his intended victim himself, he may induce someone else to killthe victim for him-in which case, it seems, the would-be assassin is acause of the victim's death even though he does not kill the victim himself. (This isn't to say, of course, that such a course of action need be any lessreprehensible than killing. )
than saying that every causative verb is synonymous with someverb phrase in which the verb 'to cause' (in its agent-causation sense)appears, I am inclined to reverse the direction of semantic explanation andsay that our grasp of the concept of agent causation is, as it were, a distillation of our grasp of a multiplicity of more specific action-conceptsconcepts such as those of killing, pushing, stretching, attracting, corroding, burning, and dissolving. These and related action-concepts form a family, whose members bear 'family resemblances' to one another but possess, Isuggest, no common and clearly definable 'essential core'. Certainly wemay say that the actions in question are all ways in which an agent maycause something to happen: but I think that this observation, rather thanhelping to elucidate the nature of such actions, better serves to elucidatewhat it means to speak an agent's causing something to happen-for wevery arguably have a much firmer grasp on the nature of these and similarspecific actions than we do on the generic notion of agent causation. However, clearly, we cannot hope to define agent causation by reference toany class of such specific actions, given that they form an open-endedfamily whose members bear only family resemblances to one another and
"See the editor's introduction
Bambrough, 'Universals and Family Resemblances',
in Pieter M. Seuren (ed. ), Semantic Syntax (Oxford: OxfordUniversity Press, 1974), 8 ff. , and Judith Jarvis Thomson, Acts and Other Events (Ithaca, NY: CornellUniversity Press, 1977), 128.
See Renford
Proceedings of the Aristote.
212\nEVENT CAUSATION AND AGENT CAUSATION 213
share no common essence. So I conclude, albeit somewhat tentatively, that
the concept of agent causation is primitive and indefinable, but that it is at
the same time the product of our grasp of an open-ended multiplicity of
specific ways in which individual objects can act upon one another. \n12
ACTIONS AND EVENTS
Do events exist?
The previous chapter inevitably involved us in a good deal of talk aboutactions and events, but left unaddressed certain fundamental ontologicalquestions concerning the existence and nature of such entities. Must we
really include 'actions' and 'events' in our ontology, as entities in their ownright, in addition to-or perhaps even instead of-persisting objects (or'substances') which act in various ways and undergo various kinds ofchange? Assuming that they exist, are actions just a species of events, or are
they items belonging to an altogether different ontological category? Andhow are actions and events to be individuated? What are their identity
conditions? Need we and can we frame satisfactory criteria of identity for
such entities? These are the main questions that I shall examine and, tosome extent, try to answer in this chapter.
Presented with the general question 'Do events exist? ', one's immediate
response might well be to say, 'Yes, of course they do-for we are con
stantly referring to them'. Here one might have in mind both certain
famous events of history, such as the Battle of Hastings or the Boston Tea
Party, and more mundane events of one's own personal experience, such asthe wedding of a sister or the death of an uncle. We have familiar ways of
constructing certain singular noun-phrases whose function seems to be to
secure reference to particular events, which must therefore exist if such
reference is successful. However, we should be wary of assuming that asingular noun-phrase whose function appears to be referential really doesfunction in a referential way. Consider, for example, a singular nounphrase such as 'the average British citizen', as used by some statistician indescribing certain demographic trends: it would surely be naïve to supposethat such a statistician uses this phrase with an intention to refer to anyparticular entity and that his statistical account fails if there is no such\nACTIONS AND EVENTS |
thing as 'the average British citizen'. Rather, the statistician's use of this
phrase is part of a convenient way of summing up certain general informa
tion about a large population of individual human beings-to no one of
which, in particular, is he referring. What we seem to need at this point is a
viable criterion of ontological commitment-a principle which will reliably
tell us what kinds of entities a theorist is committed to acknowledging as
existent, in virtue of his acceptance of the truth of a given theory. And
what we have just discovered is that we cannot regard as particularly reli
able the principle that the singular noun phrases which are standardly used
in the expression of a theory reveal its ontological commitments. In a
moment, I shall discuss another and much more widely endorsed criterion
of ontological commitment, but before doing so I want to consider a
second possible response to our original question, 'Do events exist? '
This second response is, disconcertingly, the very reverse of the previous
one. Faced with the question, 'Do events exist? ', some philosophers are
inclined to reply with an emphatic 'No', even while conceding quite readily
that we do indeed refer to particular events constantly, both in everyday
speech and in scientific discourse. The point of such a denial, however,
would not be to suggest that events are 'not real', or not genuine features of
the world, but rather that the verb 'exist' is not one which properly
expresses their distinctive 'mode of being'. According to this way of think
ing, we should say that events occur or that they happen, rather than that
they exist; whereas, conversely, we should say of persisting objects (or
'substances') that they exist, but not that they occur or happen. We should
not dismiss this suggestion too lightly, as one resting merely upon an
idiosyncrasy of everyday language. For the point is not just that it 'sounds
odd' to say such things as 'The Battle of Hastings existed in 1066'. Rather,
the view in question may be motivated by a carefully considered
metaphysical doctrine which denies that entities of different ontological
categories all share some single 'mode of being'.
Advocates of this doctrine may urge that our use of the verb 'to be' is
systematically ambiguous, with its sense depending upon the category of
entity being referred to by the subject of that verb on any given occasion. '
Thus, just as the sense in which exercise may be said to be 'healthy' is
different from, but closely related to, the sense in which a person (or other
living being) may be said to be 'healthy', so it may be contended that the
This approach is Aristotelian in its inspiration: for discussion, see Michael J. Loux, 'Kinds and
Predications: An Examination of Aristotle's Theory of Categories', Philosophical Papers 26 (1997),
3-28.
215\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
sense in which an event may be said to 'be' is different from, albeit relatedto, the sense in which a substance may be said to 'be'. In particular, it maybe suggested that, just as the primary sense of the adjective 'healthy' is thatin which a person (or other living being) may be said to be healthy, so theprimary sense of the verb 'to be' is that in which a substance may be said tobe or exist-and that the secondary or derivative sense in which an event
may be said 'to be' has its subordinate status in virtue of the ontologicallydependent nature of events in relation to substances. This doctrine, whichis more or less Aristotelian, undeniably has some attractions. However, I
am not convinced that one can only adequately recognize the ontological
primacy of substances-if, indeed, such recognition is due-without
accepting that the verb 'to be' is ambiguous in the way being proposed.
Consequently, I shall assume in what follows that, contrary to this pro
posal, a perfectly proper way to acknowledge the reality of events is to say
that they exist and, indeed, that all real beings or entities 'exist' in precisely
the same sense of that verb, which I shall henceforth take to be perfectly
univocal. (I acknowledge that the proposal which I am now dismissing
merits more discussion than I can afford to give it here, but I would also
urge that the position which I favour is, as it were, the 'default' position,
An argument for the existence of events
I mentioned, a little while ago, a certain criterion of ontological commit
ment which has received widespread endorsement in recent times. This is
W. V. Quine's criterion, encapsulated in his famous slogan 'To be is to be
the value of a variable'. According to this criterion, we may discover the
ontological commitments of a theory by first expressing the theory in the
language of first-order predicate logic and then determining what kinds of
entities must be admitted as possible values of the bound variables used in
thus expressing the theory, if the theory is to be deemed true. (A 'bound
variable' is a variable bound by a quantifier, as the variable 'x' is bound by
the existential quantifier 'E' in the formula '(Ex) Fx'; the latter formula
means, quite simply, "There is at least one thing, x, such that x is F', where
'F' is any predicate one may care to choose. ) Thus, for example, given that
See, for example. , W. V. Quine, 'Existence and Quantification', in his Ontological Relativity andOther Essays (New York: Columbia University Press, 1969). In that paper, Quine discusses the. )
216\nACTIONS AND EVENTS
elementary arithmetic-which is, of course, just a particular mathematical
theory-includes such relatively uncontested truths as 'There is a prime
number greater than 4 and less than 7' and 'Every natural number has a
successor which is a natural number', Quine's criterion implies that elem
entary arithmetic is committed to the existence of natural numbers and,
indeed, to the existence of infinitely many of them. This becomes obvious
once we express such purported truths in standard logical form-for
instance, when we express the first of the two purported truths just cited in
the form '(Ex) (x is a natural number and x is prime and x is greater than 4
and x is less than 7)'. For the latter sentence plainly entails '(Ex) (x is a
natural number)', which must therefore likewise be deemed true, accord
ing to elementary arithmetic, given that the sentence entailing it is deemed
true. However, '(Ex) (x is a natural number)' can be true only if its bound
variable, 'x', can take as a value something to which the predicate 'is a
natural number' applies: in other words, it can be true only if natural
numbers exist. (The argument here presumes, of course, the correctness of
a certain way of interpreting the so-called 'existential' quantifier, 'E'--a
way which has, to be fair, been challenged by some logicians who favour a
so-called 'substitutional' interpretation of the quantifiers and who, as a
consequence, may regard the epithet 'existential' as tendentious in this
context. But I shall not pursue this debate here, since my main concern at
present is to describe rather than to defend Quine's criterion of ontological
commitment. )
Quine's criterion of ontological commitment may evidently be invoked
in defence of a positive answer to the question 'Do events exist? '. One such
line of argument is famously due to Donald Davidson and runs roughly as
follows. 3 In everyday speech, we frequently assert action sentences which we
take to be uncontentiously true. Such a sentence typically consists of a
subject term denoting an agent, a verb of action, and one or more adverbs
or adverbial phrases expressing the time, manner or place at or in which
the agent acted. For example, 'Jones climbed slowly, steadily, at dawn, on
the north face of Everest' is a typical action sentence. Evidently, there is no
limit to the number of adverbial qualifiers which can be attached to the
verb in an action sentence. Equally evidently, from any such adverbially
3 See Donald Davidson, 'The Logical Form of Action Sentences', in Nicholas Rescher (ed. ), The
Logic of Decision and Action (Pittsburgh, Pa. : University of Pittsburgh Press, 1966), reprinted in
Donald Davidson, Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980). For discussion,
see Lawrence Brian Lombard, Events: A Metaphysical Study (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1986), 9 ff.
217\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
qualified sentence we can validly infer a sentence from which one or moreof the adverbial qualifiers has been detached. For instance, the action sentence just cited plainly entails all of the following simpler action sentences: 'Jones climbed slowly, steadily, at dawn', 'Jones climbed slowly, steadily', ' Jones
climbed slowly', and ' Jones climbed
'. But how can we explain these
entailments? First-order predicate logic will not help us to do so if we leavethese sentences in their present grammatical form, because first-orderpredicate logic does not recognize the grammatical phenomenon ofadverbial qualification. As far as that system of logic is concerned, 'Jonesclimbed slowly' and 'Jones climbed' are simply two quite distinct atomicpredicative sentences with the same subject term, as logically unrelated toone another as are 'Jones climbed' and 'Jones laughed'.
However, if we are prepared to recognize in action sentences an under
lying logical form which differs from their superficial grammatical form,
then we can indeed appeal to first-order predicate logic for an explanation
of the problematic entailments. All we need to do is to construe each
action sentence as involving an implicit existential quantification, with the
variable of quantification taking events as its possible values. For example,
we may construe our original action sentence, 'Jones climbed slowly, stead
ily, at dawn, on the north face of Everest', as implicitly having the following
logical form: '(Ex) (x was a climbing and x was by Jones and x was slow
and x was steady and x was at dawn and x was on the north face of
Everest)'. Then we can explain, for example, the entailment of 'Jones
climbed' by 'Jones climbed slowly' in terms of the laws of first-order predi
cate logic, since it amounts simply to the entailment of '(Ex) (x was a
climbing and x was by Jones)' by '(Ex) (x was a climbing and x was by
Jones and x was slow)'. The latter entailment holds purely in virtue of the
truth-functional properties of the conjunction 'and'. And now, to com
plete the argument for the existence of events, we can appeal to Quine's
criterion of ontological commitment: having expressed what we take to be
true action sentences in the language of first-order predicate logic, in the
manner just prescribed, we see that their truth requires the existence of
events as possible values of the variables of quantification used in thusexpressing action sentences. For instance, in the case of our sampleaction sentence, its truth requires the existence of something to which the
himself would readily acknowledge, this particular example is complicated bythe fact that 'slow' is a so-called attributive adjective-the complication being that an event that isslow for a climbing might be fast for, say, a climbing in poor weather: see his Essays on Actions andEvents, 106-7.
*As Davidson
218\nACTIONS AND EVENTS
predicate is a climbing' applies: and climbings, it seems clear, are simply (a
species of) events.
Is the foregoing argument open to any serious objection? Perhaps so. In
the first place, what entitles us to assume that the entities that we must call
upon as possible values of the variables of quantification in this case are
indeed events? Shouldn't we say, rather, that they are actions? Of course, it
may be held that actions just are (a species of) events: but that is a further
claim, which is not established simply by the argument that has been
developed so far. Secondly, and more fundamentally, why should we sup
pose, just because the problematic entailments can only be explained by
means of first-order predicate logic when action sentences are taken to
involve existential quantification over events (or actions), that therefore we
should indeed take action sentences to involve such quantification? Why
shouldn't we maintain instead that first-order predicate logic provides an
inadequate means of representing the logical relationships between action
sentences, with the implication that what we really require is a way of
extending first-order predicate logic so as to accommodate the phenom
enon of adverbial qualification? " After all, what is so sacrosanct about first
order predicate logic in its standard form? Perhaps the response to this
objection will be that if we can avoid having to extend first-order predicate
logic, by quantifying over some suitable category of entities, then we
should certainly do so, because it is more extravagant, in general, to revise
one's logic than to augment one's ontology. How satisfactory such a
response would be, I leave others to judge for themselves. Suffice it to say
that it is not uncontentious that the argument developed earlier is a good
way of defending a positive answer to the question 'Do events exist? ' On
the other hand, perhaps it will be felt that we don't really need an argument
to justify our belief in the existence of events quite generally, any more
than we need an argument to justify our belief in the existence of things
quite generally, because we can't really make sense of the idea of there
being no events or things whatever. Whether or not that is so I shall not
attempt to determine now, but for the time being I shall simply assume
that we are indeed entitled to believe in the existence of events, and turn
instead to questions concerning their nature.
For such an approach see, for example, Terence Parsons, 'Some Problems Concerning the
Logic of Grammatical Modifiers', in Donald Davidson and Gilbert Harman (eds. ), Semantics of
Natural Language (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1972).
219\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
Criteria of identity
may be urged, with some plausibility, that we do not really grasp thenature of entities of a given category until we have a firm grasp of theidentity conditions of entities of that category-and that what is needed forsuch a grasp is an understanding of a suitable criterion of identity for suchentities. To cite another famous slogan of Quine's: 'No entity withoutidentity'. There has been much debate on the logical form and status ofidentity criteria, but for present purposes I shall assume that a criterion ofidentity for entities of a given kind, k, is a statement of the following
It form:
(C1) If x and y are entities of kind k, then x is identical with y if and onlyif x and y stand in the relation R to one another.
Clearly, if (C) is to be neither trivial nor circular, then the relation R, must
be neither the relation of identity itself nor any relation which presupposesor depends upon the identity of any entity of kind k. For example: in the
mathematical theory of sets, we can formulate a criterion of identity for
sets which states that x and y are the same set if and only if x and y have
exactly the same members. This criterion is neither trivial nor circular,
because it can be determined whether or not x and y have the same mem
bers without first determining whether or not x and y are identical and
without having to presuppose the identity of any set. Of course, we must
allow that a set may have other sets amongst its members, but, where this is
so, we can apply the given criterion to the sets in question to determine
their identity by reference to their members, and so on repeatedly, if need
be, until we eventually arrive at sets which have no sets amongst their
members and their identity we can determine, by means of the given
criterion, without presupposing the identity of any set whatever. (One such
set will be the empty set, which has no members at all, but other such sets
will have as members only entities which are non-sets-for instance, concrete objects, such as trees, planets, and ships. )
It might be thought at this point, in view of the foregoing remarks, thatwhat we need in order to understand better the nature of events is an
acceptable criterion of identity for events. And, indeed, in due course I shalllook at some proposed criteria of identity for events. But, as a matter of
See, for example, W. V. Quine, 'Speaking of Objects', in his Ontological Relativity and OtherEssays.
7See further my 'What is a Criterion of Identity? ', Philosophical Quarterly 39 (1989), 1-21.
220\nACTIONS AND EVENTS
fact, I have some doubts as to whether it even makes sense to propose a
criterion of identity for events quite generally, as opposed to criteria of
identity for this or that kind of events, for the same reason that it may be
doubted whether it makes sense to propose a criterion of identity for things
quite generally, as opposed to criteria of identity for various different kinds
of things. The point is that the distinction between events and things is a
distinction between two different categories of entities and it seems that
entities of many different kinds, with different identity conditions, can
very often belong to one and the same ontological category. For example,
the category of things even if we restrict our attention to concrete, as
opposed to abstract, things-includes items as different from one another
as living organisms, artefacts, and lumps of matter, all of which very plaus
ibly have quite different criteria of identity. (Of course, 'thing' is a slippery
term, and in one very broad sense it is just synonymous with 'entity'-but
more commonly it is used in a more restricted sense, as it is when 'things'
are contrasted with such items as events, processes, properties, and rela
tions. ) Why, then, should we assume that different kinds of events do not
have different identity conditions, in the way that different kinds of things
plainly do? If this assumption is mistaken, then the search for a criterion of
identity for events quite generally will be entirely misguided. None the less,
this is what many recent philosophers concerned with the ontology of
events have tried to seek. All that I can suggest, then, is that we approach
their proposals with some caution and even some scepticism.
The individuation of actions and events
One quite popular idea is that actions and events are to be individuated
and identified at least in part by reference to their time and place of
occurrence. Certainly, if we are talking about individual or particular
actions or events, as opposed to the types or kinds which these individuals
exemplify or instantiate, then it seems indisputable that one and the same
action or event cannot recur at different places and times. If the Battle of
Hastings took place at Hastings in 1066, then that very event cannot also
have taken place elsewhere at a different time-although, of course,
another very similar battle could have taken place in another place at a
different time. We do sometimes talk of events 'recurring-for instance,
we may talk of a 'recurring headache'-but what I think we mean (or
should mean) by this is just that a number of different individual events of
221\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
the same kind extension. )
(or of very similar kinds) can sometimes occur in succes
sion. It might be suggested, then, that if x and y are individual events of the
same kind (for example, if x and y are both battles, or are both headaches), then x and y are one and the same individual event of that kind just in case
x and y occur at the same place and at the same time. Unfortunately,
however, this proposal is plainly flawed: for even if two different things of
the same kind cannot exist in the same place at the same time (for
example, two different trees, or two different statues), it would appear that
two different events of the same kind can indeed occur in the same place at
the same time, even if such a coincidence is not a particularly common
occurrence. We can even make sense of such a coincidence in the case
events such as battles and headaches. For example: three opposing armies
might be fighting pairwise with one another on the same battlefield during
the same period of time, in which case one might say that three different
battles were being fought simultaneously in the same place. Again: in a case
of so-called 'multiple personality syndrome', two distinct 'persons' associ
ated with the same human body might complain of having suffered a
headache at the same time, in which case (since we do not regard head
aches as being shareable between different persons) one might say that two
different headaches occurred in the same place (namely, in the same head,
or part of a head) at the same time. I concede that these examples are a
little far-fetched, but that doesn't matter: if they even make sense, as they
seem to, we cannot say with any confidence that it is impossible for differ
ent events of the same kind to occur in the same place at the same time
in which case, the proposal now under scrutiny cannot be endorsed. And,
in any case, with other, more esoteric kinds of events the possibility of
coincidence is even more easily envisaged. For instance, if three point
particles, P1, P2, and P, collide simultaneously, then three different colli
sions occur in the same place at the same time-the collision between P,
and P, the collision between P, and P, and the collision between P, and P1.
(A 'point particle' would be a particle with certain physical properties and
capable of motion, but possessing no spatial
Are actions events?
So far, in discussing the individuation of actions and events, I have made
no distinction between actions and events and, indeed, it is widely
assumed that actions just are (a species of) events-for which reason it is
222\nACTIONS AND EVENTS
also widely assumed that actions and events are to be individuated in the
same fashion. But already in the previous chapter I paved the way for a
challenge to these assumptions. Suppose that we take seriously the notion
of agent causation proposed in that chapter-and suppose we say, accord
ingly, that certain actions consist in an agent's causing some event. Then we
may very well want to resist, with good reason, the suggestion that such
actions are themselves events which occur at certain times and places. For
how could the causing of an event-whether by an agent or by another
event-itself be an event, with a specific location and time of occurrence?
Consider, for instance, Smith's action of killing Jones by administration of
a slow-acting poison. Since Smith's action was his killing Jones, it follows
that Smith, in performing this action, caused Jones's death, which presum
ably occurred at a specific time and place-for example, on Tuesday after
noon in Jones's bedroom. But perhaps Smith administered the poison
much earlier, Jones ingesting it on Monday in his dining room. So when
and where did Smith kill Jones? On Monday in the dining room, or on
Tuesday in the bedroom, or over the course of both days and partly in each
location? I am inclined to say that the question is a misplaced one, because
Smith's action is not itself an event at all, but the causing of an event. In my
view, it would be just as silly to ask where and when an explosion caused
the collapse of a bridge: the explosion occurred in a certain place at a
certain time, as did the collapse-but the explosion's causing the collapse
did not (or so I am inclined to say). For the same reason, I am reluctant to
speak of actions occurring: I prefer to say that, whereas events occur,
actions are performed. If it is still insisted that we may always quite sensibly
ask where and when an action was performed, then I will still urge that we
should not attempt to answer such a question as if actions were a species of
events. Where an action consists in an agent's causing some event by
means of causing various other, intermediary events, then the question of
where and when the action was performed can, I suggest, only be answered
by saying where and when all of these constituent events occurred-which
implies that there is no such time as 'the' time at which the action was
performed and no such place as 'the' place at which it was performed.
I must acknowledge at once that my preferred way of talking about
where and when an action was performed is not shared by a good many
other modern philosophers of action-notably, of course, many of those
See further Kent Bach, 'Actions Are Not Events', Mind 89 (1980), 114-20, and Maria Alvarez
and John Hyman, 'Agents and their Actions', Philosophy 73 (1998), 219-45. See also my An
Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000), 240 ff.
E
223\n224 AGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
who assimilate actions to events. According to one view of these matters, a
human action such as Smith's action of killing Jones-is in fact nothing
else than a certain bodily event: in this case a certain movement of Smith's
body, namely, the movement involved in Smith's administration of the
poison as, say, he tipped the poison bottle with his hand. According to this
view, all that human agents ever do, really, is to undergo certain bodily
movements: the events that follow these movements, such as the motion of
the poison bottle and, ultimately, the death of Jones, are just consequences
of the actions in question. So is it incorrect, on this view, to say that Smith
killed Jones, or even that he tipped the poison bottle? By no means. For,
according to this view, we very often describe our actions, quite legitim
ately, in terms of their more or less remote effects. An action which, in
itself, is merely a bodily movement, such as a certain motion of Smith's
hand, may be variously redescribed as a tipping of a poison bottle or as a
killing of a victim, just so long as it has, amongst its effects, events of
certain appropriate kinds-in this case, a tipping motion of a poison bottle
and the death of another human being.
Philosophers who espouse this sort of view must say, it seems, that
Smith's action of killing Jones took place on Monday in the dining room,
assuming that this is when and where the crucial movement of Smith's
hand occurred. But to other philosophers this verdict sounds distinctly
odd and even absurd: for how can Smith have killed Jones a day before
Jones died, while Jones was still hale and hearty-and how can Smith have
killed Jones far from the place in which Jones died? No doubt we can make
sense, of a kind, of such odd ways of talking-but the fact that we find
them so odd strongly suggests that any theory of action which requires us
to talk in these ways rests upon some sort of mistake. In my view, the
mistake is one of assimilating actions to events, and the remedy is
explained above.
A causal criterion of identity for events
Setting aside these concerns, however, let us return now to the question of
how events-whether or not these should be taken to include actions are
to be individuated. The one proposal that we have looked at so far-that
See, for example, Donald Davidson, 'Agency', in Robert Binkley, Richard Bronaugh, andAusonio Marras (eds. ), Agent, Action, and Reason (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1971), reprinted in Davidson, Essays on Actions and Events. \nACTIONS AND EVENTS
spatiotemporal location serves to individuate events of any given kind
turned out to be flawed, since numerically distinct events of the same kind
can plausibly coincide in space and time. But another and seemingly more
promising proposal appeals instead to causal considerations, on the plaus
ible assumption that all events have causes and/or effects. (Even if some
events have no causes-such as, perhaps, a putative 'first' event and some
events have no effects, it seems safe to say that we can have no evidence of
there being any event which has no causes and no effects whatever: for
unless an event has either causes or effects, it seems that it cannot make
itself known to us in any way, however indirect. ) Putting the proposal in
the form of a putative criterion of identity for events, along the lines of the
schema (C2) presented earlier, it amounts to the following principle: 10
(C2) If x and y are events, then x is identical with y if and only if x and y
have the same causes and effects.
Those who typically espouse this principle presume that all causation is
event causation, so that the causes of any event are always themselves
events (rather than, say, agents of any kind). But this presumption also
seems to lead to the principle's downfall, because it appears to condemn
the principle to a fatal circularity. Recall that, when introducing schema
(C1), I remarked that the relation R, must be neither the relation of identity
itself nor any relation which presupposes or depends upon the identity of
any entity of kind k. But, it would seem, principle (C2) violates the latter
requirement. For to say that events x and y have the same causes and effects
is, given the presumption just mentioned, simply to say that the same
events that cause and are caused by x likewise cause and are caused by y,
which surely presupposes the identity of certain entities of the very kind
for which principle (C2) is supposed to provide a criterion of identity
namely, certain events. " This appears still more evident if we rephrase (C2)
in the following way:
(C2*) If x and y are events, then x is identical with y if and only if (i) for
any event z, z is a cause of x if and only if z is a cause of y and (ii)
for any event z, x is a cause of z if and only if y is a cause of z.
10 See Donald Davidson, The Individuation of Events', in Nicholas Rescher (ed. ), Essays in
Honor of Carl G. Hempel (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1969), reprinted in Davidson, Essays on Actions and
Events.
11
See further W. V. Quine, 'Events and Reification', in Ernest LePore and Brian McLaughlin
(eds. ), Actions and Events: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson (Oxford: Blackwell,
1985). Replying to Quine in the same volume, Davidson concedes the difficulty and in con
sequence abandons the criterion.
225\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
Although neither clause (i) nor clause (ii) of (C*) contains any explicitexpression of identity between events, both of these clauses contain arepeated variable, 'z', which takes events as its possible values. And when avariable is repeated in this way, it must be implicitly understood that ittakes the same value at both of its occurrences. Thus, in each of theseclauses, the variable 'z' must be understood to take the same event as itsvalue at both of its occurrences, which appears to presuppose the identity
of some event, contrary to our requirement on non-circularity. To put the
point another way: to say, as in clause (i), that an event z is a cause of x if
and only if z is a cause of y is just to say that an event z is a cause of x if and
only if that same event is also a cause of y.
Some responses to the circularity objection
At this point, it is worth comparing the apparently defective criterion of
identity for events, (C2), with the perfectly acceptable criterion of identity
for sets cited earlier, for they are superficially similar. 12 The latter criterion
states that if x and y are sets, then x is identical with y if and only if x and y
have the same members. Now, it is true that some sets may have other sets
amongst their members: but we saw earlier that, whenever this is so, it is
possible, by repeated applications of the stated criterion of identity, even
tually to determine whether or not a set x is identical with a set y without
presupposing the identity of any set whatever. This is because all sets are
ultimately founded upon entities which do not themselves have members
in the set-theoretical sense that is, they are all ultimately founded upon
entities which are either non-sets or else identical with the empty set. (The
stated criterion itself implies that there is only one empty set, because if
sets x and y both have no members, then, quite trivially, they have the same
members and so are identical according to the criterion. ) However, it
seems improbable that anything like this situation can be supposed to
obtain in the case of events, given the presupposition that the only species
of causation is event causation. It is true that criterion (C2) implies that
there is at most one event which has no causes and effects and such an
event, if it could reasonably be supposed to exist, would be in some ways
analogous to the empty set of set theory. (Clearly, if events x and y both
"For more on the points about to be made, see my 'Impredicative Identity Criteria andDavidson's Criterion of Event Identity', Analysis 49 (1989), 178-81.
226\nACTIONS AND EVENTS
have no causes and effects, then, quite trivially, they have the same causes
and effects, so that x and y are identical according to criterion (C2). ) How
ever, in the first place, as we saw earlier, we have no reason to suppose that
any event has no causes and effects and, secondly, even if such an event did
exist, it plainly could not play a role in the theory of events similar to that
of the empty set in set theory, because whereas the empty set can be a
member of other sets, the putative event with no causes and effects plainly
cannot be a cause or effect of any other event. Of course, we could save
criterion (C2) from circularity if we could suppose that certain entities
other than events could be causes or effects of events-for instance, if we
could maintain that there is agent causation as well as event causation and
that agent causation is irreducible to event causation. For then we could
hope to identify certain events by reference to their agent causes and then
to identify other events by reference to these previously identified events.
But this would be too high a price to pay for most philosophers who are
inclined to espouse a causal criterion of identity for events along the lines
of (C2).
Couldn't we perhaps hope to save criterion (C2) from circularity in the
following way, without either supposing that there is an event which has no
causes and effects or giving up the presupposition that the only species of
causation is event causation? Suppose that the universe began with the
occurrence of a finite number of uncaused events, each of which caused
various subsequent events. Call the supposed uncaused events e, and e, and
suppose, say, that e, was an immediate cause of events e, and e, while e, was
an immediate cause of events e, and es. If we like, we can suppose that this
is all that happens in the very simple universe under consideration. Now it
might seem that each of the five events occurring in that universe is dis
tinguishable in terms of its causes and/or effects and consequently that
principle (C2) suffices as a criterion of identity for events in such a uni
verse. Thus, e, is the event which has no causes and is a cause of events e,
and e, e2 is the event which has no causes and is a cause of events e, and e,
e3 is the event which is caused by e, but not by e, , e is the event which is
caused by both e, and e, and e, is the event which is caused by e but not by
e1. It might seem that, in this way, we have specified the causal relations
between the events in our five-event universe so as to assign to each
of those events a unique causal role which serves to distinguish it
unambiguously from all of the other events.
However, symmetry considerations reveal that, in fact, the only event
which is uniquely identified by its causal role in these circumstances is the
227\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS, which is distinctive in being the only event which has two causesand no effects. Of the remaining events in our five-event universe, e, is justlike e, in having no causes and two effects and e, is just like e, in having onecause and no effects. Unless we have some further way of distinguishing efrom e, and e, from e, , then, we have not yet managed to identify everyevent in this imaginary universe unambiguously. I am prepared to grantthat, in certain other very simple universes of an asymmetrical character, criterion (C) may indeed serve its intended purpose of unambiguouslyidentifying every event non-circularly. But I see no reason to suppose thatthe universe which we actually inhabit is one in which criterion (C2) canserve its intended purpose in the way it might in such an imaginary universe. Apart from anything else, we have no compelling reason to supposethat our actual universe contains a finite number of events or that it began
with a finite number of uncaused events. Here I should make it plain that
the objection to criterion (C2) is not so much that it is impractical-that it
would be impossible in practice to use it in order to identify and dis
tinguish between events, in a universe as complex as ours is-but rather
that it fails in principle to determine unambiguously the relations of iden
tity and diversity between events in any but certain unrealistically simple
universes.
Events as property exemplifications
Our search for a general criterion of identity for events has not proved
fruitful so far, which may perhaps confirm my suspicion that we shouldn't
expect events of every kind to be individuated in the same general way. But
another suspicion that may be encouraged by this failure is that we have
been approaching matters from the wrong direction: instead of attempting
to cast light on the nature of events by trying to formulate a satisfactory
criterion of identity for events, perhaps we should first endeavour to say
what events are which should then help us to understand what their
identity conditions might be. So far, in this chapter, we haven't advanced
much beyond saying that events are things that happen or occur (using the
word 'thing', here, in its broadest sense, to mean 'entity' or 'item'). This
tells us, indeed, that events are temporal entities and hence that it doesn't
make sense to talk of 'timeless events'. But it leaves practically everthingelse about their nature undetermined, apart from their particularity-thefact that they are individual entities of some sort. Thus far, then, we have
228\nACTIONS AND EVENTS
said little more than that an event is a temporal particular. an item which
happens or occurs at a particular time and is not repeatable. And some
philosophers, it seems, would be happy to leave matters at that, perhaps
even considering that nothing more than this can be said about events in
general. But others would urge that events, as a category, are by their very
nature related not only to particular times, but also to particular concrete
objects and their properties. One suggestion, for instance, is that an event
just is the exemplification of a property by an object at a time, so that every
event can be represented by (though not necessarily be identified with) an
ordered triple of an object, a property, and a time. " (An ordered triple is
simply a set of three items taken in a particular order-a mathematical
example being the ordered triple of the first three positive integers taken in
ascending order of magnitude, (1, 2, 3). )
In many familiar cases, this proposal has a good deal of plausibility. For
instance, the death of Julius Caesar is an event which can plausibly be
thought of as Caesar's exemplifying the property of dying on the Ides of
March 44 BC and thus as being representable by the ordered triple (Caesar,
dying, Ides of March 44 BC). If this conception of the nature of events is
correct, it seems to provide us immediately with a corresponding account
of the identity conditions of events. The obvious thing to say is that if x
and y are events, then they are the same event if and only if they are
represented by the same ordered triple--that is to say, if and only if they
are exemplifications of the same property by the same object at the same
time. This, of course, still leaves open the question of how we are to
individuate properties, objects, and times: but since none of these are
events, it is not obvious that the proposed criterion of identity for events
can be convicted of circularity or triviality.
I shall say more about this and related conceptions of events in the next
chapter, but for prese purposes I should just point out a few potentially
vulnerable features of it. One possible problem is that there may perhaps
be some events which do not involve the existence of any particular object
at all. Think of an event such as a sudden flash of light, perhaps one
occurring during an early phase of the universe, before any material
objects such as stars had formed. Whereas a flash of light from a light
house can perhaps be thought of as being the lighthouse's exemplifying the
19 See Jaegwon Kim, 'Events as Property Exemplifications', in Myles Brand and Douglas Walton
(eds. ), Action Theory (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980).
14 See P. F. Strawson, Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics (London: Methuen, 1959), 46.
229\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
property of
flashing at a particular time, it is not so clear what we can sayin this vein about the putative flash of light in the early universe. (Wemight be tempted to say that in this case the 'object' exemplifying theappropriate property is the universe itself: but this looks suspiciously adhoc and little more than a verbal trick. )
Another possible problem concerns the nature of the supposed 'properties' whose exemplification by objects at times events are alleged to be. Talkof 'properties' is often extremely obscure, as we shall see more fully inChapter 19. Too often, philosophers make the careless assumption that anymeaningful predicate expresses a property which something can possess: but, in fact, even if we can justify the inclusion of properties in our ontology, it is a far from trivial matter to determine which predicates expressproperties and equally problematic to determine when two predicatesexpress the same property. Even setting aside these general difficulties con
cerning properties, however, it may be doubted whether the appeal toproperties in characterizing the nature of events really can always avoidimplicit circularity. For instance, when I said, a moment ago, that a flash of
light from a lighthouse can perhaps be thought of as being the lighthouse'sexemplifying the property of flashing at a particular time, this may promptthe question of what, precisely, we should understand by the property of
'flashing' in this context. If, by 'flashing', we simply mean 'emitting aflash'-as seems plausible-then it appears that what we are talking about
in speaking of a lighthouse's 'flashing' is just a species of agent causation
(in the very broad sense of that term discussed in the previous chapter). In
other words, according to this interpretation of the verb, for a lighthouse to
'flash' is for it to cause, produce, or bring about a flash, that is, an event of a
certain kind. If that is so, then it is blatantly circular to characterize a flash
as an object's exemplifying the property of flashing at a particular time, for
this then just amounts to saying that a flash is the exemplification of the
property of producing a flash by an object at a time. Indeed, the latter
pronouncement seems not only circular but actually false, since it is hard
to see how one could identify an event with an object's exemplification ofthe property of producing just such an event. At the very least, then,
adherents of the proposal now under consideration must take great careabout which property they choose to include in the ordered triple supposedly representing a given event, making sure that it is not a propertywhich an object possesses only in virtue of producing an event of the very.
My conclusions in
this chapter have mostly been negative: that we have
230\nACTIONS AND EVENTS 231
found no satisfactory general argument for the existence of actions or
events, that actions are plausibly not events, that we have found no satisfac
tory general criterion of identity for events, and that, so far, nothing much
more can confidently be said about events in general but that they are
temporal particulars ('things which happen'). Given the evident import
ance of events for contemporary metaphysics, these conclusions may
be disappointing. However, in the next chapter I hope to be able to say
something rather more positive about the nature of events. \n13
EVENTS, THINGS, AND
SPACE-TIME
Event-ontologies versus thing-ontologies
We came to no very positive conclusion in the preceding chapter as to
what, exactly, events are, beyond saying that they are temporalparticulars-things which happen'. Although events, for the most part,
appear to be things which happen to persisting objects (or 'substances')
as, for example, a death is something which happens to an animal or
human being we did not even arrive at any very clear conception of how
events are related to the persisting objects, if any, to which they happen, or
which 'participate' in those events. We briefly considered the view that an
event just is the exemplification of a property by an object at a time, but
saw that it is apparently vulnerable to certain difficulties. In the present
chapter, I want to inquire more deeply into how we might conceive of the
ontological relationship between entities in the category of event and
entities in the category of persisting object, substance, or thing in the
narrow sense of 'thing', in which we restrict this term to such items as
trees, rocks, animals, stars, and atoms. (Some philosophers prefer to call
items belonging to these two categories 'occurrents' and 'continuants'
rather than events' and 'things', which has the advantage of avoiding some
unwanted connotations associated with everyday terms but the greater
disadvantage of artificiality. )' I also want to raise the question of how
things and events are related ontologically to the places and times in whichthey are situated or at which they occur and, indeed, how the existence of
space and time quite generally is related to the existence of the concrete
The terminology of 'continuants' and 'occurrents' is due to W. E. Johnson: see his Logic, Part I(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1921), 199. \nEVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME
occupants of space and time, both things and events. Can we, for instance,
make sense of the notion of a perfectly 'empty' space or time-regions of
space, or even an entire space, in which no concrete object exists and
periods of time, or even an entire time, in which no event occurs? If so,
what does this imply for our conception of how space and time in general
are related, ontologically, to concrete things and events capable of occupy
ing them?
On the question of how events and persisting objects, or 'things' (in our
narrow sense), are related ontologically to one another, several different
positions have been advocated at one time or another. Some philosophers
invite us to be either reductionists or eliminativists about either things or
events, while others invite us to be non-reductive pluralists. The reduction
ists attempt to reduce either things to events or else events to things (and
their properties or relations), whereas the eliminativists argue that either
things or events may be excluded, without any real loss, from our ontology.
The non-reductive pluralists, in contrast, maintain that we need to include
both things and events in our ontology as items belonging to two mutually
irreducible and equally fundamental categories. Let us call an ontological
theory which attempts to reduce things to, or eliminate them in favour of,
events an event-ontology. And let us correspondingly call an ontological
theory which attempts to reduce events to, or eliminate them in favour of,
things (and their properties or relations) a thing-ontology (or substance
ontology). These may be described as monistic ontologies, as far as the
thing/event distinction is concerned, in contrast to any pluralist ontology
which admits both things and events as items of equally fundamental
ontological status. With these distinctions in mind, we are in a position
now to examine some of the attractions and weaknesses of the various
types of ontology just mentioned.
Event-ontologies and modern physics
It is sometimes said that modern physics requires us to espouse an event
ontology. According to this way of thinking, the physical world as
described by modern physics is a four-dimensional space-time manifold,
each point of which may be designated by an ordered set of space-time
coordinates of the form (x, y, z, t), the first three co-ordinates specifying a
spatial location and the fourth a moment of time, relative to some suitable
frame of reference. A complete description of the physical world, it is then
233\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
suggested, can in principle be supplied by specifying what is happening ateach such point of space-time, that is, in terms of the events occurring atall such points. What we ordinarily think of as being a persisting object, such as a rock or a tree, is, it may be urged, just a series of events-aprocess which occupies that object's so-called 'world-line', its paththrough space and time. Another way of putting this is to say that what weordinarily think of as a persisting object or thing is just the 'materialcontent' of a region of space-time and as such is not in reality distinct from
the collection of events occurring in that region. This, of course, is areductionist rather than an eliminativist event-ontology: it admits that
persisting objects or things exist, but contends that they are nothing 'over
and above the events occurring in the space-time regions occupied by
them. If, however, it is objected that to reduce things to events in this way is
to commit some sort of 'category mistake'-on the grounds, for instance,
that persisting objects, unlike events, cannot properly be said to 'occur'
then an alternative option is an eliminativist event-ontology, according
to which talk of persisting objects should be replaced by, rather than
reduced to, talk of events and processes, at least in a fundamental scientific
description of the physical world.
Those who say that modern physics prescribes an event-ontology of
either of these kinds are rather overstating their case. 3 Modern physics is
perhaps consistent with such an ontology, but does not appear to entail it.
Some philosophers and philosophically-minded physicists may have been
misled on this score by their allegiance to an excessively positivistic epis
temology of science. In particular, they may have been swayed by the
thought that all that empirical science reveals to us, finally, are the results
of certain actual or possible measurements and observations which can be
made in the physical world-and that measurements and observations are,
after all, just events. If we think, in a positivistic spirit, that measurements
and observations are all that physical science is really concerned with, then
we may be led to imagine that all that may legitimately be said to exist, for
scientific purposes, are measurements and observations occurring at vari
ous points of space-time. However, the naïveté of such a stance is striking.
Apart from anything else, it ignores the fact that scientific measurements
See W. V. Quine, 'Identity, Ostension, and Hypostasis', in his From a Logical Point of View, 2ndedn. (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1961), and also his Word and Object (Cam
bridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1960), 171. For another scientifically inspired event ontology, see AlfredNorth Whitehead, The Concept of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1920). › See further D. H. Mellor, Real Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 127 ff.
2
234\nEVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME
and observations are made by people and very often with the indispensable
aid of scientific instruments. Both people and instruments are persisting
objects or things, which we cannot without argument presume to be 'noth
ing over and above', or reducible to, mere collections of events of meas
urement and observation. The impersonal and abstract character of much
official scientific discourse may partially disguise the metaphysical
inadequacy of the view now under scrutiny: using verbs expressed in the
third-person and passive voice, such discourse tends to describe measure
ments and observations as being made', almost as if this activity were
somehow disembodied, rather than being carried out in real laboratories
by real people using real instruments.
A rather more compelling-though still far from conclusive-argument
for saying that modern physics prescribes an event-ontology is that quan
tum physics demands an event-ontology and all physics is ultimately
reducible, at least in principle, to quantum physics. According to this line
of thinking, talk of fundamental physical 'particles'-such as protons, neu
trons, electrons, and the like-is misleading in its suggestion that these
entities are at all like the persisting objects which we ordinarily take to
populate the macroscopic world of tables, rocks, and trees. Once we
appreciate the partially 'wave-like' character of these sub-atomic entities,
which permits them to be 'spread out' and 'entangled' with one another in
states of 'superposition', we can see that the ontology of quantum physics
cannot be, in any straightforward sense, a thing- or substance-ontology
or so it may be said.
The proper response to this sort of observation is, I think, as follows.
First, even if it turns out to be the case that some sort of 'field' interpret
ation of quantum phenomena is preferable to any kind of particle' inter
pretation, it doesn't follow that such an interpretation would commit us to
a thoroughgoing event-ontology. Even before quantum physics was on the
scene, some scientists and philosophers considered that we should ultim
ately describe all physical phenomena in terms of the propagation of dis
turbances in fields of force or energy rather than in terms of interacting
particles of matter in relative motion. But such a 'field'-ontology is per
fectly compatible with a 'substance'-ontology of sorts, namely, with a
substance-ontology which holds the physical world to consist, not of a
plurality of distinct material substances, as the Greek atomists believed,
For the 'field' versus 'particle' distinction, see Michael Redhead, A Philosopher Looks at
Quantum Field Theory', in Harvey R. Brown and Rom Harré (eds. ), Philosophical Foundations of
Quantum Field Theory (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990).
235\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
but rather to be in its entirety a single and indivisible substance, as Spinoza
contended. This single substance might be identified with space-time andthe various fields' be regarded as, in Spinozistic terms, highly complex
'modes' of that single substance. A field of force or energy is, after all,
something that is characteristically conceived of as being extended in space
and persisting over time, though not qualifying as a 'substance' in its own
right because it has an ontologically dependent status, only existing so long
as its existence is sustained by the activity of something more
fundamental-something that we might call the field's 'substrate'. This,
for instance, is how we ordinarily think of the magnetic field of an elec
tromagnet, which is sustained only so long as an electric current passes
through the magnet's coils. If we think of matter as being, ultimately, a
kind of field-effect, then it seems that we must conceive of the field in
question as having as its 'substrate' nothing less than space-time itself,
which thereby acquires the status of a singular and fundamental substance.
Secondly, however, even setting aside these esoteric issues concerning
the ontology of quantum physics, we may challenge the idea that if the
ontology of quantum physics turns out not to be a thing- or substance
ontology, then this implies that a reductionist or eliminativist conception
of macroscopic physical objects must be espoused. The thought behind
this idea is, presumably, that if macroscopic objects, such as rocks and
trees, are ultimately composed entirely of quantum particles', and
quantum particles' are not really 'things' or 'persisting objects' in any
recognizable sense, then it follows that rocks and trees cannot be things or
persisting objects either: so that we must either deny that they really exist
or else regard them as being reducible to non-things of the same
category-whatever it may turn out to be-that quantum entities should
properly be said to belong to (perhaps, indeed, the category of events).
Now, it is true enough that our everyday conception of composition is
such that an entity of a given category can only be composed by other
entities of the same category-a larger thing by smaller things or a larger
event by smaller events, for instance. This may imply that we should not,
strictly, speak of a macroscopic physical object, such as a rock, as being
composed of quantum entities, if we want to regard the rock as being a
genuine 'thing' or 'substance' and the quantum entities as being 'non
things' of some kind. However, nothing in quantum theory itself appears
to require us to see the relationship between a rock and the quantum
entities which 'underlie' it as being literally one of composition in this
familiar sense. It seems open to us to regard the rock as having the status of
236\nEVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME
an emergent' entity, arising out of a complex array of quantum phenom
ena but belonging to an altogether different ontological category, one
which is only exemplified on the macroscopic scale. Certainly, the coher
ence of this view would have to be successfully challenged by anyone
seeking to undermine our allegiance to the reality of persisting objects or
'substances' merely by appeal to the putative ontology of quantum physics.
Events and change
Having considered what appear to be the somewhat dubious prospects of
defending an event-ontology on scientific grounds, let us look next at a
converse point of view-one which takes a reductionist or eliminativist
stance towards events in favour of the ontological primacy of things or
substances. This, of course, is a much more traditional position-one
which may loosely be described as being 'Aristotelian' in spirit. Now,
whereas one might aspire to identify a 'thing', such as a rock or a tree, with
some collection or series of events (though perhaps only on pain of being
accused of committing a category mistake), it is clear that there is no
prospect whatever of our saying, with any degree of plausibility, that an
event-such as the Battle of Hastings-just is (identical with) some collec
tion of things or persisting objects. The most obvious reason for this is that
events occur at times, often of fairly short duration, whereas the persisting
objects which 'participate' in events such as the soldiers who fought at
the Battle of Hastings-typically have careers which transcend the times of
those events. Rather, what we might more plausibly contend is that any
event is a change in the properties of or relations between some thing or
things. For instance, a death, we might say, is a change in the vital proper
ties of a living organism (understanding its 'vital' properties to be those in
virtue of which it qualifies as a living thing). Similarly, a marriage, we
might say, is a change in the legal relationship between two persons. That
events are changes does indeed seem a sensible-perhaps even
platitudinous-thought. And that changes are at least very often changes
in the properties and relations of things seems equally uncontentious. But
this account of the nature of events is only as clear as the notion of
'change' to which it appeals. What is a change? If all that we can say is that a
change is an event, or a happening, or an occurrence, then we shall not have
made much progress at all.
But perhaps we can say something more illuminating about the nature
237\n238
AGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
change. In the broadest possible sense of 'change', we may say, perhaps, that a change occurs at a time t just in case something begins to be the caseat t which was not the case prior to t. For example, a change in the colourof an object, O, occurs at a time t if, say, O is green prior to t but O beginsto be red at t. (O here might be something like a traffic light. ) In this case, itseems clear, the change in question is a change in the object O itself, since itis a change in the colour-properties of O. But consider now another kindof case such as the following: the change which occurred when Xanthippebecame a widow upon the death of her husband, Socrates. Here we may bereluctant to say that the change in question was really a change in Xanthippe. Or, again, consider the change which occurs when Mary (who has
stopped growing) becomes shorter than her brother, Tom, because Tom
has suddenly grown. We do not, perhaps, want to say that this is really a
change in Mary, or that Mary herself has really changed. Even so, in both
these cases, it seems, we want to say that something has really changed:
Socrates in the first case-for he has died and to die is certainly to suffer a
kind of change, indeed a very radical one-and Tom in the second case.
Some philosophers say that, in these cases, Xanthippe and Mary have
undergone a 'mere Cambridge change'-a term whose historical roots
need not concern us here-but perhaps we can say more perspicuously
that Xanthippe and Mary have undergone a purely relational change, as
opposed to an intrinsic change. They have changed only inasmuch as
something to which they are somehow related has undergone an intrinsic
change: independently of their relationship to the thing in question, Xan
thippe and Mary have not (or need not have) undergone any change
of
at all.
Is it the case, though, that non-intrinsic change in an object always and
only arises in virtue of some relationship it bears to another object which is
itself the subject of an intrinsic change? Perhaps not, for consider the
following kind of case. Today every object that existed yesterday is older
than it was yesterday. Tom, for instance, is perhaps 4, 961 days old today,
whereas he was 4, 960 days old yesterday. According to the definition of
change proposed earlier, this implies that a change has occurred: for today
it began to be the case that Tom is 4, 961 days old, which was not the case
yesterday. But is this a change in Tom-and if so, is it an intrinsic change in
Tom? No doubt Tom will indeed have changed in some way since yesterday
and, indeed, changed intrinsically in some way: but not, surely, purely in
virtue of being one day older. We can perfectly easily conceive of an object
which gets one day older without changing intrinsically in any way at all.
So it seems that an object's merely getting older is not in itself a matter of\n239EVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME
that object's undergoing some kind of intrinsic change. But equally,
seems, an object's merely getting older is not in itself a matter of that
object's being somehow related to something which does undergo some
kind of intrinsic change: for, quite apart from anything else, we seem to be
able to conceive of a world of objects all of which get one day older
without any of them undergoing any kind of intrinsic change. (This is a
putative possibility to which I shall return later in this chapter. )
One thing that emerges from this example is how very broad the con
ception of 'change' is that was defined earlier. This is an advantage of that
conception for our present purposes, because it means that it is a concep
tion which does not presuppose much, if anything, about the ontological
relationships between change, events, and things. Employing this notion of
change, there will be nothing circular or question-begging in our propos
ing, as we did earlier, that an event is a change in the properties of or
relations between some thing or things. Of course, if we are right in saying
that something's getting older is not in itself a matter of that thing (or
anything else) undergoing any kind of intrinsic or relational change, then
it will follow, according to our proposal, that Tom's becoming a day older
today is not an event. But that, if anything, seems to be to the credit of our
proposal, since it sounds distinctly odd to speak of Tom's becoming a day
older as being an event. Apart from anything else, we expect events to have
causes and effects, but it is not clear that Tom's becoming a day older, as
such, has either. All that is required for Tom to become a day older today is
that nothing should have caused his death yesterday. But the non
occurrence of any event causing Tom's death yesterday is not a cause of
Tom's becoming older today, since a 'non-occurrence' is not some strange
kind of 'negative' event. Indeed, there are no negative events, in the way
that there are negative facts.
It is true, of course, that various events cause Tom to go on living from
yesterday to today-and it might be thought that these are the causes of
Tom's becoming a day older today. However, we are not obliged to say
the latter. We may concede that the events in question provide a causal
explanation of the fact that Tom is still alive today and hence a day older,
without conceding that Tom's becoming a day older today is itself an event
which the events in question cause. The mere passage of time, it seems, is
not properly conceived as consisting in a succession of events, each requir
ing a prior cause. And Tom's becoming a day older today is merely a logical
See further D. H. Mellor, The Facts of Causation (London: Routledge, 1995), 133 f. \nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
consequence of the passage of time, together with the fact that his deathdid not occur yesterday. It does not appear to be something which canproperly be described as an 'effect', in the causal sense of this word, andconsequently does not seem to be something belonging to the category ofevents.
Are there any 'subjectless' events?
There is, however, one apparently very serious difficulty facing the proposal that an event is a change in the properties of or relations betweensome thing or things-a difficulty which we touched upon in the previouschapter. This is that there would at least appear to be some events whichhave no thing or things as their 'subject'. As was noted in that chapter, Peter Strawson makes the point in one place that 'There was a flash' does
not entail 'Something flashed'. That is perfectly correct. However, it does
not immediately threaten our proposal. Consider, for instance, a flash of
lightning, which is certainly an event. A child who asked, upon seeing a
flash of lightning, 'What was it that flashed just then? ', would have to be
told that nothing-no thing-flashed. A flash of lightning is not like the
flash of a lighthouse. Had the child's question concerned a flash of the
latter kind, we could quite properly have answered 'It was a lighthouse that
flashed'. But none of this goes any way at all toward showing that a flash
need not be a change in the properties of or relations between some thing
or things. In the case of a lightning flash, indeed, it seems entirely correct
to say that it is just such a change, the things in question being various
charged particles in the clouds, changes in whose electrical properties con
stitute the kind of electrical discharge which science reveals a lightning
flash to be. These particles do not literally 'flash', in the way that a light
house flashes, but they do undergo certain intrinsic and relational changes
which may be said to constitute an event of the kind we describe as a
"lightning flash'.
This sort of case makes it clear that genuine counterexamples to the
proposal that an event is a change in the properties of or relations between
some thing or things may not be all that easy to come by. Even so, we did
meet a putative counterexample of this sort in the previous chapter, when
we considered the case of a flash of light occurring in the early universe,
See P. F. Strawson, Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics (London: Methuen, 1959), 46.
6
240\nEVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME
before the formation of any material particles. If photons, as quantum
entities, are not really 'things', for reasons adumbrated earlier, then there
would seem to be little scope for identifying any thing or things as the
'subject' of such a change, other than, perhaps, the physical universe as a
whole, conceived as a singular and indivisible substance along Spinozistic
lines. However, the very fact that even this option remains as a way of
saving the proposal from counterexamples demonstrates, perhaps, its ver
satility and strength as a metaphysical hypothesis. (Opponents might say,
contrariwise, that it demonstrates the vacuity of the hypothesis, by exhibit
ing to us its apparent unfalsifiability: but although unfalsifiability is very
arguably a defect in scientific hypotheses, because it deprives them of
empirical content, it seems rather to be a virtue in a metaphysical
hypothesis. )
Reductionism versus eliminativism
Incidentally, our proposal that an event is-is 'nothing but'-a change in
the properties of or relations between some thing or things may be given
either a 'reductionist' or an 'eliminativist' gloss. We might see this pro
posal, in line with my implicit assumption so far, as telling us what events
are, by 'reducing them to-or explicating them in terms of changes in
the properties of or relations between things. This, then, is not to deny that
events exist, only to contend that they are ontologically dependent entities,
depending for their existence and identity upon the things, properties, and
relations in terms of which they are to be explicated. It is a view which still
permits us to quantify over and refer to events with impunity. But an
eliminativist would prefer to see in such a proposal a way of excluding
events from our ontology altogether: according to this way of reading it,
the proposal is that we can, and in principle should, replace all of our talk
about events and their properties and relations by talk of change in the
properties and relations of things (remembering here that talk of 'change'
in the sense now being understood is not just trivially equivalent to talk of
the occurrence of events).
How should we choose between the reductionist and eliminativist
options? Perhaps, applying Occam's infamous razor, we should adopt the
7 For one recent defence of eliminativism regarding events, see Michael Tye, The Metaphysics of
Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), ch. 2.
241\n242 AGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
eliminativist option if and only if we can find no honest work for events todo. If we are convinced, for instance, that events need to be included in ourontology to serve as the relata of causal relations, then we should choosethe reductionist option in preference to the eliminativist one. And notehere that even if we believe in the ontological primacy of agent causationover event causation (see Chapter 11), we may still need to include events inour ontology as effects, even if not as causes. All things considered, however, it would seem that the eliminativist option is unduly austere and I shallcontinue to assume as much from now on.
Is motion change of distance?
One kind of change which we have not yet properly considered is the kind
of change which occurs when two persisting objects or things move relative
to one another. Such a change, which would seem to qualify quite
unproblematically as an event, is apparently a kind of relational change, for
the objects in question clearly undergo a change in respect of the degree of
spatial separation or distance between them-and distance is a relation.
But this kind of change may not, on the face of it, seem to be what I earlier
described as a purely relational change, that is, a change which an object
undergoes only inasmuch as something to which it is somehow related
undergoes an intrinsic change-such as Xanthippe's becoming a widow or
Mary's becoming shorter than Tom. If two objects move relative to one
another, it is not clear that we should want to say that just one of these
objects is undergoing an intrinsic change while the other is undergoing a
purely relational change. Indeed, it may be held that motion just is change
of distance between two objects, in which case it does not essentially
involve any kind of intrinsic change in the objects in question that is to
say, any change in their intrinsic properties-but only a change in a con
tingent relation between them. (An intrinsic property of an object is one
which it possesses independently of any relation that it may bear to any
other object. ) This, certainly, seems to be the conception of motion that is
assumed by modern physics. However, it is a conception which is not
invulnerable to challenge, as we shall now see.
Common sense suggests that sometimes, at least, relative motion
between two objects does indeed constitute a purely relational change onthe part of one of these objects. For example, if an astronaut separatedfrom his ship in deep space fires a bullet from his space gun, he and the\nEVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME 243
bullet will move away from one another: but the astronaut will also move
relative to his ship and his ship relative to him-and yet we intuitively
want to say in this case that it is the astronaut, not his ship, which is really'
moving, because the initiating cause of the change of distance between
them was a force acting upon the astronaut, not upon the ship. In this case,
it seems, the ship's 'movement' relative to the astronaut is a purely
relational change, arising from an intrinsic change involving the astronaut.
Perhaps, indeed, we can say that the intrinsic change in question is not a
change in any intrinsic property of the astronaut, but only a change in an
intrinsic property of a pair of objects consisting of the astronaut and the
bullet or (if this way of putting it is preferred) a change in an intrinsic
relation-namely, distance-between the astronaut and the bullet. (An
intrinsic relation between two objects is a relation which holds between
them independently of any relation that either object may bear to any
third object. ) This would allow us to preserve the 'orthodox' scientific
conception of motion as change of distance between objects, sup
plemented merely with the observation that when such change occurs we
are not obliged to say that both of the objects concerned are really'
moving.
However, a more radical but apparently quite coherent alternative would
be to conceive of 'real' motion as being a kind of intrinsic property of the
moving object-a property which may help to cause changes of distance
between that object and others, but which does not consist in its undergo
ing such changes of distance. (Note, though, that talk of such causation
will not fit comfortably with the idea that all causes are events. ) According
to this way of thinking, both the astronaut and the bullet are 'really' mov
ing, but not in virtue of the change of distance between them, this merely
being an effect of their (oppositely directed) motions, just as the change of
distance between the astronaut and his ship is an effect of the astronaut's
motion in a certain direction. Motion in an object, on this conception, is
something like a 'directional tendency', of variable magnitude, which is
intrinsic to the moving object and helps to cause, in appropriate circum
stances, changes of distance between it and other objects, the other con
tributory causes being the 'directional tendencies' of the other objects in
question. (In fact, the mathematical conception of velocity as a vector is
perfectly consistent with this view of motion, even though the view is at
8
Compare Michael Tooley, 'In Defense of the Existence of States of Motion', Philosophical
Topics 16 (1988), 225-54, and Denis Robinson, 'Matter, Motion and Humean Supervenience',
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 67 (1989), 394-409. \nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
odds with the 'orthodox' idea that motion simply consists in change ofdistance between objects-an idea which arises, perhaps, from a confusionbetween what motion is and how it may be measured. I shall return to
these matters when I say more about the nature of motion in Chapters 14and 16. )
Prospects for a non-reductive pluralism of things
and events
So far in this chapter we have been considering strategies and arguments
for reducing things to, or eliminating them in favour of, events or for
reducing events to, or eliminating them in favour of, things (and their
properties or relations). But, as I indicated at the outset of the chapter, a
possible alternative position to adopt would be a form of non-reductive
pluralism with respect to the distinction between things and events. To the
extent that there are difficulties besetting the reductivist and eliminativist
positions, non-reductive pluralism may emerge as the victor by default.
According to this view, the world contains things (persisting objects, or
substances) and it also contains events, but both are types of 'basic particu
lar'. Things and events, being particulars of different basic types, have
different sorts of properties and enter into different sorts of relation-but,
according to the view under scrutiny, little more than this can be said, quite
generally, about the distinction between them. We can remark, indeed, that
events occur at times or last through periods of time, whereas things
persist over time or from one time to another; that events happen to or
'befall' things, whereas things 'participate' in events; and that events may
uncontentiously have temporal parts or stages earlier and later phases
whereas things apparently do not. Such remarks, however, almost plati
tudinous as they seem to be, do not amount to anything deserving the title
of a theory of the distinction between things and events. Indeed, they seem
to leave inherently mysterious the relationship between an event and the
things which 'participate' in it-for example, the relationship between a
battle and the men fighting it or between a marriage and the two people
getting married. If things and events are items of two basic and mutually
irreducible ontological categories, it would seem that the relationship of
This would appear to be Donald Davidson's position: see his "The Individuation of Events', in
Nicholas Rescher (ed. ), Essays in Honor of Carl G. Hempel (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1969), reprintedin Donald Davidson, Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980).
31
244\nEVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME 245
'participation' between things and events must itself be something basic
and incapable of analysis or explication. If so, this is a deeply unsatisfactory
feature of the non-reductive pluralist's position. For this reason, I am
inclined to view non-reductive pluralism as being a position of last resort,
to be adopted only if no reductive or eliminative position proves to be
tenable. As will be clear from the preceding discussion, my own preference
is for a conception of events which reduces them to, or explicates them in
terms of, changes in the properties of or relations between things. In short,
I am in favour of a thing- or substance-ontology. Such a view renders
entirely unmysterious the relationship between events and the things
which 'participate' in them, for on this view those things' participation in
the events in question consists in their being the very things changes in
whose properties or relations constitute those events. Thus, for example,
by this account a living creature 'participates' in the event of its death
simply in virtue of being the thing a change in whose vital properties
constitutes that event.
Can there be time without change?
We have thought a good deal, in this chapter, about the relationship
between things and events, but rather less about the relationship between
items in these categories and the places and times which, in some sense,
they 'occupy'. Both things (in the narrow sense currently intended) and
events are necessarily inhabitants of time and may also be inhabitants of
space. We should probably not insist, without qualification, that things and
events are necessarily inhabitants of space, because we can at least coher
ently conceive of spatially unlocated things and events, such as 'Cartesian'
egos and their cognitions. Things and events of certain kinds clearly are
necessarily inhabitants of space-for example, material bodies are, as are
explosions and collisions. We can make no coherent sense of the notion of
a spatially unlocated material body, nor can we intelligibly conceive of an
explosion or collision which does not occur somewhere. But this holds on
account of the kinds of things and events that we are considering here, not
simply on account of their being things and events as such. Partly in view
of this element of contingency in the relationship between things and
events, in general, and space or place, I shall concentrate in what follows on
See further my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1998).
10\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
issues concerning time-though in the next chapter I shall consider insome depth the question, mentioned at the outset of this one, of whetherspace, or even merely some region of space, could exist wholly devoid ofphysical objects.
The corresponding question concerning time is this: could time in itsentirety, or even merely some period of time, exist wholly devoid of events, that is, without anything at all happening during that time? This is sometimes broached as the question of whether there could be (a period of)time without change. However, that way of putting the question is potentially misleading since, as we have already seen, the term 'change' admits ofmany subtly different interpretations. In the most general sense of the term
that I defined earlier, according to which a change occurs at a time t just in
case something begins to be the case at t which was not the case prior to t
it is perfectly clear that there cannot, on pain of contradiction, be time
without change. For if a period of time exists, it must have earlier and later
parts, and of any time t during the period it will consequently be true to
say that something begins to be the case at t which was not the case prior to
t-namely, it begins to be the case at t that the part of the period earlier
than this past. This kind of 'change' is simply the so-called 'passage' of time
itself, which must take place if time is to exist at all. A more interesting
question, then, is whether there could be a period of time during which no
event occurred-though this question obviously depends for its interpret
ation upon what conception is adopted of an event. Suppose, however, that
we adopt the conception recommended earlier, that an event is a change in
the properties of or relations between some thing or things. Then our
question amounts to this: could there be a period of time during which
nothing-no thing-underwent any change in its properties or relations to
other things?
Earlier in this chapter, I gestured towards a positive answer to this ques
tion, when I said that we seem to be able to conceive of a world of objects
all of which get one day older without any of them undergoing any kind of
intrinsic change. But we should be wary of assuming that what we are able
to 'conceive' therefore constitutes a genuine metaphysical possibility. In
such a world, what would make it the case that objects got 'older' by a day?
Certainly, nothing and no-one in such a world would be able to record or
measure the passage of time during the period of non-change-for people,
clocks, and even atomic processes would all remain 'frozen' for that period.
However, we should resist applying a verificationist criterion of meaning at
this point, contending that, because the passage of time would be
246\nEVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME 247
unobservable and unmeasurable during the supposed period of non
change, such a period could therefore not meaningfully be said to exist.
Moreover, it is at least arguable that an observer inhabiting such a world
could, in principle, have good indirect evidence for believing that a period
of time had elapsed during which no event (in our sense) had occurred.
Shoemaker's argument
Exploiting a famous thought experiment of Sydney Shoemaker's designed
for this purpose, we could suppose that the observer's world is divided into
three distinct regions, A, B, and C, each one of which is observed by
inhabitants of the others to go, periodically, into a 'frozen' state, in which
nothing happens in the region in question. " Observation over many years
might indicate that the three regions each go into a 'frozen' state of a year's
duration after a fixed number of 'unfrozen' years, the number being differ
ent for each region. For region A, a 'freeze' appears to occur once every
three years; for region B, it appears to occur once every four years; and for
region C, it appears to occur once every five years. There are many
opportunities for the inhabitants of any two different regions to com
municate with one another during periods in which both of their regions
are 'unfrozen', so that the complete evidence for the regular cyclical pat
tern of the 'freezes' can be made available to an inhabitant of any one of
the regions. However, it takes only elementary reasoning to see that, if the
cyclical hypothesis is correct, then once every sixty years all three regions
must simultaneously undergo a 'freeze', so that for one year in every sixty
the whole world is 'frozen'.
Of course, an alternative hypothesis would be that a more complicated
pattern of 'freezes' occurs, missing out the total 'freeze' in every sixtieth
year. But, quite generally, it is preferable to adopt a simpler hypothesis
rather than a more complicated one in order to explain a given set of
empirical data: and the cyclical hypothesis is clearly simpler than its rival
which omits the total 'freeze' in every sixtieth year. So, it seems, the cyclical
hypothesis offers the best, because the simplest, explanation of the empir
ical data in question and is therefore supported by those data more
"See Sydney Shoemaker, 'Time Without Change', Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969), 363-81,
reprinted in his Identity, Cause and Mind: Philosophical Essays (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1984). The discussion that follows cannot do full justice to the subtlety of Shoemaker's
arguments, given the limited space available. \n\n\nAGENTS, ACTIONS, AND EVENTS
strongly than is its rival. It seems that inhabitants of the world in questionought, accordingly, to accept the cyclical hypothesis and therewith itsimplication that a period of time can elapse in which nothing at allhappens.
Here, however, it may be objected that we are putting the cart before thehorse in suggesting that empirical evidence could support the cyclicalhypothesis when what is at issue is whether the cyclical hypothesis evenstates a possibility. Empirical evidence may help us to choose between rivalscientific hypotheses, as may considerations of simplicity, but a precondition for any such hypothesis even to be considered eligible as an explanation for certain empirical data is that it should express a possible state ofaffairs. Any hypothesis which entails an impossibility itself expresses animpossible state of affairs. But the cyclical hypothesis entails that a periodof time elapses in which nothing at all happens in the three-region world,
so unless it is possible for nothing at all to happen for a period of time, the
cyclical hypothesis expresses an impossible state of affairs and is ineligible
for the purposes of scientific explanation. Hence, empirical evidence can
only count in favour of the cyclical hypothesis on condition that it really is
possible for nothing at all to happen for a period of time, which is the very
point at issue. Thus it appears that the thought experiment involving the
three-region world cannot in any way help to establish this possibility, that
is, provide rational grounds for thinking that it really is a possibility.
Besides, there is another problem with the cyclical hypothesis, even
assuming that it is possible for nothing at all to happen for a period of
time. If the three-region world were ever to enter into a total 'freeze', why
should any part of it subsequently become 'unfrozen' again? According to
the cyclical hypothesis, all of the three regions become 'unfrozen' following
each year of total 'freeze': but what could possibly cause the regions to
become 'unfrozen' again, given that nothing at all happens―no event
whatever occurs-during the period of time immediately preceding the
time of 'unfreezing'? If causes are events, then the only events capable of
causing the 'unfreezing' of the regions following a total 'freeze' would be
events which occurred at least one year prior to the time of 'unfreezing'.
But to suppose that any such event could cause the 'unfreezing' is to
suppose that there can be causation at a temporal distance, that is, that an
event occurring at an earlier time can cause an event occurring at a later
time 'directly', without that earlier event causing any event which occurs at
an intermediate time and which in turn causes the later event. The trouble(or, at least, one trouble) with the notion of causation at a temporal dis
248\n249EVENTS, THINGS, AND SPACE-TIME
tance is that it is hard to see how the supposed cause could cause its
supposed effect to occur at the time it did-in this case, at least one year
later rather than at some earlier time. Of course, it might still happen by
chance that all three regions of the three-region world become 'unfrozen'
precisely one year after the beginning of some total 'freeze'. But if that is
what happens, rather than the 'unfreezing' after a total 'freeze' always
being brought about by prior causes, then there would be no reason to
expect there to be a regular cycle of 'freezes' of the kind proposed by the
cyclical hypothesis, since the length of any period of total 'freeze' would be
a matter of pure chance-and so there would be no reason to believe the
cyclical hypothesis to be true.
As for the more fundamental question of whether, indeed, it is possible
for nothing at all to happen for a period of time, it would seem that we
cannot hope to provide a principled answer to this question unless or until
we possess a satisfactory theory of the nature of time itself. Some steps
towards the construction of such a theory will be taken in the course of the
next five chapters. \n\nPART V
SPACE AND TIME\n\n14
ABSOLUTISM VERSUS
RELATIONALISM
Dimensionality and the structure of space
What are space and time? And how are they related to one another? Space,
as far as we know, is three-dimensional. Is time just a fourth dimension
which, together with the three dimensions of space, helps to comprise a
unitary four-dimensional manifold in which all physical objects and events
somehow reside? Or is it a mistake to think of time as being any kind of
dimension in which physical reality is extended or 'spread out', in the way
in which physical things are extended in space? Certainly, we do not, in our
everyday concerns, normally think of time as being anything like space,
even though the mathematical representation of time in theoretical physics
may tempt us assimilate time to the three dimensions of space. Physicists
often represent spatiotemporal relations graphically by means of (two
dimensional) space-time diagrams, in which one axis represents time, t,
and the other represents the three dimensions of space, s (see Fig. 14. 1). But
it is equally common to use such two-dimensional graphical representa
tions to convey information about relations between, for instance, the
pressure and temperature of a gas-and no one imagines that pressure and
temperature are literally dimensions of reality in which physical things are
extended. So the mathematical representation of time implies nothing, in
itself, about the similarity or lack of it between time and the three dimen
sions of space. However, since the nature of time is, if anything, even more
problematic than the nature of space, let us, for the present, focus on
space-even though it may turn out, eventually, that space can only prop
erly be conceived of as a part or aspect of an all-embracing space-time. (I
shall return to this issue at the end of the chapter. )
Space, it seems, has parts. Some of these parts are three-dimensional, \nSPACE AND TIME
Fig. 14. 1
like space as a whole: these we may call volumes of space or, more colloquially, 'regions'. But regions of space have two-dimensional boundaries
their surfaces which may also seem to be parts of space. Surfaces in turnhave one-dimensional or linear boundaries and these lines have zero
dimensional boundaries, otherwise known as points. Some philosophersand most modern mathematicians take a 'bottom-up' view of three
dimensional space and its various lesser-dimensional parts or features, maintaining that space as a whole is ultimately composed of points-that it
is just an aggregate or multiplicity of points. Against this view, other philo
sophers contend that no plurality, however large, of zero-dimensional
entities can possibly add up to or collectively constitute a three
dimensional entity-not even if the plurality question is uncountably
infinite. According to many of these philosophers-who take instead a
'top-down' view of the relation between space as a whole and its lesser
dimensional features-surfaces, lines, and points are not, strictly speaking,
parts of space at all, but just 'limits' of certain kinds and as such 'abstract'
entities (in one sense of the term 'abstract', which we shall explore further
in Chapter 20). 1
These are matters that we shall discuss in more detail Chapter 16. For
the time being, let us just take note of the fact that the only parts of space
that we can uncontentiously regard as such are its three-dimensional
regions or volumes. However, even if it is uncontentious that space as a
whole has three-dimensional parts, it is questionable whether space as awhole is composed of those parts, because to suppose that it is may seem to
See further Joshua Hoffman and Gary S. Rosenkrantz, Substance among Other Categories(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 107 ff. and 188 ff.
t
254\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM 255
concede too much to the 'bottom-up' view of space. Composition is nor
mally conceived of as a relation which obtains between a whole and parts
of that whole which could, in principle, exist independently of the whole
of which they are parts. But, very arguably, no region of space could exist
independently of space as a whole. Not even God, it may seem, could
obliterate all of space except for a certain three-dimensional region of it.
Perhaps He could shrink the whole of space to what was formerly the size
of a small region of it-on the assumption that space as a whole is not
necessarily infinite in extent-but that is a very different thing for Him to
do. If this line of thinking is correct, then space as a whole has a unitary or
singular nature which is inconsistent with our regarding it as being 'made
up' of lesser parts of any kind-even if we accept, as we surely must, that
space contains many quite distinct regions, some of which are contiguous
with one another and others of which are widely separated.
We have arrived by degrees at a conception of space as a singular three
dimensional entity which, while exhibiting internal geometrical complex
ity, is, ontologically speaking, a simple and indivisible whole. Considered a
priori, it may seem that space as a whole may be either finite or infinite in
extent, and if finite then either bounded or unbounded. If it is finite but
unbounded, then it cannot be 'flat', as Euclid supposed, but must be posi
tively 'curveď', having a topology in three dimensions which is analogous
to that of the surface of a sphere. (The surface of a sphere is not infinitely
extended, but it does not have any 'edge' or boundary. ) Non-Euclidean
'curved' space may be difficult or even impossible for us to imagine, but
seems to be, metaphysically speaking, perfectly possible--and many mod
ern cosmologists think it likely that space actually is 'curved' in this way. It
would be a mistake, incidentally, to suppose that if three-dimensional
space is positively 'curved', then there must be some fourth spatial dimen
sion in which it is curved, in the way in which the two-dimensional surface
of a sphere is curved in the third dimension. This is simply a point at
which the analogy breaks down. The 'curvature' of space-whether it is of
'positive', 'negative', or, indeed, 'zero' value-is an internal or intrinsic
feature of space itself, not a feature which it possesses only in virtue of its
relation to some higher-dimensional space in which it is 'embedded'. And,
clearly, its curvature must have some value, even if that value is zero, as
Euclid effectively assumed. \nSPACE AND TIME
Space as 'the void' versus space as a 'plenum'
But how is space, thus conceived, related to the physical objects whichseemingly occupy its various regions and move about within it? We may bestrongly tempted to think of space as a kind of 'container' for physicalobjects, but this can at best only be a metaphor and may well be a misleading one. 'Containers', after all, are, literally speaking, just various types ofphysical object. For instance, a fish tank is a container for water and the
fish that live in it. Some philosophers, convinced that space itself is distinctfrom any material entity residing in it, have thought of space as ' thevoid'-a kind of emptiness which material bodies can partly fill. But it is
hard to see how the void' can be anything at all-how it can differ from
mere nothingness or absence of being-in which case it is hard to see how
anything material can 'occupy' it. It seems that 'the void' could have no
features or nature of its own, for only that which is something a real
entity can have features or a nature. And space, we have seen, does have
features and so, presumably, a nature. Space is something, not nothing. But
what sort of something? That is the chief question.
Contrary to the conception of space as 'the void', there is the conception
of space as a 'plenum'-as something that is, quite literally, 'full'. Full of
what? Full, perhaps, of matter-or of its modern equivalent, energy (the
equivalence being underwritten by Einstein's famous equation, E = mc).
Modern physics teaches us that even the 'vacuum' is, in reality, a highly
energetic state. We have good empirical reason to suppose that there is no
part of space which is not suffused with energy, even though the energy
density of some parts of space is clearly much higher than that of others.
Even so, we may wonder whether it is not at least metaphysically possible for
there to be regions of space that are perfectly empty of matter and energy. If
that is possible, then, it seems, space cannot simply be identified with the
spatially extended material universe as a whole. And, indeed, the so-called
field equations of Einstein's general theory of relativity which forms the
basis of modern scientific cosmology--admit of solutions in which space is
entirely devoid of matter and energy. 3 So, mathematically, at least, it seems
that the notion of perfectly 'empty' space is perfectly coherent.
*For an interesting discussion of some of the possible implications of this, see John Leslie, TheEnd of the World: The Science and Ethics of Human Extinction (London: Routledge, 1996), 108 ff. See further J. D. North, The Measure of the Universe: A History of Modern Cosmology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1965), 87 ff.
256\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM | 257
We thus arrive at a puzzling conclusion: that space cannot be mere
emptiness and yet could be perfectly empty. Space seems to teeter
uncomfortably on the boundary between being nothing and being some
thing. It is that in which all material things have their existence while itself
being somehow immaterial. Perhaps this makes more intelligible Sir Isaac
Newton's suggestion that space is God's 'sensorium' (as it were, the theatre
of His mind), or it may recall to us St Paul's famous remark (a favourite
one of Berkeley's) that it is in God that we 'live, move, and have our
being'. Seen in such a light, space presents itself as a unitary and indivis
ible immaterial substance, possibly infinite in nature-which makes it not
far removed from God Himself, as He is conceived by traditional theism.
Indeed, from a theological point of view, space thus conceived even seems
to pose something of a dilemma: for either space threatens to constitute an
infinite and uncreated substance which rivals God, or else, to eliminate
the threat of such rivalry, God is to be identified with space, which means
that He is spatially extended and, quite literally, 'omnipresent' (located
everywhere) and neither alternative sits altogether comfortably with
traditional theological doctrines. Spinoza adopts something like the sec
ond option, speaking as he does of the one substance of his monistic
metaphysics as Deus sive Natura ('God or Nature'). Newton, by contrast,
very often seems committed, whether he likes it or not, to something more
like the first option, through his allegiance to an 'absolute' conception of
space. Setting aside, however, all of the murkier theological complications,
let us now inquire more closely into this Newtonian conception of space,
considered from a purely scientific and metaphysical point of view-for
not only is it metaphysically interesting in its own right, but also it has
been immensely influential in the history of science, owing to the
enormous and long-lasting success of Newtonian physics.
Newtonian absolute space
Newton arrives at his conception of space as 'absolute'-in the sense to be
explained shortly--through a number of considerations concerning the
nature of motion. Motion, intuitively, either consists in or at least necessar
ily involves change of place or position. When we attempt to measure
* See Sir Isaac Newton, Opticks (New York: Dover, 1952), query 28, p. 370, and George Berkeley,
A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, para. 149, in his Philosophical Works, ed.
M. R. Ayers (London: Dent, 1975), p. 234. For St Paul's remark, see Acts 17: 28. \nSPACE AND TIME
motion, however, we inevitably have to do so relative to some identifiablematerial object, whose position we regard as fixed for the purposes ofmeasurement: this object we may regard as determining a 'frame of refer
ence' for our measurement. To use one of Newton's own examples, one
may measure the speed-or, more properly speaking, the velocity-of a
sailor as he walks along the deck of his ship by taking the deck as our frame
of reference: but since the ship itself may be moving relative to the sea bed,
we may find that the velocity of the sailor as measured by taking the
surface of the earth as our frame of reference has a quite different value.
Now, of course, the Earth in turn is moving relative to the Sun and this
moves relative to the other stars of our galaxy, the Milky Way, while the
Milky Way in turn is moving relative to other distant galaxies. But then
what? Although Newton himself did not know this (being unaware of the
existence of distant galaxies), we now know that all of the galaxies in the
universe (or, at least, localized clusters of them) are moving away from one
another at an immense velocity, in a process known by modern cosmolo
gists as 'the expansion of the universe'. So what are the galaxies moving
relative to-apart from each other, of course? It is very tempting to answer
that every galaxy must be moving relative to something else-something
which is not itself a galaxy nor, indeed, any other aggregation of matter.
This something else, according to Newton's conception, is space itself,
which is immaterial. A material object's velocity relative to space itself is its
absolute velocity, which cannot be measured by us simply because space
itself, being immaterial, is imperceptible. When a material object is moving
absolutely, it is undergoing a change of its absolute position that is, it is
moving from one part of space to another, the parts of space themselves
being necessarily immovable. Mere relative motion, such as the motion of
the sailor relative to the deck of his ship, is mere change of relative
position, which need involve no change of absolute position at all.
But why should we believe in the existence of this 'absolute' space? Why
shouldn't we just say that the galaxies are moving away from each other
and leave it at that? This would mean that all motion is relative motion
motion relative to some material object or other which can be taken to
determine a frame of reference. After all, Newton concedes that absolute
velocity cannot be measured, because the parts of space as he conceives of
See Isaac Newton, The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, trans.
1. Bernard Cohen and Anne Whitman (Berkeley and Los Angeles, Calif. : University of California
Press, 1999), Scholium to the Definitions, pp. 409-10. The thought experiments described later areintroduced in this scholium.
258\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM | 259
it are imperceptible. To this it may be replied that we should not apply at
this point some crude verificationist criterion of meaning and say, just
because absolute velocity is not empirically measurable or observable, that
it therefore cannot meaningfully be said to exist. However, our question is
whether we should believe that absolute velocity-and therewith absolute
space-really does exist and it is not enough, to justify a positive answer to
this question, to point out that absolute velocity and space could exist,
consistently with empirically known facts. We want to know what sort of
empirical evidence, if any, could justify a belief in absolute space-and if it
should turn out that no such evidence ever could justify that belief, then
we had better not hold it.
Newton, to his credit, is sensitive to this requirement and attempts to
satisfy it. His contention is that, although absolute velocity is not empiric
ally measurable, absolute acceleration that is, the rate of change of abso
lute velocity-certainly is empirically detectable. Because we can, as he
believes, detect absolute acceleration empirically, we are entitled to believe
in the existence of absolute velocity-absolute change of position-and
therewith in the existence of absolute space. And to convince us that abso
lute acceleration is empirically detectable, he presents us with some
thought experiments. One of these is his famous example of the rotating
bucket, which may be described as follows.
The rotating bucket experiment and
Mach's objection
Imagine a bucket, half-full of water, suspended by a rope from a hook. In
stage 1 of our thought experiment, the bucket is hanging undisturbed with
the water lying stationary with respect to the bucket. Here there is no
relative motion between the water and the bucket, a fact which may be
ascertained empirically by noting that a small test particle lying on the
surface of the water-such as a scrap of paper-does not move relative to
an ink mark inscribed on the inside wall of the bucket just above the water
line. In stage 2 of the thought experiment, the rope is twisted a number of
times and then released, so that the bucket rotates rapidly about its vertical
axis. In this stage of the experiment, there is relative motion between the
bucket and the water, as can be seen from the fact that the scrap of paper,
which remains stationary with respect to the water, moves relative to the
ink mark inscribed on the bucket's inside wall. Finally, in stage 3 of the\nSPACE AND TIME
thought experiment, the water has picked up the rotational motion of thebucket through friction between it and the bucket's wall, so that now thereis no longer any relative motion between the water and the bucket-andthe scrap of paper accordingly now remains stationary with respect to theink mark.
We see, thus, that, in respect of the presence or absence of relative
motion between the bucket and the water, stage 1 of the experiment is
exactly like stage 3, for in both of these stages there is no relative motion
between the water and the bucket, whereas in stage 2 there is. However,
there is, none the less, an important physical difference between stage 1 and
stage 3 which is empirically detectable: this is that in stage 3, but not in
stage 1, the surface of the water exhibits a concave form-whereas in stage
1, it is perfectly flat. Why is this? Newton has a simple answer to the
question. In stage 3, but not in stage 1, the water is really rotating-it is
rotating 'absolutely'. By contrast, in both stage 1 and stage 2 the water is not
really rotating, even though in stage 2 there is relative rotational motion
between the water and the bucket. The physical evidence of the water's real
rotation in stage 3 is the water's recession from the centre of the bucket,
which results in its rising up the bucket's inside wall, thereby making the
surface of the water concave.
It is important to appreciate at this point that a rotating object is an
object whose velocity is constantly changing and which is therefore
accelerating: for, velocity being a vector, a change in the direction of an
object's motion is a change in its velocity-and acceleration is, by defin
ition, rate of change of velocity. However, according to Newton's own
celebrated laws of motion, an object only deviates from its state of rest or
uniform motion in a straight line if it is acted upon by a force-a force
whose magnitude is directly proportional to the product of the object's
mass and its acceleration. Rotational motion in an object, therefore,
implies the imposition of some 'centripetal' force upon it-a fact which is
borne out in experience when one swings a stone around one's head at
the end of a rope, for one soon finds that, the faster one swings the stone,
the greater the tension is in the rope. If it were not for the tension in the
rope-a kind of force operating on the stone-the stone would fly off at a
tangent and move in a straight line, just as Newton's laws of motion
prescribe. So it is with the water in the bucket, only here it is the wall of the
bucket which is imposing a force upon the water which constrains it to
undergo a circular movement: if the wall of the bucket were to break, the
water would fly outwards and cease to rotate.
260\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM 261
The supposed lesson of the thought experiment is this, then. Mere rela
tive motion change of distance between one material object and
another must be distinguished from real motion in an object, even if we
cannot always detect real motion directly. For what we can always detect, at
least indirectly, is real acceleration, since this is caused by real physical
forces which have real physical effects, such as the recession of the water
from the centre of the bucket. The physical forces in question are often
quite easily measurable: for instance, when one swings a stone around
one's head on the end of a rope, one can measure the tension in the rope
by incorporating a spring balance into the rope and noting the position of
the pointer on the scale of the spring balance.
However, an obvious objection comes to mind at this point. The bucket
and rope of our thought experiment are not the only material objects in
the world. The rope is attached to a hook, which is presumably fixed to
the ceiling of a laboratory, which is in turn built upon the surface of the
Earth and the Earth, we know, is surrounded by many other material
objects, including distant stars and galaxies. Certainly, there is a physically
detectable difference in the water as it is in stages 1 and 2 of the experi
ment from how it is in stage 3-and, if we like, we can say that this is
because, in stage 3, the water is 'really' rotating, whereas in stages 1 and 2
it is really undergoing no rotation. But what entitles us to say that the
water's 'real' rotation does not consist in its rotating relative to any
material object? It may be, indeed, that the water's 'rotating' relative to
the wall of the bucket in stage 2 of the experiment does not qualify as a
'real' rotation: but how can we legitimately conclude that its 'real' rota
tion in stage 3 is not merely relative, but 'absolute', in Newton's terms?
For why shouldn't we infer from the experiment that the sort of relative
rotational motion which gives rise to such characteristic physical effects as
the recession of the water from the centre of the bucket is precisely
rotation relative to the rest of the material universe-the stars and galaxies
surrounding us? As the nineteenth-century Austrian physicist and phil
osopher Ernst Mach pointed out, if we were to increase the thickness of
the bucket's wall so that it extended to the distant stars and galaxies,
would we not expect the water's surface to become concave in stage 2 of
the experiment, when the water is undergoing a mere relative rotation
with respect to the bucket? For, after all, what is the difference between
supposing that all of the material universe is rotating around the water
and supposing that the water is rotating in the midst of the material
universe? As Mach says, we seem not to be presented here with two\nSPACE AND TIME
genuinely distinct alternatives, just two different ways of describing thesame set of phenomena.
The two-globes thought experiment
As if to counter this sort of objection, Newton presents another famousthought experiment. He asks us to imagine a universe whose sole material
occupants are two exactly similar globes, attached to one another by astraight length of string. Initially, one might suppose that there would beno way of telling whether or not these globes were rotating about the
midpoint of the string, for there would be no other material object relative
to which their rotational motion could be measured. In this universe, no
material object undergoes any change of distance from any other material
object. Nevertheless, it seems that there would be a physically detectable
difference between the case in which the globes are stationary and the case
in which they are rotating about the midpoint of the string, for in the latter
case there would be a tension in the string proportional to the rate of
rotation of the globes-a tension which could, in principle, be indicated by
the position of the pointer of a spring balance incorporated into the string.
Since, in this case, there would be a real rotation undergone by the globes,
but no merely relative motion with respect to any material object, such real
motion must be 'absolute' motion in Newton's sense, that is, change of
position in space itself, which must therefore be something immaterial.
However, the trouble with this second thought experiment is that it is
entirely counterfactual in character. What entitles Newton to assume that,
in the very different physical circumstances of the universe that he
describes, the string connecting a pair of rotating globes would be under
tension, as it would be in our own universe, in which such globes are
surrounded by vast quantities of distant matter? In assuming that there
would be a physically detectable difference, in the sort of universe he
describes, between rotating and non-rotating pairs of globes, he seems to
be assuming something for which he ought really to provide independent
justification if he is to make good his case for the existence of absolute
space. Furthermore, there is, as Einstein observes, something metaphysic
ally questionable about Newton's proposal that, in his two-globe universe,
rotation of the globes makes for a physically detectable difference in terms
See Ernst Mach, The Science of Mechanics (La Salle, Ill. : Open Court, 1960), 279 ff.
262\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM 263
of the magnitude of the tension in the string. For the implication is that a
real physical effect is associated with the 'absolute' rotation of the globes
and hence that Newton's 'absolute' space-an immaterial entity-can
interact causally with matter. However, we are already familiar, from the
infamous mind-body problem, with the fact that causal interaction
between material and immaterial entities is not something whose
possibility can lightly be assumed.
Objections to Mach's position
So far, Newton seems to be getting the worst of this argument. Neither of
his thought experiments provides, upon reflection, a compelling reason to
believe in absolute motion or absolute space. On the other hand, his
opponent's position, as exemplified by Mach, is not altogether comfortable
either. It may indeed be a mystery, as Einstein suggests, why 'absolute'
rotation-rotation with respect to a supposedly immaterial entity
should give rise to any distinctive physical effect. But, equally, it may seem
mysterious why, if Mach is right, rotation relative to the distant masses of
the universe should give rise to any distinctive physical effect. After all,
those distant masses are so far away from us that any causal influence they
may have on earthbound objects must have taken many millions of years
to reach us assuming, of course, that Einstein was correct in holding that
no causal influence can be propagated at a velocity greater than the speed
of light. Would it make any immediate difference to us, here on earth, if all
the distant stars and galaxies were annihilated overnight? Everything
would surely seem just the same for several years, when we would begin to
see the nearest stars disappear. But if it would make no immediate differ
ence to us, how can Mach be right, after all, to suppose that 'real'
rotation-rotation that has detectable physical effects, such as the reces
sion of the water from the centre of Newton's bucket-is rotation relative
to the distant stars and galaxies? For these physical effects would presum
ably persist even if the distant stars and galaxies were annihilated over
night. According to Mach's way of thinking, the distant stars have an
immense influence upon what happens here on earth-a doctrine which
sounds uncomfortably close to that of some astrologers and mystics.
Indeed, according to Mach's way of thinking, it would seem, material
7 See Albert Einstein, 'The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity', in H. A. Lorentz, A.
Einstein, H. Minkowski, and H. Weyl, The Principle of Relativity (New York: Dover, 1952), 113. \nSPACE AND TIME
on earth only possess mass (that is, so-called 'inertial' mass)because they are surrounded by the distant stars and galaxies. For it is anobject's mass which makes it something upon which a force must beimposed in order to give it acceleration-so that if, as Mach would have tosay, a single globe in an otherwise empty universe could not be given anacceleration by the imposition of any force, the implication seems to bethat such a globe could have no mass. But then it becomes mysterious how, according to Mach's way of thinking, the material universe as a whole canhave any mass, or how, lacking any mass as a whole, its material parts maynone the less possess mass and somehow confer the property of mass uponeach other. It is natural to assume that a material object's mass (or, at least, its so-called 'rest mass') is an intrinsic property of the object, which itpossesses independently of any relation which it may bear to any otherobject. This, certainly, seems to have been Newton's assumption. But ifMach is correct, it seems that the assumption is fundamentally mistakenand mass turns out to be a relational property which objects can possessonly in virtue of being parts of a complex dynamical system.
bodies here
Some varieties of relationalism
It is hard, then, to say who emerges more intact from this encounter
between Newton the 'absolutist' and Mach the 'relationalist'. (I prefer the
term relationalist' to the more usual relationist' for purely stylisticreasons. ) Each seems to be committed, even if only implicitly, to some
metaphysically mysterious contentions. However, while it is clear enough
what the relationalist is opposing-namely, the idea that space exists as an
immaterial entity in its own right, independently of any material objects
which may occupy it-it may not yet be sufficiently clear what alternative
position is being proposed. According to one-very extreme-form of
relationalism, space as such does not exist at all, only spatial relations
between material objects. However, one serious difficulty with such a view
is that it is not at all evident, according to it, what one could possibly mean
by saying that there is a place which is actually unoccupied by any materialobject. And yet it does seem perfectly possible that there should be such a
place, even if it is assumed that it is impossible that every place should beunoccupied by any material object. A less extreme form of relationalism
might maintain, instead, that space-including, possibly, some materiallyunoccupied places-does indeed exist, but depends for its existence and!
264\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM 265
properties entirely upon the material objects which occupy it and the
spatial relations in which those objects stand to one another. Thus, on this
view, space is an ontologically dependent entity-unlike the absolute space
of Newton-and yet, like Newtonian space, is something that is distinct
from any material object or sum of material objects, because it has proper
ties of its own which no material object could possess (for instance, the
property of having parts which are possibly materially unoccupied).
Concerning such a view, however, the following query may be raised. If
space exists but depends for its existence and properties entirely upon the
material objects which occupy it and the spatial relations in which those
objects stand to one another, what determines, for instance, whether space
is bounded and, if it is, where its boundaries lie? Suppose that the only
existing material objects were three particles arranged in an equilateral
triangular formation, each particle lying a mile away from each of the
other two. Presumably, there would be unoccupied space between the par
ticles. But would there be unoccupied space outside the triangle formed by
the particles? And if so, how far would it extend? Would it extend to
infinity in all directions? If so, why? If, as this version of relationalism
maintains, space depends entirely upon the existence of material objects
and their spatial relations, then it would seem that facts about material
objects and their spatial relations should determine the answers to ques
tions like those that have just been raised. And yet it is not at all clear that
such facts could do so, for in the case that has just been described it is not
at all clear, even given those facts, what the answers should be. I am
inclined to conclude that this version of relationalism is not much better
than the more extreme version described earlier.
Perhaps, however, it is open to the relationalist to adopt something like
the following view of the nature of space. Space, the relationalist may say,
consists of all the places in which it is possible for a material object to be
located and such a place exists if and only if it lies at some distance from
a place in which some material object is actually located, that is, if and only
if it is possible for some material object to move that distance in the
appropriate direction. (Hence, it may be contended, all reference to 'places'
can ultimately be cashed out in terms of possible movements amongst
material objects. ) So, for example, according to this way of thinking, if it is
possible in the three-particle universe just described for one of the particles
to move a certain distance away from the midpoint of the triangle while
remaining equidistant from the other two particles, then there actually
exists an unoccupied place in the space of that world at that distance from\nSPACE AND TIME
the midpoint in the direction just specified. What, then, determines
whether the space of this universe is bounded and, if so, where its boundar
ies lie, according to this 'modal' version of relationalism (as we may call it)?
The answer, presumably, is that the natural laws of the universe in question
determine these matters, for these laws determine how-and how far-the
particles can move with respect to one another. So space, on this view,
depends for its existence and properties not just on what material objects
there are and how they are actually spatially related to one another, but also
upon the laws which govern how these objects may change their spatial
relations to one another.
The general theory of relativity and the nature
of space
This, or something very like this, it seems to me, is the only version of
relationalism that is at all likely to be defensible. But whether this modal
version of relationalism is superior to the sort of absolutism favoured by
Newton seems still to be an open question. Moreover, how that question is
to be resolved, if indeed it can be resolved-for instance, whether it can be
resolved by philosophical argument or only by empirical science also
seems to be an open question. It certainly isn't just obvious that the dis
pute between relationalism and absolutism can only be resolved by empir
ical science, much less that empirical science has already resolved it in
favour of relationalism. Some philosophers and scientists are inclined to
assume the latter on the grounds that Einstein's general theory of relativity
is superior to Newton's theory of gravitation and is committed to relation
alism. But, although Einstein's theory is undoubtedly superior to New
ton's, in terms of its compatibility with the empirical evidence and its
predictive accuracy, it is not so clear that it is committed to relationalism--
even if Einstein himself was, as we have seen, critical of Newtonian
absolutism.
It may be wondered how Einstein's theory could be consistent with
absolutism, given that the absolutist conceives of space as an immaterial
entity which is ontologically independent of any material occupant of it--
that is, in effect, as an immaterial substance. Perhaps, however, Einstein's
theory is strictly only incompatible with Newton's dualism of 'matter' and
'space' and, more specifically, with Newton's conception of matter. (We
know for sure, of course, that Newton's conception of mass is incompatible
266\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM 267
with Einstein's and since one's conception of mass is essential to one's
conception of matter, it follows that their conceptions of matter are like
wise incompatible. ) One way of interpreting the conception of 'material
bodies' implicit in Einstein's theory is to regard the theory as treating such
'bodies' as being, in effect, local deformations in the fabric of space (or,
more strictly, of space-time). Einstein's theory treats space itself as having,
or at least as being capable of having, a variable 'curvature', in the sense of
'curvature' discussed earlier. In Einsteinian space, light rays follow the
shortest path between any two points and, according to the general theory
of relativity, the presence of gravitational mass (that is, a 'material body')
in a region of space makes a difference to the path taken by light rays in
that region-something that has been well-confirmed by astronomical
observation. But, rather than seeing the presence of gravitational mass-a
'material body''-as being something which causes a local variation in the
curvature of space, it is ontologically more economical and metaphysically
less mysterious simply to identify the presence of gravitational mass with
the presence of such a local variation. According to this way of thinking,
'matter' becomes 'dematerialized' and is treated as being a purely geo
metrical feature of space itself. However, the consequence is that the con
ception of space that we are left with seems to be very close, ontologically
speaking, to Newton's conception, although it is a space of variable
curvature, unlike Newton's 'flat', Euclidean space.
Curious though it may seem on first reflection, it is possible, then, to
regard Einstein's theory as agreeing with Newton's on the fundamental
nature of space that is, as being absolutist in spirit-while differing only
on the nature of matter. Just because Einstein's theory advertises itself as
the general theory of relativity, we shouldn't assume that it is committed to
a relationalist theory of space. Indeed, as we noted earlier, the field equa
tions of Einstein's theory admit of solutions in which the density of matter
is everywhere zero, that is, in which space contains no gravitational mass,
or is perfectly empty'. This is a possibility which any absolutist may readily
accept but which no self-respecting relationalist can countenance: so those
who think that Einstein's theory is committed to relationalism owe us an
explanation of what it is about the theory which rules out this possibility
and it is not clear what they can say, given that the mathematical principles
which lie at the very heart of the theory do not rule it out.
8 For further discussion of the debate between absolutism and relationalism, see John Earman,
World Enough and Space-Time: Absolute versus Relational Theories of Space and Time (Cambridge,
Mass. : MIT Press, 1989). \nSPACE AND TIME
The special theory of relativity and the nature
of time
This may be a good point at which to reintroduce time into our discussion.
Famously, according to Einstein's special theory of relativity (as opposed to
the general theory, which he developed later and which incorporated an
account of gravitation), events which are simultaneous-that is, which
occur at the same time'-with respect to one frame of reference may not
be simultaneous with respect to another. This is the notorious relativity of
simultaneity. And Einstein's thinking on this issue is certainly at odds with
Newton's, which is committed to an absolute conception of simultaneity
and therewith an absolute conception of time. However, the distinction
here is between absolutism and relativism, not between absolutism and
relationalism. The chief significance of this difference between Newton and
Einstein concerning the nature of simultaneity seems to be that for New
ton, but not for Einstein, space and time can be regarded as quite
independent aspects of reality. For Einstein, physical reality as a whole is a
unitary, four-dimensional space-time manifold and events which have a
purely space-like separation with respect to one frame of reference may
have a time-like separation with respect to another: the only kind of 'sep
aration' between events whose measure is not frame-relative is neither
purely space-like nor purely time-like-it is their space-time separation. 10
This feature of Einstein's theory arises from the fact that one of its basic
postulates is the constancy of the velocity of light (in vacuo) in all frames
of reference. The theory, including the consequences of this postulate, has
undoubtedly been strongly confirmed by experiment and observation. For
example, the so-called 'time-dilation' effect-whereby a clock with a high
velocity (an appreciable fraction of the velocity of light) with respect to a
given frame of reference appears to 'run slow'-has been confirmed by the
observation that the half-lives of radioactive particles with high velocities
are measurably longer, by an amount predicted by the theory, than those of
similar particles moving at lower velocities. However, the postulate of the
See Albert Einstein, 'On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies', in Lorentz et al. , The Principle of Relativity, 42-3.
See H. Minkowski, 'Space and Time', in Lorentz et al. , The Principle of Relativity, whereMinkowski's famous words appear: 'Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself, are doomed to
fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of the two will preserve an independent
reality' (75).
268\nABSOLUTISM VERSUS RELATIONALISM 269
constancy of the velocity of light is just that-a postulate-and not itself
capable of direct empirical verification. What can be directly confirmed
empirically is the constancy of the average speed of light for a round trip
from A to B and back to A again-which, of course, is entailed by, but does
not entail, the constancy of the velocity of light. It would be possible,
therefore, for a theorist to postulate, contrary to Einstein, that simultaneity
is absolute and explain the 'time-dilation' effect in a way which would
imply that this effect does not reveal anything about the nature of time
itself (and so is ill-named), but only something about certain distorting
influences on our measurement of temporal duration, arising from vari
ations in the speed of light as it travels in different directions (with respect
to a given frame of reference). It would then be possible for such a theorist,
consistently with all the empirical evidence currently taken to support
Einstein's theory, to reject the Einsteinian view that space-like and time
like separation between events are always frame-relative, along with its
implication that space and time are not wholly separate and independent
aspects of physical reality. "
Of course, it might be objected that this new theory would be inferior to
Einstein's in being less simple and economical. However, simplicity and
economy are not the only criteria by which to judge the relative merits of
scientific theories which have the same empirical consequences. There may
be metaphysical considerations which favour the ontology of one theory
over that of another and which outweigh any considerations of simplicity
or economy. After all, we have no evident right to expect reality to be
'simple' by our standards. In any case, the criteria by which we judge
whether one theory is 'simpler' than another are themselves open to dis
pute and are often far from obvious. 12 Moreover, on the question of econ
omy, there is in fact a clear sense in which the new theory would be more
economical than Einstein's, in that the postulate of the constancy of the
velocity of light, to which Einstein's theory is committed, is stronger
than entails but is not entailed by-the principle that the average speed
of light for a round trip is constant, which is all that the new theory is
committed to.
None of this is to say that we should reject Einstein's theory in favour
of the new theory. It is just to point out that an empirical scientific
theory such as Einstein's, no matter how strongly it may be confirmed by
11
A theory along these lines is developed and defended by Michael Tooley in his Time, Tense,
and Causation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997), ch. 11.
12 See further Elliott Sober, Simplicity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975). \nSPACE AND TIME
observation and experiment, does not necessarily have the last word on
such fundamental metaphysical issues as the nature of space and time and
their interrelationship. It is perfectly conceivable that a philosopher should
devise a metaphysical argument which so compellingly demonstrates that
simultaneity, properly conceived, must be absolute, that we would be
obliged to prefer the new theory to Einstein's. I do not claim to have such
an argument myself, but I do urge that we retain an open mind about its
possibility.
270\n15
INCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS
AND THE NATURE OF SPACE
Substantivalism, relationalism, and
transcendental idealism
In the previous chapter, the dispute between absolutist and relationalist
accounts of the nature of space was left unresolved, as was the question of
whether this is an issue which is to be resolved, if at all, by empirical
science or by philosophical argument. According to absolutism, space is an
immaterial and (in a strong sense) a unitary or singular entity which does
not depend for its existence or properties upon the material objects, if any,
which may happen to occupy it. In describing space as being, on this view,
'unitary' or 'singular', I mean that it is conceived as a whole which has
ontological priority over its parts-that is, as a whole which, while it
undoubtedly possesses parts (at least, the three-dimensional parts that are
its 'regions'), is not in any sense composed of those parts, since its parts
cannot exist independently of space as a whole. Thus, for the absolutist,
space is no mere aggregate or plurality of entities, in the way that a heap of
sand is an aggregate or plurality of grains, something whose existence and
identity depend upon the existence and identity of the things which consti
tute its parts. This is because, according to the absolutist, the parts of space
are necessarily related to one another in an unchangeable order or
arrangement, unlike the grains in a heap of sand and the very identity of
each part of space depends upon its position in this order or arrangement
of all the parts, rather in the way in which the very identity of a natural
number depends upon its position in the entire series of natural numbers.
In sum, for the absolutist, space is a substance, in one technical meta
physical sense of the term in which it denotes an entity which does not
depend for its existence or identity upon the existence or identity of any\nSPACE AND TIME
Hence, the absolutist conception of space may also-andperhaps more perspicuously-be called a substantivalist conception ofspace.
other entity.
According to the opposing relationalist conception of space, space-tothe extent that the relationalist acknowledges its real existence at all-is anontologically dependent entity, depending for its existence and propertiesat least in part upon the material objects occupying it and the spatialrelations in which those objects stand to one another. I say 'at least in partbecause, as we saw in the previous chapter, the most plausible version ofrelationalism-the 'modal' version-holds that space depends for some ofits properties upon the laws of nature which govern how material objects
occupying it can move with respect to one another. The relationalist,
clearly, must deny that it is possible for space to exist entirely devoid of any
kind of object occupying it, since in the absence of occupying objects andtheir spatial relations to one another, space is deprived of the very entitiesupon which its existence allegedly depends.
In view of the dependent ontological status that space has according to
relationalism, it is evident that relationalism is diametrically opposed to
substantivalism. One might think, therefore, that these two approaches
leave available no other conception of the nature of space. But that would
apparently be a mistake, because Immanuel Kant has famously offered us
what would seem to be a third: the conception of space as 'transcen
dentally ideal'. 2 Kant presents this conception as constituting the only one
that is philosophically defensible, given what he sees to be the fatal flaws in
the substantivalism of Newton and the relationalism of Leibniz. According
to Kant, things 'as they are in themselves'-what he calls noumena-are
not occupants of space and stand in no spatial relations to one another:
space belongs, rather, to the realm of sensible appearances or phenomena
and as such is an aspect of the constitution of the human mind rather than
an aspect of mind-independent reality. If it is true that substantivalism and
relationalism are both fatally flawed, then indeed it would seem that some
thing like Kant's view must be accepted: but, on the face of it, his view isextravagant and only to be adopted as a last resort.
of substance, see my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), chs. 6 and 7.
*See Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, trans. Norman Kemp SmithMacmillan, 1929), pp. 67
For more on this conception
(London: ff.
272\nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS
The argument from incongruent counterparts
Before he converted to the doctrine of transcendental idealism, Kant
adhered to a substantivalist view of space inspired by Newton. In defence
of substantivalism, he offered a particularly interesting argument known as
the argument from incongruent counterparts. The fact that he later tried to
use this argument in support of a transcendental idealist conception of
space may appear to weaken its force as an argument for substantivalism.
Perhaps, however, the argument can at best only be used in support of
transcendental idealism on the assumption that substantivalism is fatally
flawed, in which case there is no inconsistency in his using the argument in
support of each of these mutually incompatible positions. For present
purposes, however, I shall only consider the argument in its original role of
providing a putative defence of substantivalism against relationalism.
Incongruent counterparts are asymmetrical objects which are mirror
images of one another, such as a left hand and an otherwise exactly similar
right hand. The objects are 'incongruent' because they cannot be brought
into congruence-that is, cannot be made to coincide with one another
exactly simply by moving them around and without in any way distort
ing their shapes. Of course, even two exactly similar left hands cannot
literally be made to coincide, inasmuch as they are material objects and any
portion of matter excludes any other from the space that it occupies
matter is, as we say, 'impenetrable'. However, this consideration is irrele
vant to our present purposes. The incongruence of a left hand and an
otherwise exactly similar right hand manifests itself in the fact that a glove
which exactly fits the right hand will not, without distortion, fit the left
hand.
What is the explanation for the possibility of this kind of incongruence?
More particularly, how can a relationalist explain it? According to relation
alism, all of the properties of space derive from facts concerning the
objects which occupy space, including, most importantly, facts about
actual and possible spatial relations between these objects. So the fact
that space can contain incongruent counterparts seemingly ought to be
3 See Immanuel Kant, 'Concerning the Ultimate Foundation of the Differentiation of Regions
in Space', in his Selected Precritical Writings, trans. G. B. Kerferd and D. E. Walford (Manchester:
Manchester University Press, 1968).
* See Immanuel Kant, Prolegomena, trans. Peter G. Lucas (Manchester: Manchester University
Press, 1953), sects. 11-13, pp. 39 ff.
273\nSPACE AND TIME
explicable, according to relationalism, in terms of facts about the actualand possible spatial relations between objects. Is it? Well, the relationalistmight perhaps urge that one of these facts is that certain objects, such as aleft hand and an otherwise exactly similar right hand, cannot be made tocoincide simply by moving one of them relative to the other and withoutdistorting the shape of either (waiving the irrelevant point about theimpenetrability of matter)-and that this is why space can contain incongruent counterparts. However, this is plainly a circular explanation and sono explanation at all: it simply tells us that space can contain incongruentcounterparts because incongruent counterparts can exist-and, for therelationalist at least, the fact that space can contain incongruent counterparts is nowise distinct from the fact that incongruent counterparts canexist. We want to know why it is that incongruent counterparts can existhow it is possible for there to be pairs of objects, such as a left hand and anotherwise exactly similar right hand, which cannot be made to coincide. However, the relationalist may perhaps now urge that there is simply noexplanation of this fact to be had-that it is just a 'brute fact'-pointingout that explanations must end somewhere. If explanation is an asymmetrical relation, so that circular explanations are not allowed, then, onpain of an infinite regress, some facts must not admit of explanation-andperhaps the fact that incongruent counterparts can exist is one such fact. After all, is the substantivalist in any better position to explain this fact? Well, that remains to be seen. But if the substantivalist can offer an explanation where the relationalist can offer none, this would certainly seem tocount in favour of substantivalism.
Kant's example of the solitary hand
Now, however, Kant presents what may seem to be a crucial challenge torelationalism by asking us to envisage a world whose sole material occu
pant is a single hand. Such a hand, one may be inclined to suppose, musteither be a left hand or else be a right hand. It surely cannot lack handedness altogether. For, after all, if a second hand (of exactly the same size asthe first hand) were subsequently to be created in this world (without inany way disturbing the first hand), then it would have either to be congruent with the first hand or else to be an incongruent counterpart of it-inother words, the two hands would have either to have the same handednessor else to be of opposite handedness. And this apparently means that the
274\nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS 275
first hand must have had one or the other handedness even before the
second hand was created-for, by hypothesis, nothing was done to the
first hand in creating the second. It may be, indeed, that it is arbitrary
which handedness is called 'left-handedness and which is called 'right'
handedness, but all that matters for present purposes is that a solitary hand
would have one or other handedness and not lack handedness altogether.
In other words, it seems that handedness is an intrinsic property of some
thing like a hand or, at the very least, that it is not a property which
something like a hand has only in virtue of some relation that it bears to
other objects which occupy space. This, however, creates what appears to
be a severe difficulty for the relationalist. For if a solitary hand would have
a handedness, what would determine which handedness it had? According
to the relationalist, it seems, this could only be determined by facts about
the actual and possible spatial relations between the parts of the hand,
these being the only objects occupying space other than the hand itself.
And yet it seems that these relations would be exactly the same for a
solitary hand of either handedness, in which case the relations in question
could not determine which handedness the solitary hand had. ' (The parts
of each hand would stand, it seems, in exactly similar geometrical relations
to one another: for instance, the relative lengths of thumb and forefinger
would be the same, as would be the angle between forefinger and little
finger when each hand was spread out to the same extent. ) Thus the
relationalist seems to be forced either to deny that the solitary hand would
have a handedness, or else to say that its handedness would be a brute fact
without explanation.
But how is the substantivalist in any better position to explain what
would determine the handedness of a solitary hand? In something like the
following way, perhaps (which is what Kant himself suggests). If, as sub
stantivalism maintains, space exists independently of any material object
that may occupy it, then we may speak of there being relationships
between a material object and space itself which do not reduce to relation
ships between that material object and other material objects. And it may
be that an asymmetrical object such as a hand admits of two quite different
relationships to space itself, each of which gives rise to a different handed
ness. We may perhaps think of these relationships as two different ways in
which something like a hand may be 'oriented' with respect to space itself.
5 For a challenge to this claim, however, see Peter Alexander, 'Incongruent Counterparts and
Absolute Space', Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 85 (1984/5), 1-21. \nOn this
SPACE AND TIME
view, then, handedness is not, strictly speaking, an intrinsic property, because it is a property which something has in virtue of its 'orientation' to space itself-though, for that very reason, it is not a propertywhich something has in virtue of any relation that it bears to other objectswhich occupy space. This would explain why it is a property whichrelationalism finds inexplicable.
A two-dimensional analogy
We may illustrate the foregoing approach to the explanation of handednesswith the help of the following example. So far, we have only been consider
ing three-dimensional objects, such as hands. But a problem like that ofthe left and right hands arises in two dimensions as well. Imagine cutting
out of thin paper two shapes in the form of a letter 'R' and then placing
these shapes on the surface of another sheet of paper. In placing the shapes
on the surface, two options would present themselves to us. We could
either place both of the R-shapes on the surface the same way round', or
else we could place each of them on the surface 'a different way round'. In
the latter case, one of the shapes would be 'back to front' and each would
appear as the mirror-image of the other. In this second case, it would be
impossible to make the two R-shapes exactly coincide just by moving them
around on the surface of the paper-although, of course, one could easily
do so by flipping over one of the shapes. Now, this example is only
intended for purposes of illustration. In reality, our paper R-shapes are
three-dimensional objects, albeit very thin ones. But it seems that one can
at least conceive of a world in which space and all the objects that it
contains really are purely two-dimensional. In such a world, it seems, R
shapes would come in two different varieties which were incongruent
counterparts of each other. But the suggestion is that what would explain
this variety would be the fact that there were two different ways in which
an R-shape could be oriented with respect to the two-dimensional space
which it occupied, rather as there are two 'different ways round' in which a
cut-out R-shape of our illustrative example may be placed on the surface
of the sheet of paper. And, of course, the same sort of thing might equally
be said about three-dimensional incongruent counterparts, such as left andright hands, and the three-dimensional space which they occupy. However, it
may be wondered whether our illustrative example is reallyof much use in helping to us to understand the notion of 'orientation'
276\nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS
which is central to the explanation of handedness now being offered on
behalf of the substantivalist. For we cannot seriously suppose that some
thing like a hand can literally be placed in three-dimensional space either
'one way round' or 'the other way round'. The metaphor or analogy seems
to break down precisely at the point at which it is supposed to help us. It is
not as though something like a hand can somehow be 'taken out' of space
and put back' there the other way round', because hands are objects
which depend for their very existence upon their continuous occupancy of
space. Indeed, talk of 'taking something out of space'-construed literally,
rather than just as tantamount to talk of annihilating the object in
question is surely incoherent, since it seems to imply a kind of change of
place which can only occur within space. Our illustrative example perhaps
misleads us in this respect, because the sheet of paper on which our cut
out R-shapes can be placed itself exists within space-so that the R-shapes
can be removed from it and replaced on it simply by making them undergo
a temporary change of place whereas space itself plainly does not exist
within space and so lacks a crucial point of resemblance with the sheet of
paper.
We see, then, that the illustrative example of the sheet of paper and the
cut-out R-shapes can at best provide a somewhat dubious metaphor or
analogy for the notion of 'orientation' that is central to the substantivalist
explanation of handedness now under scrutiny. Lacking a non
metaphorical elucidation of that notion, we cannot really claim to under
stand it satisfactorily. Moreover, to the extent that the metaphor or analogy
serves any purpose at all, it may actually seem to play into the hands of the
relationalist. For the relationalist may now emphasize the point that, in our
illustrative example, the two cut-out R-shapes are not really incongruent
counterparts at all, since they can easily be made to coincide by flipping
one of them over. If the analogy has any value at all, then, the implication
might seem to be that a left and a right hand in three-dimensional space
are not really incongruent counterparts either, since they could in principle
be made to coincide by 'flipping one of them over' in a fourth spatial
dimension. The fact that no such dimension actually exists may perhaps
be deemed irrelevant, provided that it is metaphysically possible for one to
exist as it would appear to be-for then there would seem to be only a
merely contingent obstacle to our making the two hands coincide and
This is Ludwig Wittgenstein's verdict in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, trans. D. F. Pears
and B. F. McGuinness (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1961): see 6. 36111.
277\nSPACE AND TIME
hence no real difference between them. But if being incongruent counter
parts is not, after all, a real difference between two objects, such as a left and a
right hand, then it is surely not a defect in relationalism that it allegedly
cannot explain this 'difference'.
Moebius bands and the topology of space
Another consideration which seems to lead towards the same conclusion is
the following. Contrary to what we have been implicitly assuming so far,
it should be pointed out that a two-dimensional space could in fact have a
topology (that is, an overall structure) of such a kind that R-shapes in it
would not come in two different varieties, so that it would be possible for
any R-shape to be made to coincide with any other R-shape merely by
moving them around within the two-dimensional space and without dis
torting either of the shapes. This possibility can be illustrated in terms of
our paper cut-out R-shapes as follows. Let the sheet of paper on which
the cut-out R-shapes are placed be given the form of a long, narrow strip,
which is given a half-twist before its ends are joined together, thus making
what is known as a Moebius band. Of course, our Moebius band, being
made out of paper, is a three-dimensional object, owing to the thickness
of the paper. But a Moebius band of zero thickness would be a truly two
dimensional entity and, curiously enough, a single-sided one, unlike a
band of zero thickness whose ends have been joined without giving it a
half-twist. If we place two cut-out R-shapes side by side somewhere on
the surface of our paper Moebius band, with one of the shapes seemingly
'back to front' with respect to the other, then simply by moving one of
the shapes right around the band and without removing it from the
surface of the paper, we can bring it back to a position directly behind the
other R-shape, in such a way that the two R-shapes now exactly overlie
each other. And, of course, with a Moebius band of zero thickness, this
would mean that any two R-shapes confined to its single surface could be
made to coincide exactly, just by moving one of them around the band
and without distorting the shape of either. In other words, a two
dimensional space with the topology of a Moebius band is a space in
which there are no incongruent counterparts. There seems to be no rea
son, in principle, why a three-dimensional space should not have a similar
topology, in which case one could turn what appeared to be a 'left' hand
into what appeared to be a 'right' hand simply by transporting it around
278\nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS 279
the universe and bringing it back to its original location. This too, then,
would be a universe in which there were no incongruent counterparts.
However, rather as before, it may now be urged that, even if the space of
our own universe does not in fact have a Moebius-like topology, so that a
'left' and a 'right' hand cannot actually be made to coincide, our space
could have had such a topology: so that its lacking such a topology is, once
more, only a merely contingent obstacle to our making the two hands
coincide, implying that there is no real difference between them and
hence no difference which relationalism can be criticized for failing to
explain.
Whether the foregoing considerations really help the case for relational
ism and undermine that of substantivalism is a matter to which we shall
return shortly. But before we do so I want to draw attention to a way in
which the possibility of space's having a Moebius-like topology may be
deemed to undermine an assumption that is crucial to Kant's thought
experiment of the solitary hand. Suppose it were to turn out that space
actually did have something like the topology of a Moebius band, in three
dimensions. In that case, what we call a 'right' hand and a 'left' hand would
not in fact be incongruent counterparts, since either could be made to
coincide with the other merely by moving them around in space and
without distorting the shape of either. In a sense, this would mean that
handedness would not really exist (though I shall qualify this remark later).
But this possibility, it seems, immediately undermines one of the assump
tions that we made in discussing Kant's example of the solitary hand, for in
discussing that example we maintained that the hand would have to have a
handedness. We now see that this assumption was unwarranted, for if the
space in which the solitary hand existed had a Moebius-like topology, then
the hand would not have a handedness. However, even though a crucial
assumption of Kant's argument is thus undermined, it is not immediately
apparent that this fact necessarily assists the case for relationalism, because
the explanation for the lack of handedness in such a solitary hand would
lie solely in the topology of the space it occupied-that is to say, it would
lie in a fact about the nature of space itself rather than in any fact about the
nature of the sole object which supposedly occupies space: and this seems,
if anything, to help the case for substantivalism. \nSPACE AND TIME
Actual space versus possible spaces
In reply, it is perhaps open to the relationalist to object that the imaginary
world of the solitary hand residing in a space whose Moebius-like topology
is not determined by facts concerning the material occupant of that space
is merely imaginary and does not constitute a genuine metaphysical possi
bility. The relationalist may urge that worlds with three-dimensional
spaces having a Moebius-like topology are genuinely possible, but that
these are all worlds in which the topology is determined by facts and
natural laws concerning the material inhabitants of those worlds. And, it
may further be urged, these will all be worlds which are far more complex
than the imaginary world of the solitary hand.
Now, whatever we make of this reply, we do at least need to be clear as to
whether the dispute between the substantivalist and the relationalist is
supposed to be a dispute about the nature and ontological status of space
in the actual world or a dispute about the nature and ontological status of
space in any possible world. The reply just offered on behalf of the relation
alist assumes that the dispute is about the nature and ontological status of
space in any possible world. However, one might suppose that most rela
tionalists would be happy to concede that absolute space is metaphysically
possible that substantivalism is a correct doctrine about the spaces of
some possible worlds-while denying that substantivalism is true of our
world. And such relationalists, one might think, are in a position to dismiss
as simply irrelevant thought experiments, such as Kant's, which involve
radically counterfactual states of affairs: they need not take a stance on the
question of whether or not such counterfactual states of affairs are genuine
metaphysical possibilities. On the other hand, if relationalists are entitled
to dismiss as irrelevant an appeal to such a radically counterfactual state of
affairs as the existence of a solitary hand, then substantivalists are surely
equally entitled to dismiss as irrelevant appeals to such radically counter
factual states of affairs as the existence of a fourth spatial dimension or the
existence of a Moebius-like topology, which were earlier made on behalf of
relationalism. So if the dispute is construed as being solely about the
nature and ontological status of space in the actual world, it may seem that
none of the considerations so far raised really helps either party. But this
presumes, of course, that the dispute can indeed be construed in either of
the two ways just described-a presumption which would be undermined
if it could be argued that space cannot have a different nature and
mang một vật có t
280\nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS
ontological status in different possible worlds. Whether such an argument
is available is a matter to which I shall return later, but for the time being I
shall assume that it is not.
Let us take stock of what we may suppose to have been established so far.
First, it certainly seems that there could be universes with spaces-even
three-dimensional spaces-in which incongruent counterparts would not
exist, because a 'left' and a 'right' hand in such a universe could be made to
coincide exactly, without distorting the shape of either, simply by trans
porting one of the hands right around the universe. However, it appears
most unlikely that the space of our own universe actually has such a
topology. Second, it also seems that there could be universes with four
dimensional spaces, in which two three-dimensional objects, exactly like a
left' and a 'right' hand in our universe, could be made to coincide exactly,
without distorting either, simply by 'flipping one of them over' in the
fourth dimension. Again, however, it appears most unlikely that our own
universe actually has such a fourth spatial dimension. On both counts,
then, it seems that, however matters may be in other possible universes, in
our universe a left hand and an otherwise exactly similar right hand really
are incongruent counterparts. Furthermore, it should be noted that even in
a universe with four spatial dimensions-unless it had a Moebius-like
topology-certain four-dimensional objects could still exist which would
be incongruent counterparts. More generally, even in a universe with any
finite number of spatial dimensions, incongruent counterparts could still
exist, unless the space of that universe had a Moebius-like topology. So, it
seems, the supposed possibility of making any two n-dimensional objects
which appear to be incongruent counterparts coincide exactly simply by
'flipping one of them over' in an (n+1)-dimensional space does nothing,
in itself, to eliminate the possibility of there being objects which are genu
inely incongruent counterparts-since congruence between the two n
dimensional objects can be achieved only at the expense of introducing the
possibility of incongruence between certain pairs of (n+1)-dimensional
objects.
The upshot of all this is that only the possession of a Moebius-like
topology by a space genuinely eliminates the possibility of there being
pairs of objects in that space which are incongruent counterparts. The
space of our universe is almost certainly not Moebius-like and con
sequently it is at least physically (even if not metaphysically) impossible to
make a left and a right hand of our world coincide exactly without distort
ing their shapes. The question then is whether this is a fact which is in any
281\nSPACE AND TIME
way an embarrassment to a philosopher who favours a relationalist con
ception of the space of our universe. The answer would seem to be that
such a philosopher need find this fact no embarrassment if he could hope
to explain why the space of our universe lacks a Moebius-like topology by
appealing to facts and natural laws concerning the actual and possible
spatial relations between material objects in our universe. There seems to
be no reason, in principle, why such an explanation should not be
available though this, of course, is very from saying that such an
explanation does in fact exist. But, as far as I am aware, current physical
science does not provide any such explanation-and this may give some
encouragement to the substantivalist. For if it should emerge that the fact
that the space of our universe lacks a Moebius-like topology cannot be
explained by appeal to facts and natural laws concerning the actual and
possible spatial relations between material objects in our universe, then
this would imply that the space of our universe has properties which are
independent of any facts concerning its material occupants and hence that
it has at least some features of a substance.
I say only at least some features of a substance' because, even if the
space of our universe has some properties which are independent of any
facts concerning its material occupants, this does not imply that it has an
existence which is altogether independent of its material occupants: it does
not imply, for instance, that the space of our universe could have been
entirely devoid of material occupants-but only if this is the case can the
space of our universe truly be described as being a 'substance', in the fullest
sense of the term. However, if it should turn out that the space of our
universe could not have been entirely devoid of material occupants and yet
that it has some properties (such as, perhaps, its lack of a Moebius-like
topology) which are independent of any facts concerning its material
occupants, then neither substantivalism nor relationalism will turn out to
provide a correct account of the nature and ontological status of the space
of our universe. Thus we see that Kantian transcendental idealism is not in
fact the only alternative substantivalism and relationalism, since there is
a possible position intermediate between these two extremes. "
7 For further discussion of handedness and its implications for the nature of space, see GrahamNerlich, The Shape of Space, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), ch. 2, andJohn Earman, World Enough and Space-Time: Absolute versus Relational Theories of Space and Time(Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1989), ch. 7.
282\nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS 283
How many dimensions could space have?
There are many issues which our discussion so far has left unresolved or
insufficiently explored. One relatively minor issue concerns the number of
spatial dimensions actually possessed by the space of our universe, which
we have so far assumed to be three. We should remember here that time,
even if it is in some sense a 'fourth dimension' (though this itself is highly
contestable), is certainly not a fourth spatial dimension, on a par with our
three familiar spatial dimensions of length, breadth, and height. If our
universe contained a fourth spatial dimension on a par with these three,
then it would be possible to escape from a room whose ceiling, floor, and
four walls contained no door or window, without forcing an exit-simply
by moving in a direction at right angles to the length, breadth, and height
of the room and this, as far as we know, is not possible. It is true that
some contemporary physicists postulate the actual existence of more than
just three spatial dimensions, maintaining that the additional dimensions
manifest themselves only on the ultra-subatomic scale: but such specula
tions, even if they turned out to be correct, would apparently have no
direct bearing on the main issues with which we are concerned in this
chapter, relating as they do to the realm of macroscopic objects, including
ourselves.
A rather more interesting question is whether space-either the space of
our universe or at least the space of some possible universe is really
capable of having more than three spatial dimensions, all on a par with our
three familiar dimensions of length, breadth, and height (not, that is,
merely in such a way that all but three of these dimensions manifest them
selves only on the ultra-subatomic scale). Indeed, is space really capable of
having two or fewer dimensions, in the way we assumed earlier when
discussing a supposedly two-dimensional space with a Moebius-like top
ology? Or is there some deep reason for the three-dimensionality of space
that we find it to have? Kant evidently thought so, for he considered that
the three-dimensionality of space was a necessary feature of it, being
bound up with what he regarded as its transcendentally ideal status. Other
philosophers have contended that universes in which space is not three
dimensional would not be capable of sustaining intelligent life, so that we
For the contrasting views of two leading twentieth-century philosopher-scientists, see
Hermann Weyl, Space-Time-Matter (New York: Dover, 1952), 283-5, and Hans Reichenbach,
The Philosophy of Space and Time (New York: Dover, 1957), 279-80.
t\n284 SPACE AND TIME
have at least an 'anthropic' argument for the three-dimensionality of
space an argument to the effect that space must be three-dimensional
because, if it were not, we would not be here (as we plainly are! ) to acknow
ledge its existence. Thus it is said, for instance, that complex life-forms
would be impossible in a two-dimensional universe, because a complex
life-form requires something like an alimentary canal which enables it to
ingest matter from its environment and excrete it-and such a 'canal' in a
two-dimensional life-form would simply divide it into two separate
entities, whereas in a three-dimensional life-form the canal is merely a tube
through the life-form which does not disrupt its physical integrity as a
single living entity. Again, it is said that complex life-forms would be
impossible in a universe with four or more spatial dimensions, because in
such universes planets could not form with stable orbits around stars in
the way in which they do in our universe, in which an inverse square law of
gravitation generates such orbits. Whatever we make of such arguments,
however, they do not have much metaphysical depth: they do not go any
way towards showing that it is metaphysically necessary for space to be
three-dimensional on a macroscopic scale. To that extent, they do nothing
to undermine the thought experiments deployed earlier in this chapter,
which invoked the possibility of spaces with more or fewer dimensions
than the three with which we are familiar.
Does 'space' denote an ontological category?
This is a convenient point at which to address another issue which we
earlier left aside: namely, the question of whether space can have a different
nature and ontological status in different possible worlds. Of course, it is
plausible to contend that the space of our universe could not have had a
nature and ontological status different from those it actually has: that if it
is, say, a substance in actuality, as substantivalists believe, then it is a sub
stance in any possible world in which it exists. This is simply because any
entity's ontological category is very plausibly one of its essential features.
In the same way, it is plausible that I am a person in any possible world in
which I exist-that there is no possible world in which, say, I am a poached
egg or the positive square root of four. But a rather more difficult question
See further John D. Barrow and Frank J. Tippler, The Anthropic Cosmological Principle
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1986), 258-76. \nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS
to answer is whether there can be, in two different possible worlds, two
different entities, each of which may properly be described as being the
'space' of its world, but each of which possesses a nature and ontological
status different from those of the other. Thus, for example, could the space
of one possible world conform to the substantivalist's conception of space
while the space of another possible world conforms to the relationalist's?
To suppose so is to assume, in effect, that the term 'space' does not denote
an ontological category, in the way, say, that 'substance' does.
It might be thought obvious that 'space' cannot denote an ontological
category, given that there can be as we have seen in the course of this
chapter an intelligible dispute between substantivalists and relationalists
concerning what ontological category the space of our world should be
held to belong to. However, we cannot assume, just because this dispute is
intelligible, that things of quite different ontological categories genuinely
could quite equally merit the title of 'space' (albeit only in different pos
sible worlds). It could be, for instance, that nothing genuinely meriting
that title could fail to be a substance-in which case it would seem that
'space' would denote a sub-category of substance and hence an ontological
category (albeit not a fundamental one). However, I confess that I know of
no convincing argument to this effect. It may seem odd that we should, in
some sense, know what space is and yet not know for sure to which onto
logical category it belongs, nor even whether things of quite different
ontological categories could equally merit the title of 'space' (in different
possible worlds). But such seems to be our epistemic predicament where
space is concerned. (It is a predicament that some philosophers have held
us to be in even regarding ourselves, maintaining that although we know, in
some sense, what we are, we do not know for sure to which ontological
category we belong-whether, for instance, we are immaterial souls, living
organisms, or bundles of psychological states. In which case, we can hardly
complain that it is impossible that we should be in such a predicament
regarding space. )
Is handedness a property?
Another important issue left over from earlier discussion, which needs to
be considered, is this. I remarked that in a world whose space had a
Moebius-like topology, there would be no incongruent counterparts and
that this implied that, in a sense, handedness would not exist in such a
285\nSPACE AND TIME
world. Certainly, in such a world, a 'left' hand could be made to coincide
exactly with a 'right' hand, simply by transporting one of them around the
universe. But, it might be protested, our very description of this processbelies the suggestion that in such a world there would be no difference
between left-handedness' and 'right-handedness'. Rather than describinga world in which such handednesses do not exist at all, we seem to be
describing one in which an object's handedness can be changed, simply by
transporting it around the universe-which implies, it would seem, that
the object does indeed have a handedness at all times, albeit a different one
at different times. However, matters cannot be as simple as this, for we can
hardly suppose that the transported hand suddenly undergoes a change ofhandedness somewhere along its journey around the universe--nor can
we suppose that the change of handedness is gradual, because handedness
does not come in degrees. All we can say is that, while the hands are in
close proximity to one another prior to the transportation of one of them,
they cannot be made to coincide with each other simply by moving them
around locally, whereas, after one of them has been transported around theuniverse and brought back into close proximity with the other, they can bemade to coincide with each other simply by moving them around locally.
Something, clearly, has changed: but it is not clear that what has changed is
a property of one of the hands. Rather, seems, a certain relationshipbetween the hands has changed.
Even so, it is difficult to resist our inclination to say that some property
of one of the hands has changed, so as to make it match the other in a wayin which it did not match it before. For, before one of the hands was
transported around the universe, the two hands looked different, whereas
afterwards they do not. How can two things look different, though, with
out differing in some property? Well, they could do so if the observer is
subject to some illusion, or if the objects are observed under different
conditions-as, for example, two mountains with the same shape maylook different when viewed from different sides. But nothing like thisseems to apply in the case of a 'left' hand and an otherwise exactly similar
'right' hand lying in close proximity to one another. It is not as though we
are seeing the two hands in two quite different 'perspectives', as in the caseof the two mountains. For, while our perspective on each hand will beslightly different, we can easily switch their positions so that we now seeeach in the perspective in which we formerly saw the other-but thisobviously does not have the effect of changing their apparent handedness.
The nature of handedness thus still seems to be something of a mystery.
286\nINCONGRUENT COUNTERPARTS 287
In some sense, handedness still has objective existence even in a world in
which, owing to the Moebius-like topology of its space, incongruent coun
terparts (as we have defined them) do not exist. Handedness is no mere
illusion, it seems, produced by the conditions under which we observe
objects residing in space. Even so, one can perhaps see why Kant should
have thought that the phenomenon of handedness is evidence of the tran
scendental ideality of space-its mind-dependent status as the form under
which objects manifest themselves to our visual perception, rather than an
arena in which those objects reside or a system of relations in which they
stand to one another. In fact, though, it seems that handedness is built
deeply into the nature of matter, at least in our world. Thus, complex
organic molecules of the same composition but different handedness may
undergo quite different kinds of chemical interactions-a fact which
would make life difficult, or even impossible, for any human being
unfortunate enough to have the handedness of his body completely
reversed (unless objects in his environment also underwent such a
change). Even at the level of subatomic particles, handedness appears to
make a difference to the prevalence of certain types of interaction: nature
at this level is not blind to differences of handedness, any more than it is
blind to differences of electrical charge-which suggests that handedness is
a natural phenomenon at least as fundamental as electrical charge. But as
long as our understanding of the origin and character of handedness
remains clouded, its implications for the nature and ontological status of
space will also remain somewhat obscure.
10 See Martin Gardner, The New Ambidextrous Universe: Symmetry and Asymmetry from Mirror
Reflections to Superstrings, 3rd edn. (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1990), ch. 22. \n16
THE PARADOXES OF MOTION AND
THE POSSIBILITY OF CHANGE
Reality and the appearance of change
The concepts of space, time, and motion are mutually dependent, althoughthe precise nature of their relationship is contentious. One of the purposesof the present chapter is to examine that relationship by studying certainlogical and metaphysical problems besetting the concept of motion. When
an object moves, it undergoes a change of its spatial location during aninterval of time. Movement, thus, is a species of change-and the notion ofchange, as we saw in Chapter 13, is far from straightforward, admitting as itdoes of many important distinctions. How any kind of change at all ispossible is something of a mystery, rooted partly in the mysterious natureof time itself. It is little wonder, then, that in all ages there have beenphilosophers who have denied the reality of change, maintaining that it
belongs only to the realm of appearances. But even this claim harbours aparadox, for even if only the appearances change, something changes and
so change is real. To deny the reality of change altogether, it seems, onemust deny even the appearance of change-unless, as I very much doubt,
one can make clear sense of a distinction between appearance of changeand change of appearance. And yet to deny even the appearance of changeis to repudiate the very phenomena which have led philosophers to suppose that there is a problem about change in the first place. There cannot
even appear to be a problem, it seems, unless change in some sense is real. For this reason, we are likely to find any argument which purports to showthat change is impossible especially perplexing.
Motion presents a crucial challenge for the thesis that change is not
illusory, for no change seems more real than movement and if movementcan be shown, for any reason, to be impossible, then it will be difficult to
i
*. .. \nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION 289
resist the perplexing conclusion that change in general is impossible. This
helps to explain the importance and abiding interest of the famous para
doxes of motion that we owe to Zeno of Elea, which are the central concern
of the present chapter. The paradoxes are four in number and go by vari
ous names, but, following venerable precedent, I shall call them the Race
course, the Achilles, the Arrow, and the Moving Blocks. I shall not be at all
concerned with the history of the paradoxes or the ancient textual evidence
for their provenance, their original form, and the intended purpose of the
philosopher who allegedly first thought of them. The first two paradoxes,
as we shall see, are really just variants of a single paradox, while the other
two are genuinely distinct both from the first two and from each other. It is
generally considered that the first two paradoxes present a greater chal
lenge than do either the third or the fourth, which are regarded by some
philosophers-wrongly, I think-as trifling or obviously confused. How
ever, because the first two paradoxes have received considerably more
attention than the others, I shall spend rather more time discussing them.
The Paradox of the Racecourse
The Paradox of the Racecourse may be set out as follows. A runner, A, has
to run a finite distance-say, of 400 metres-in a finite time, by running
from a point X to a point Y. He sets off at a certain time, to, aiming to arrive
at the later time t1. Clearly, however, before A can arrive at his ultimate
destination, Y, he must first run half of the distance between X and Y,
reaching the midpoint, Z, at time t, which is intermediate between to and
t. But, on arriving at Z, A still has the second half of his total distance yet to
run. Before A can reach Y, then, he must first run half of that remaining
distance, reaching the midpoint between Z and Y-call it Z'--at time t
which is intermediate between t and t1. But even on arriving at Z', A still
has a quarter (half of one half) of his total distance yet to run, the first half
of which (one-eighth of the total) he must run before he can reach Y, as is
depicted in Fig. 16. 1. Now, in our description of the runner's task, we
have obviously set out upon an infinite regress. For, however close to Y the
runner gets, some distance between himself and Y will still remain and he
For more on the historical context of Zeno's paradoxes, see Richard Sorabji, Time, Creation
and the Continuum: Theories in Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages (London: Duckworth, 1983),
ch. 21. See also Gregory Vlastos, 'Zeno of Elea', in Paul Edwards (ed. ), The Encyclopedia of Phil
(New York: Macmillan, 1972), vol. viii, pp. 369-79. \nSPACE AND TIME
X
09to
Z
0
ty
Fig. 16. 1
Z'
0
t3/ A
will have to complete the first half of that distance before he completes all
of it: but, having completed the first half of it, he then just faced oncemore with a task of completing some distance between himself and Y.
Thus, he cannot, it seems, complete his original task of reaching Y, because
his completion of that task requires his prior completion of an infiniteseries of similar tasks.
Here it may be objected that there is no reason why the runner should
not complete his original task of reaching Y within a finite period of time,
because each remaining half-distance is shorter than the previous one and
so will take him less time to complete. If the time he takes to run the first
half-distance the distance from X to Z-is, let us say, half a minute,
then the time he will take to run the next half-distance, from Z to Z', will
be just a quarter of a minute (assuming that he runs at a constant speed).
The next half-distance will take him one-eighth of a minute and the
half-distance after that only one-sixteenth of a minute and so on.
Thus the sum of the times he takes to run the ever-decreasing half
distances may be expressed as the sum of a converging infinite series,
1/2+1/4+18+ 1/16 + 1/32 +. .. .. ., and it can be proved mathematically
that this infinite series of ever-decreasing quantities has a sum equal to 1.
In short, it can be proved that the runner will take exactly one minute to
arrive at his ultimate destination and so will certainly arrive there after a
finite period of time.
However, this response arguably does not go to the heart of the prob
lem. For the problem is not to explain how the runner can arrive at his
ultimate destination in a finite period of time, given that he can indeed
reach that destination, but rather to explain how he can ever arrive thereat all. For, in order to arrive there, it seems that he must complete an
infinite series of tasks-running the first half-distance (from X to Z), then
running the second half-distance (from Z to Z'), then running the third
half-distance (from Z' to the midpoint between Z' and Y), then runningthe fourth half-distance, and so on ad infinitum. But it is impossible,
surely, to complete an infinite series of tasks, since such a series has, by
definition, no last member. I shall return to this claim in due course, for
despite its intuitive appeal, it may rest on a confusion. But before doing so,
290\nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION
I want to consider some other possible responses to the Paradox of the
Racecourse.
Is the paradox self-defeating?
One response which is quite tempting is to say that the paradox is self
defeating, for the following reason. In describing the task confronting the
runner, we began by pointing out that before A can arrive at his ultimate
destination, Y, he must first run half of the distance between X and Y.
However, it may now be objected that the paradox only works on the
assumption that A can at least run that first half-distance, from X to Z,
since only if A can reach Z can there be a time at which half of the total
distance still remains for him to run. And the same applies to all the other
half-distances in the series. But if A can indeed run from X to Z, then he
can complete a distance between two points, which is all that his original
task amounts to. Hence, it seems, the way in which the paradox is set up
concedes the very thesis that it is supposed to undermine, namely, that
movement by an object from one point of space to another is possible.
However, this response, too, is questionable. For, very arguably, we
should see the propounder of the paradox as presenting a reductio ad
absurdum argument against the possibility of movement. That is to say, we
should see him as presenting an argument which shows how, if we assume
that movement is possible, we run into a contradiction, thus demonstrat
ing that movement is not in fact possible. The propounder of the paradox
need not be seen as conceding that it really is possible for A to run from X
to the first midpoint, Z, but merely as assuming that this is possible for the
sake of argument, in order to show that movement between one point of
space and another is in fact impossible, with the implication that A cannot,
after all, really run from X to Z.
An inverted version of the paradox
If this objection to the proposed response is not found convincing, it may
be urged that there is, in any case, another way of propounding the Para
dox of the Racecourse which entirely escapes the alleged difficulty. In this
version, what the paradox is designed to show is not that A cannot ever
reach his ultimate destination, Y, but rather that A cannot even begin to
291\nSPACE AND TIME
move that he cannot leave his starting point, X. This alternative versionof the paradox may be described as follows. As in the first version, it ispointed out that before A can arrive at his ultimate destination, Y, he mustfirst run half of the distance between X and Y, reaching the midpoint, Z, at a time t, which is intermediate between to and t. But now it may beremarked that, likewise, before A can reach Z, he must first reach themidpoint between X and Z-call it Z'-at a time t, which is intermediatebetween to and t1/2 as depicted in Fig. 16. 2.
X
0
to
Z
0
tva
Z
0
tis
Fig. 16. 2
0
t1
In our new description of the runner's task, we again seem to be facedwith an infinite regress: before A can arrive at his ultimate destination, Y,
he must first complete half of the distance from X to Y; but before he can
do that, he must complete half of that half-distance; and before he can do
that, he must complete half of that half-half-distance-and so on ad infini
tum. But how, then, can A even begin to move? For in order to move anydistance at all, A must already have moved a lesser distance: so he now
seems to face an infinite series of tasks with no first member rather than, as
in the original version of the paradox, an infinite series of tasks with no lastmember.
A common-sense objection to the paradox
the availability of this inverted version of the paradox, it might seem
that we lose nothing by concentrating on the original version, which has
the added advantage of a certain intuitive appeal. (I shall, though, return tothe inverted version of the paradox later, since we shall discover reasons fordoubting whether the two versions can be resolved in the same way. ) Now,
concerning the original version of the paradox, we must be on guardagainst those unphilosophically minded individuals who may be inclinedto dismiss it in the style of Samuel Johnson. Boswell describes a conversa
tion between himself and Johnson on the topic of Berkeley's view thatperceptible objects are merely collections of ideas, and reports Johnson asGiven " The. i, p. 292.
292\nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION 293
implication of Johnson's remark is that everyday experience and common
sense sufficiently demonstrate that stones are not merely collections of
ideas; and, no doubt, he would urge with equal vehemence that they dem
onstrate that movement is possible. After all, it may be said, we can quite
plainly see that people can run from one place to another, so where is the
difficulty? If our runner, A, has a race of 400 metres to run and has a stride
of two metres, then there will come a moment in the race at which he
needs just one more stride to complete it-and he can surely take that last
stride. What was represented as constituting an infinite series of tasks
seems, to common sense, to amount in fact to a merely finite series of tasks
consisting of 200 successive strides, which is easily completable by taking
the final stride. However, matters are unfortunately not quite as simple as
common sense suggests-and even if common sense is right in insisting
that motion is possible, that in itself does nothing to remove the paradox.
To take even a single stride, A must move his leg from one point of space to
another and this is a task which is fundamentally no different in nature
from the task of moving himself from X to Y. The fact that we can divide
his run into 200 successive strides makes the underlying problem no easier
to solve. And, in any case, exactly the same problem would arise if, instead
of having A run from X to Y, we had him freewheeling a bicycle from X to
Y, in which case we couldn't divide the continuous forward movement of
the bicycle's frame into a finite series of sub-movements analogous to the
successive strides of a runner.
Infinite series and supertasks
It seems, then, that we must take the Paradox of the Racecourse seriously.
But perhaps it still admits of a solution which does not require us to deny
the possibility of continuous movement. Recall that I suggested earlier
that the root of the difficulty presented by the paradox is that it is appar
ently impossible to complete an infinite series of tasks, since such a series
has, by definition, no last member. And we cannot deny, it seems, that the
runner has to complete an infinite series of tasks-unless, of course, we
deny that space is infinitely divisible. Certainly, if space is not infinitely
divisible, then there will be a point in the race so close to Y that the
distance between that point and Y is not divisible into two half-distances.
And perhaps A will be able to move from that point to Y discontinuously
and instantaneously. However, as we shall see when we come to discuss the
$\n294 SPACE AND TIME
Paradox of the Moving Blocks, the notion of such discontinuous andinstantaneous motion raises new problems, so it would be better not toassume that this is possible if we can resolve the Racecourse Paradoxwithout doing so.
Let us then focus attention instead upon the claim that, because an
infinite series of tasks has, by definition, no last member, it is therefore
impossible to complete such a series of tasks. Much depends here on what
exactly is meant by 'completing an infinite series of tasks'. If by this is
meant 'completing the last task in the series after completing all of its
predecessors', then, of course, we must say that it is impossible to complete
an infinite series of tasks, simply because such a series has no last member.
But if, as seems altogether more sensible, what we should mean by 'com
pleting an infinite series of tasks' is just 'completing all of the tasks in the
series in the order in which they occur in the series', then it is far from
obvious that this is impossible. Indeed, we have already noted that we can
calculate how long it will take to complete an infinite series of tasks, each
of which takes half as long as the preceding one. Provided that space and
time are both continuous and thus infinitely divisible, there is no problem
in supposing that such an infinite series of tasks may exist, and that one
does indeed exist in the case of the movement of a point-particle from one
point of space to another. Our imaginary runner is no point-particle, of
course, which is partly why the Paradox of the Racecourse seems so con
trary to common sense and everyday experience. And, indeed, modern
physics leads us to believe that point-particles do not actually exist. But
these merely contingent facts have no bearing on the question of whether
the paradox has any logical force. What I am now suggesting is that it does
not, after all, have any logical force, but only appears to do so owing to a
confusion over what should be understood by 'completing an infinite series of tasks'.
Against this suggestion, it may be urged that the notion of completing
an infinite series of tasks, even if understood in the way recommended
earlier, is still problematic. Consider, for instance, the well-known Thom
son's lamp paradox, which involves such an infinite series of tasks and is
thus often described as being concerned with a so-called 'supertask'. 3 The
lamp possesses a button which, if pushed, will turn the lamp on if it is
already off and turn it off if it is already on. Initially, the lamp is off and the
See James F. Thomson, "Tasks and Super-tasks', Analysis 15 (1954), 1-13, reprinted in RichardM. Gale (ed. ), The Philosophy of Time: A Collection of Essays (Garden City, NY: Anchor Doubleday& Co. , Inc. , 1967). \nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION 295
'supertask' is to push the button an infinite number of times during the
course of one minute, this being accomplished by pushing it for the first
time at the beginning of the minute, for the second time after half a minute
has elapsed, for the third time after three-quarters of a minute has elapsed,
for the fourth time after seven-eighths of a minute has elapsed-and so on
ad infinitum. We may add that no button-pushing is to occur that does not
belong to this sequence. After each odd-numbered push of the button, the
lamp will be on and after each even-numbered push of the button, it will
be off. The problem is to say whether the lamp will be on or off when
exactly one minute has elapsed. Of course, a physically real lamp would
either burn out before the minute had elapsed or simply go on shining
continuously after a certain point-and, in any case, there is a physical
limit to how rapidly a material object like a lamp's button can move. But
we are supposed to be considering the problem from a purely logical point
of view, abstracting away from the constraints of physical law, which are
merely contingent. This understood, it seems that we have to say that the
lamp will be either on or off when exactly one minute has elapsed-there
is no other state in which it can be-and yet it also seems that its being in
one of those states at that time cannot be the result of any of the button
pushings in the series, because for any such button-pushing which results
in the lamp's being on there is a subsequent button-pushing which results
in its being off, and vice versa.
This is, indeed, a most peculiar state of affairs but not, it seems, a
logically impossible one. We simply have to conclude, I think, that a world
in which the 'supertask' is completable is a world in which causal deter
minism does not reign universally. At the end of the minute, the lamp will
be either on or off, but not as a result of any button-pushing in the series.
Since, as we have described the supertask, all of the button-pushings that
occur do so in the course of the series, the state of the lamp at the end of
the minute will not be determined by any button-pushing at all. If we also
assume that only a button-pushing can causally determine the state of the
lamp at any time, then it follows that the state of the lamp at the end of the
minute is causally undetermined. It is important to appreciate here that
every button-pushing in the series occurs before one minute has elapsed:
there is no button-pushing in the series which occurs when exactly one
minute has elapsed and so, given that the only button-pushings that occur
do so in the course of the series, there is no button-pushing at all that
occurs when exactly one minute has elapsed. The reason, of course, why no
button-pushing in the series occurs when exactly one minute has elapsed is\nSPACE AND TIME
that the series has no last member. For, since every button-pushing in theseries must occur during the course of the minute, no button-pushing inthe series can occur after the minute has elapsed, whence it follows that ifthere were a button-pushing in the series which occurred when exactly oneminute had elapsed, that button-pushing would have to be the last in theseries and there is no such last member.
Why does the paradox seem so compelling?
My tentative verdict concerning the Racecourse Paradox is, then, that itfails to demonstrate the impossibility of continuous motion because it is
erroneously assumed that it is logically impossible to complete an infinite
series of tasks, when in fact it is logically possible to complete an infinite
series of tasks even within a finite period of time. As we have seen, one
reason why the paradox may seem compelling is that one may have a
confused understanding of what should be meant by 'completing an infin
ite series of tasks', taking this to mean 'completing the last task in the series
after completing all of its predecessors'. But why should anyone make this
mistake-why should anyone suppose that the infinite series of tasks to be
completed by the runner has a 'last member'? For the following reason,
perhaps. Clearly, in order to complete the task of running from X to Y, A
must actually arrive at Y: arriving at any other point between X and Y, no
matter how close it is to Y, will not suffice. But every one of the infinite
series of tasks that A must complete in order to arrive at Y involves his
arrival at a point between X and Y which is distinct from Y. It may seem,
thus, that, even having completed all of those infinitely many tasks, there is
still something remaining for A to do, namely, arrive at Y itself: and this, it
may seem, is his 'last' task, which succeeds all his infinitely many previous
tasks. But, in fact, it would seem that the proper thing to say is that,
although there is no single task in the infinite series of tasks by completing
which A arrives at Y, none the less, by completing all of these infinitely
many tasks, A arrives at Y-there is nothing further that
order to arrive there than to complete every task in the series. Thus, the
whole task of running from X to Y, the performance of which results in A's
arrival at Y, is just the sum of the infinitely many subtasks in the series, even though no one of those subtasks is such that, by performing it, A
arrives at Y. This fact-if we accept that it is a fact-is sufficientlysurprising, however, to make entirely understandable one's temptation to
need do in
296\nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION
suppose, erroneously, that there must be a 'last' task for the runner to
complete in order to arrive at Y. Hence, it is perfectly understandable why
we should seem to be faced with a paradox, drawn as we are both to saying
that the runner must have a 'last' task to complete and to saying that,
because the series of tasks which he has to complete is infinite, there can be
no such 'last' task for him to complete.
More on inverted versions of the paradox
It may be wondered whether this resolution of the Paradox of the Race
course also works for the inverted version of the paradox, which is
intended to demonstrate that the runner cannot even begin to move,
because he has an infinite series of tasks to complete which has no first
member. One reason why the inverted version of the paradox may seem to
be more difficult to resolve in the foregoing fashion is this. In the original
version of the paradox, the propounder of the paradox grants us if only
for the sake of argument that the runner can complete any single subtask
in the infinite series of subtasks confronting him. But then it is open to us
to maintain, as we did above, that the runner's whole task of running from
X to Y is just the sum of all those subtasks and is hence completable by him
simply in virtue of his completion of each subtask in the series. But in the
inverted version of the paradox, the propounder of the paradox does not
grant us, even for the sake of argument, that the runner can complete any
of the subtasks in the infinite series of subtasks confronting him: rather, he
lets the burden of proof for this lie with us. Consequently, he will not
simply allow us to assume that each of these subtasks is completable and
then argue that we can, without contradiction, identify the whole task with
the sum of all the subtasks. Moreover, and even more importantly, there is
a significant disanalogy between the two versions of the paradox in the
following respect. In the original version of the paradox, in which the
question is how the runner can ever arrive at his ultimate destination, Y,
the problem seems to arise because none of the subtasks which the runner
is taken to be able to complete involves him arriving at Y. But in the
inverted version of the paradox, in which the question is how the runner
can ever leave his point of departure, X, all of the subtasks which he is
required to be able to complete involve him leaving X. Hence, since the
very question at issue is how the runner can ever leave X, it doesn't help us
answer this question to say that his whole task of running from X to Y is
297\n298 SPACE AND TIME
the sum of infinitely many subtasks each of which involves him leaving
X.
What we could say, though, by analogy with what we said regarding the
original version of the paradox, is that the runner's whole task of running
from X to Y is the sum of another infinite series of subtasks none of which
involves him leaving X. Each of these subtasks has a starting point, but
none of them has the same starting-point as the starting point, X, of the
whole task which is the sum of all these subtasks. The starting point of the
'first' subtask in the infinite series that I now have in mind is the midpoint
between X and Y, point Z; the starting point of the 'second' subtask in the
series is the midpoint between X and Z, point Z' of Fig. 16. 2; and so on.
And the reason why I put the words 'first' and 'second' in quotation marks
here is that the 'first' subtask (that of completing the distance from Z to the
ultimate destination, Y) is performed later than the 'second' subtask (that
of completing the distance from Z' to Z), and so on. To divide up the
runner's whole task in this way is, indeed, just to reverse the way in which
it is divided up in the original version of the paradox. In effect, it is to take
the first of our two earlier diagrams, Fig. 16. 1, exchange X for Y, and read
time as running from right to left in the diagram, as in Fig. 16. 3.
Y
0
t1
Z
0
ty
Fig. 16. 3
Z'
O
ty
X
0
to
Now, it may be noticed that this third diagram looks as though it is
simply the mirror image, reflected from left to right, of our second dia
gram, which was this:
X09
to
Z'
0
ty
Z
0
t1⁄2
Fig. 16. 2
Y
0
t1
But in this case appearances are misleading. For, as we are interpreting
these two diagrams, Fig. 16. 3 represents the following two subtasks of the
runner: to run from Z to Y and, prior to that, to run from Z' to Z. In
contrast, the subtasks that Fig. 16. 2 represents are: to run from X to Z and,
prior to that, to run from X to Z'. Thus, the supertask of which Fig. 16. 2 is a
partial representation is one in which all of the runner's subtasks are\nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION
nested within the interval between X and Z, whereas the supertask of
which Fig. 16. 3 is a partial representation is one in which all of the runner's
subtasks are strung out in a non-overlapping fashion between Y and X.
Consequently, we can resolve the version of the Racecourse Paradox repre
sented by Fig. 16. 3 in a way which is modelled on our resolution of the
original version of the paradox, as represented in Fig. 16. 1 (of which Fig.
16. 3 is merely a relabelled version). But we cannot construct a solution to
the version of the paradox represented by Fig. 16. 2 in exactly the same way.
So what can we do to resolve the version of the paradox represented by
Fig. 16. 2? One problem posed by this version of the paradox is that, if the
runner is to move any distance at all, he must already have moved some
(lesser) distance: if space and time are continuous, then there is no least
distance for him to move and so no distance which he moves before he
moves any other distance. However, our solution to the version of the
paradox represented by Fig. 16. 3 shows us how it can be possible for the
runner to move in such a way that, for any distance that he has moved, he
has already moved a lesser distance. So this problem cannot be what is
distinctive of the version of the paradox represented by Fig. 16. 2. In fact, I
think that all that is truly distinctive of this version of the paradox is that it
raises the problem of how something can begin to move that is (as we
might be tempted to put it), how it can be the case that at a certain instant
of time an object is moving, even though it is not moving at any prior
instant of time. And at the root of this problem, I think, is the more general
problem of how something can be moving at an instant of time at all. But
this, as we shall see, is the problem raised by the third of Zeno's paradoxes,
the Arrow, which we shall examine shortly.
The Achilles Paradox
Before examining the Arrow Paradox, I should briefly mention the second
of Zeno's four paradoxes of motion, the Achilles. This, as I mentioned
earlier, is really just a variant of the Racecourse Paradox and may be set out
as follows. Achilles, A, runs faster than the Tortoise, T, and accordingly A
gives T a head start in a race between the two of them. Suppose that T
starts at time to and A starts at the later time t, . Let P, be the point in the
race at which T arrives when A starts to run, that is, at t. By the time, t
that A has arrived at P1, T will have moved on to a point, P. , some way
ahead of A. Similarly, by the time, t, , that A has arrived at P, , I will have
299\nSPACE AND TIME
moved on to another point, P, , which is still some way ahead of A. And soon ad infinitum (if space and time are continuous and thus infinitelydivisible). At each successive time in this infinite series of times, Tis aheadof A by a smaller distance-but T is always ahead of A by some distance, however small. How, then, can A ever catch up with T? Of course, it can bepointed out that the intervals of time between successive times in the seriesare progressively smaller, so that if A can catch up with T, he can do so in a
finite period of time, since the sum of an infinite converging series of finitequantities can, as we noted earlier, be finite. But, as in the Paradox of the
Racecourse, the prior question to be answered is how A can catch up withT at all. In effect, indeed, the Achilles Paradox is just a version of the
Racecourse Paradox in which the runner, Achilles, has a moving finishingpost instead of a fixed one. That being so, however, the paradox can beresolved in the same way as we resolved the original version of the
Racecourse Paradox, and for that reason I shall give it no further attentionhere.
The Paradox of the Arrow and
instantaneous velocity
I turn next, then, to the Paradox of the Arrow. Suppose an arrow to be
moving through the air. At any instant of time during its passage from one
place to another, the arrow will occupy a part of space which fits it exactly.
As it is sometimes put, the arrow will always take up, at any instant of time,
a place exactly equal to itself. But how, then, can the arrow ever be changing
its place-since at any instant of time it is wholly in just one and the same
place? It is true that the arrow is supposedly in different places at different
instants of time, for it must be if it is to move at all. But the problem is that
we can apparently never catch it in the act of changing its place at any
instant of time and if it never changes its place at any instant of time,
how can it be anything other than a purely stationary arrow?
One response that is often made to this supposed paradox is to say that
it rests upon a misunderstanding of the nature of motion and, more espe
cially, a misconception of what it is for an object to have a velocity at aninstant of time. Thus, it may be said, because velocity simply is rate of
change of distance with respect to change of time, we can only definevelocity at an instant of time in terms of distance moved during periods of
300\nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION
time surrounding that instant. More precisely, it is proposed that we
should define an object's velocity at an instant of time, t, as having the
limiting value towards which an infinite series of ratios converges, each
member of the series being the ratio of a distance moved by the object to
the amount of time taken by it to move that distance, the periods of time
in quesion being smaller and smaller intervals surrounding the instant t.
We can think of it in something like this way: as a rough approximation of
the object's velocity at t, we can say that the value of its velocity at t, in
metres per second, is equal to the distance in metres moved by the object
during a period of one second which has tas its midpoint, divided by one
second. A somewhat less rough approximation would be provided by
reducing the period to half a second. A still less rough approximation
would be provided by reducing the period to a quarter of a second. And so
on ad infinitum. If we now take this infinite series of ratios of distance to
time, we shall find that the successive values of the ratios converge upon a
limiting value, which may be defined as the object's instantaneous velocity
at t.
How is this supposed to dissolve the Paradox of the Arrow? In the
following way. If instantaneous velocity should be conceived in the fore
going fashion, then it cannot make sense to ascribe a velocity-and hence
motion to an object at an instant of time unless the object undergoes a
change of position during a period of time including that instant. No
object could acquire an instantaneous velocity of, let us say, 10 metres per
second, at an instant of time t, while having zero velocity at all times
surrounding t and thus failing to move any distance. Clearly, an object with
an instantaneous velocity of 10 metres per second at t does not move any
distance at all at t. But it must, according to the foregoing conception of
instantaneous velocity, move some distance over a period of time which
includes t. Now, the problem supposedly raised by the Paradox of the Arrow
was this. The arrow never appears to be, at any instant of time, changing its
place--that is, moving at that very instant. But if it never moves at any
instant of time, how can it be anything other than a purely stationary
arrow? However, according to the conception of instantaneous velocity
that has just been advanced, it is simply a mistake to suppose that what
distinguishes a moving arrow from a stationary arrow at an instant of time
is something that only concerns how the arrows are at that instant. So we
should not be at all surprised by the fact that there is no apparent differ
ence between a moving and a stationary arrow at an instant of time and
certainly should not infer that, because there is no apparent difference
301\nSPACE AND TIME
between them, there can be no real difference between them. For, if the
foregoing proposal is correct, the real difference between the arrows at aninstant of time, t, arises from real differences between them at other
instants of time before and after t-in particular, from the fact that the
moving arrow is, but the stationary arrow is not, in different places beforeand after t.
However, the foregoing conception of instantaneous velocity is not
invulnerable to challenge (as we began to see in Chapter 13). One problemwith it is this. Because, on this conception, the velocity of an object at an
instant is defined in terms of distances moved by the object during periods
of time surrounding the instant, it seems that we cannot explain why an
object changes its position over a period of time by reference to the vel
ocity which it possesses during that period-for any such explanation
would be circular. We would just be saying, in effect, that the object
changes its position over a certain period of time because it moves a
certain distance during that period, which is just to say that it moves a
certain distance because it moves a certain distance. But, very plausibly, we
can and should explain why an object changes its position over a period of
time by reference to the velocity which it possesses during that period. It
may be true that we can only measure the object's velocity at any time by
measuring the distance that it moves during a period which includes that
time: but this doesn't imply that we should think of the fact that the object
has that velocity as simply consisting in the fact that the ratio of the dis
tance moved by the object to the length of time it takes to move that
distance has a certain value.
Does this mean that the Paradox of the Arrow remains unresolved? Not
necessarily. For, drawing on a proposal first sketched in Chapter 13, we can
perhaps say that an instantaneous velocity of an object at a time t is a
directional tendency which it possesses at t, in virtue of which, if it con
tinues to possess it, it will undergo a subsequent change of spatial position.
On this conception, the object's change of position is a consequence of its
velocity, not something in terms of which its velocity is defined. But we can
still say that there is a real difference, at an instant of time, between a
moving and a stationary arrow-a difference which, moreover, does not
concern how those objects are at other times. For we can say that the
arrows differ in respect of their directional tendencies. This is not a differ
ence between them that one could hope to observe at t, because
dispositions of which tendencies are a variety-are not straightforwardlyobservable. What we can observe are their manifestations. We can observe,
302\nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION
for instance, the dissolving of the sugar, but not its solubility. But its solubil
ity is quite as real a feature of the sugar as is its dissolving. And its solubility
explains why it dissolves, when it is immersed in an appropriate solvent. In
a similar fashion, we may maintain, an object's instantaneous velocity
explains why it undergoes a change of spatial position. But it is because an
instantaneous velocity is a species of disposition and hence not straight
forwardly observable that a moving and a stationary arrow may not appear
to differ at any instant of time-a fact which the propounder of the Arrow
Paradox relies upon in order to perplex us. An instantaneous 'snapshot' of
the two arrows at an instant of time would reveal no difference between
them: but that, according to the view now being recommended, is because
the difference between them, real though it is, is simply not the sort of
difference that could be revealed by a snapshot.
How can something begin to move?
We can draw on this alternative conception of an instantaneous velocity to
say something about the inverted version of the Paradox of the Racecourse,
represented in Fig. 16. 2. The problem posed by this version of the paradox
is how the runner can even begin to move, that is (as we put it), how it can
be the case that at a certain instant of time an object is moving, even
though it is not moving at any prior instant of time. If an instantaneous
velocity is a 'directional tendency', then there seems to be no reason why
an object should not acquire this at an instant of time and thus before the
object has moved any distance at all. By contrast, if an instantaneous
velocity can only be ascribed to an object at an instant of time, t, in virtue
of distances moved by the object during periods of time surrounding t
then it might appear to make no sense to ascribe an instantaneous velocity
to an object at a time, t, before the object has moved any distance at all.
However, it may be urged on behalf of the latter conception of instant
aneous velocity that, at the instant at which the runner starts the race, his
instantaneous velocity should be zero-and that this is, in fact, the value of
the velocity assigned to him by the method of computation associated with
this conception. Indeed, according to this conception of instantaneous
velocity, the solution to the inverted version of the Racecourse Paradox is
to say that the runner does not in fact 'begin to move', in the sense sug
gested earlier: that is to say, it is not the case, according to this conception,
that an object can acquire, at an instant of time, t, a non-zero velocity even
303\nSPACE AND TIME
though it has zero velocity at all instants of time prior to t. Rather, it will besaid, this is how we should understand what it is for an object to 'begin tomove' at an instant of time, t: it is for the object to have zero velocity at tbut a non-zero velocity at all instants of time succeeding t (until the objectstops moving). However, it must still be acknowledged that this account ofwhat it is for an object to begin to move' has the counterintuitive consequence that an object cannot acquire a non-zero velocity until it hasalready moved some distance, which prompts the question: how did theobject manage to move that distance? That we should find this puzzlingprovides further evidence, I think, that we do intuitively think of anobject's velocity as being something which explains why it undergoes achange of position-a notion which, as we have seen, appears to beincompatible with the conception of instantaneous velocity now under
scrutiny. But the question of which of the two conceptions is ultimatelysuperior is not one that I shall attempt to settle definitively here.
The Paradox of the Moving Blocks and discrete
space-time
The fourth and last of Zeno's four paradoxes of motion is the Paradox of
the Moving Blocks, the exact purport of which is somewhat obscure. How
ever, I shall present what seems to be one quite plausible and interesting
reconstruction of it. Suppose we have three rows of moving blocks (all of
the same size), row A, row B, and row C, with row A moving from east to
west at a certain speed and row C moving from west to east at the same
speed, while row B, which lies between the other two, is stationary. And
suppose we consider a moment of time, t1, at which the faces of all the
blocks are exactly lined up with each other, as depicted in Fig. 16. 4.
Now consider a later moment of time, t2, at which the trailing face of
block A, is exactly lined up with the leading face of block C, , as in Fig. 16. 5.
A1
B1
5G1
A2
بن
Fig. 16. 4
A3
B3
C3
304\nTHE PARADOXES OF MOTION 305
A1 A2
B1
A3
B2
G21
Fig. 16. 5
B3
(2 C3
The puzzle is supposed to be this: how can it be the case that, during the
interval between t, and t2, block A, has passed by two complete C blocks
while, in the same amount of time, it has passed by only one B block
despite the fact that all of the blocks are of exactly the same size?
One's initial thought may be that there is nothing very puzzling about
this. Because the A blocks and the Cblocks are travelling at the same speed
but in opposite directions, their velocity relative to each other is twice
the velocity of an A block relative to a B block, since the B blocks are
stationary. Perhaps the original propounder of the paradox did not fully
comprehend the fact that one and the same object may have two different
velocities relative to two different objects which are themselves moving
relative to each other. Be that as it may, the example of the moving blocks
does appear to create a problem if one supposes that space and time are
discrete rather than continuous as one might be tempted to suppose in
order to overcome Zeno's other paradoxes of motion (assuming that one is
not satisfied with the solutions of these that were proposed earlier). If
space and time are discrete, then there is a least possible distance and a
least possible length of time, neither of which is divisible. And then the
problem posed by the moving blocks is this. Suppose that the moments of
time t, and t2 are separated by the least possible length of time, so that
block A, passes two C blocks, C, and C1, in the least possible length of time.
At what time, then, did block A, pass block C, ? It must, surely, have passed
it at some time between t, and t, when the blocks were spatially related to
one another in the way depicted in Fig. 16. 6.
A1
B1 B2
A2 A3
B3
C2
Fig. 16. 6
C3\nSPACE AND TIME
But if t, and t, are separated by the least possible length of time, thenthere is, of necessity, no moment of time that lies between t, and t, and sono time at which block A, can have passed block C, . Furthermore, we seethat the situation depicted in Fig. 16. 6 is one in which, at the time at whichblock A, has just passed block C, , it has passed only half of block B, , so that, whatever distance the blocks measure from front to back, it should bepossible for half of that distance to exist. But what, then, if the blocksmeasure the least possible distance from front to back? The implication ofall this seems to be that there cannot, after all, be either a least possible
distance or a least possible length of time, so that space and time must becontinuous rather than discrete. But how good the reasoning is for thisconclusion I leave to the reader to judge for him or herself. 4
*For further discussion of Zeno's paradoxes see, in addition to items already referred to in thischapter, Max Black, Problems of Analysis: Philosophical Essays (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1954), Part 2; Adolf Grünbaum, Modern Science and Zeno's Paradoxes (London: George Allen andUnwin, 1968); and R. M. Sainsbury, Paradoxes, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), ch. 1.
306\n17
TENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
The A series and the B series
The paradoxes of motion that we discussed in the preceding chapter were
designed to persuade philosophers that there is something suspect about
our conception of change and our apparent experience of it. Motion is
perhaps the most obvious and fundamental species of change and so, if the
concept of motion can be convicted of harbouring a contradiction, mak
ing real motion impossible, we may have to conclude that reality itself is
unchanging. This in turn would have a severe impact upon our conception
of time as a pervasive feature of reality, especially if we take the view that
time without change is impossible (a view that we examined in some detail
in Chapter 13). If time without change is impossible and change is impos
sible, it follows that time itself is impossible that is to say, it follows that
temporality cannot be a genuine feature of reality, in the sense that elem
ents of reality cannot genuinely stand in temporal relations to one another
(relations such as being earlier than or being simultaneous with).
Of course, nothing that we concluded in the preceding chapter gives
support to the foregoing line of argument against the reality of time, for we
were not persuaded by the alleged paradoxes of motion that even
motion let alone change in general-is impossible. In the present chap
ter, however, I shall examine another and perhaps more compelling way in
which this line of argument against the reality of time may be pursued--
one which we owe to the Cambridge philosopher J. M. E. McTaggart, who
wrote extensively on this topic in the early years of the twentieth century.
(Of course, if McTaggart's argument is correct, he really did no such thing,
since there are in reality no 'years' and 'centuries'-but let us pass over the
See J. M. E. McTaggart, The Nature of Existence, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1927), ch. 33. \nSPACE AND TIME
irony of this observation. ) In order to understand McTaggart's argumentagainst the reality of time, however, we must first understand an importantdistinction that he makes between two ways in which events seem to beordered in time so as to constitute a temporal series. In fact, he speaks oftwo different temporal series, which he calls the 'A series' and the 'B series',
although it is clear that the elements of the series are the same and only the
ordering relations between the elements differ, so that we might better
speak of two different ways of characterizing a single series rather than of
two different series. (In what follows, I should emphasize, I shall be pre
senting a relatively simple reconstruction of what I take to be the essential
features of McTaggart's argument, avoiding detailed matters of textual
exegesis and disputes between commentators over finer points of
interpretation. )
The difference between McTaggart's A series and his B series is best
explained by appeal to two different classes of temporal expression,
which we can accordingly call 'A-series expressions' and 'B-series expres
sions'. A-series expressions include such words and phrases as 'today',
'tomorrow', and 'five weeks ago', while B-series expressions include such
words and phrases as 'simultaneously', 'two years earlier than', and 'ten
minutes later than'. The important difference between the two classes of
expressions is this: a sentence containing an A-series expression may be
true at one time but false at another, whereas a sentence whose only
temporal expressions are B-series expressions is true at all times if it is
true at any time. For instance, the sentence 'It is raining today' may be
true on one day but false on the next. By contrast, the sentence 'The
Battle of Hastings took place 749 years earlier than the Battle of Water
loo' is true now, will always be true, and, indeed, was even true, it seems,
at all times before 1066, the date of the Battle of Hastings. (I acknowledge
that not all philosophers would concede this last claim, but for the time
being let us not regard it as open to challenge: I shall return to the issue
at the end of the chapter. ) Of course, no one living earlier than 1815,
the date of the Battle of Waterloo, was in a position to know that this
sentence is true (unless gifted with precognitive powers) or even in a
position to refer to the Battle of Waterloo, which for any such person
was still a future event. But we must distinguish between what is true at
a time and what is known to be true at that time. And, given that we now
know it to be true that the Battle of Hastings took place 749 years earlier
the Battle of Waterloo, we apparently have to conclude that, even before
any human being at all existed, it was true that the Battle of Hastings
308\nTENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
would take place seven hundred and forty-nine years earlier than the
Battle of Waterloo.
Here it may be objected that, even if we accept that at all times before
1066 it was true that the Battle of Hastings would take place 749 years
earlier than the Battle of Waterloo, it does not follow that the sentence 'The
Battle of Hastings took place 749 years earlier than the Battle of Waterloo'
was true at those times, for this sentence is expressed in the past tense.
What was true at those times, rather, was the future-tensed sentence 'The
Battle of Hastings will have taken place 749 years earlier than the Battle of
Waterloo' or, rather less convolutedly, 'The Battle of Waterloo will take
place 749 years later than the Battle of Hastings'. This, after all, is what a
soothsayer might have pronounced at such a time. The complication that
we are running into here is that tensed verbs themselves qualify as A-series
expressions and tensed verbs are pretty well ubiquitous in everyday lan
guage. If we want to construct a sentence which genuinely contains only B
series temporal expressions, then we must construct one whose verbs are
tenseless. Such sentences do occasionally occur even in everyday language,
examples being the sentences 'Two plus two is four' and 'Courage is a
virtue', in which the verb 'is' does not have a present-tense sense. However,
nothing prevents us from making much more extensive use of tenseless
verbs. Rather than saying 'Rain is now falling in Durham', for example, I
could say 'Rain falls in Durham on 12 November 2000', in which the verb
'falls' is tenseless, like the 'is' in 'Two plus two is four'. I am not claiming
here that 'Rain is now falling in Durham' has exactly the same meaning
as-is synonymous with-'Rain falls in Durham on 12 November 2000':
patently, it does not. But 'Rain falls in Durham on 12 November 2000' does
provide an example of a sentence containing no A-series expressions and
consequently one whose truth or falsity is (plausibly) invariable over time.
If this sentence is true today, it is (plausibly) true at all times. By contrast,
'Rain is now falling in Durham', while it may be true today (12 November
2000), may yet be false tomorrow (since the sun may be shining in
Durham on 13 November 2000).
With these clarifications and qualifications in mind, let us return now to
the A series and the B series themselves. The temporal order of events may
be described using either A-series expressions or B-series expressions.
Consider, for instance, the following three events: the Battle of Hastings,
the Battle of Agincourt, and the Battle of Waterloo. Using only B-series
expressions, we may say that the Battle of Hastings takes place earlier than
the Battle of Agincourt, which in turn takes place earlier than the Battle of
309\nSPACE AND TIME
Waterloo (noting that 'takes place' here is to be understood as tenseless). Given that this is true-as it is-it is always true. But we can also say, forinstance, that the Battle of Agincourt took place longer ago than the Battleof Waterloo and that the Battle of Hastings took place even longer ago thanthat. In saying this, we attribute the same temporal order to the threeevents as we do when we describe their temporal order using only B-seriesexpressions, but now we do so using A-series expressions. Although it isnow true to say that the Battle of Agincourt took place long ago, it was notalways true to say this, for at one time it was still a future event. At onetime, indeed-before 1066-it would have been true to say the following: the Battle of Agincourt will take place in the more distant future than the
Battle of Hastings and the Battle of Waterloo will take place in the stillmore distant future. This way of describing the temporal relationshipsbetween the three events would have put them in the same temporal order
(the correct one) but by using different A-series expressions. It is no longer
true, however, to say that the Battle of Agincourt will take place in the
more distant future than the Battle of Hastings and that the Battle of
Waterloo will take place in the still more distant future. Now we have to say
that the Battle of Agincourt took place longer ago than the Battle of Water
loo and that the Battle of Hastings took place even longer ago than that.
This, of course, is because all of these events, which were once future
events, are now past events, owing to the so-called passage of time. So, in
short, events fall into the A series in virtue of occurring in the present or in
the more or less distant past or future, whereas events fall into the B series
in virtue of standing in earlier/later relations to one another. Both series
confer the same temporal order upon events, but do so in quite different
ways. And, crucially, the A-series 'position' of an event-its status as a past,
present, or future event-is itself subject to change, even though this
change does not affect its place in the temporal order of all events.
Change and the passage of time
McTaggart believes that temporality cannot be adequately described using
B-series expressions alone. He believes that time essentially involves change
and that change cannot be adequately characterized without using A-series
expressions. That time essentially involves change follows, it seems, from
the fact that time just is the dimension of change-from the fact, that is, that it is in time that change necessarily occurs. Of course, we do also speak
310\n311TENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
of non-temporal 'change', as when we describe the width of a river as
'changing'-'getting bigger'-as it approaches the sea. But this would
appear to be a purely metaphorical use of the word 'change'. Change in the
literal sense is change in time, not in space or in any other 'dimension of
variation'. But, even accepting this, why does McTaggart believe that
change cannot be adequately characterized without using A-series expres
sions? Chiefly, it would seem, because he considers the passage of time itself
to involve a species of change which is a prerequisite of any kind of
temporal change at all.
Here it is important to appreciate that the passage of time is supposed to
be a process which concerns, primarily, events and times, rather than per
sisting objects-although it may also be taken to concern the latter deriva
tively, in virtue of the events in which such objects participate and the
times at which they exist. A persisting object, which exists at different
times, may undergo a change of its properties or qualities over time (as we
saw in Chapter 3, though we also saw there that such change raises prob
lems of its own). For instance, a banana may change in colour from being
green to being yellow. As time passes, the banana will also get older' and
this is, indeed, a kind of 'change' which befalls it as a consequence of the
passage of time. But whereas the banana's turning yellow clearly consti
tutes an event, which occurs at a certain time, it is much more questionable
whether we should say that the banana's getting a day older is really an
'event' of any kind (as we saw in Chapter 13). However-and this is the
important point-events themselves and the times at which they occur
appear to undergo genuine change purely as a consequence of the passage
of time: a kind of change which persisting objects cannot really be said to
undergo. For events and times, it seems, change from being future to being
present and from being present to being past. Persisting objects, by con
trast, do not literally change from being future to being present or from
being present to being past-although, indeed, the times at which such
objects exist may be said to change in this way. And yet, in McTaggart's
view, it is only if events and times do indeed undergo this special sort of
change that we can say that time itself really exists and that persisting
objects may consequently undergo the characteristic sorts of changes that
they are thought to undergo, such as changes in their properties or qual
ities. In short, it is McTaggart's opinion that genuine change of any kind,
including the sorts of changes that persisting objects are thought to
be explained without resort to A-series expressions. undergo, cannot
But why, it may be asked, can't we adequately characterize and explain
1\nSPACE AND TIME
the sorts of changes that persisting objects are thought to undergo purelyby recourse to B-series expressions? Consider again, for instance, thebanana which undergoes a change of colour from being green to beingyellow. Why can't we adequately characterize this change simply by sayingthat at one time the banana is (tenselessly) green whereas at a later time itis (tenselessly) yellow-employing a sentence containing only tenselessverbs and the B-series expression 'later than'? Well, this characterizationwould perhaps be adequate if the times to which it refers could themselvesbe characterized without even implicit recourse to A-series expressionsbut it is questionable whether this can be done. One way in which thedifficulty here can be brought out is this. Recall our earlier example of theriver which 'changes' in width along its length, a fact which we maydescribe by saying that at one place the river is narrow whereas at anotherplace the river is broad. Why doesn't this difference qualify as a literalchange in the river, of the sort that we would have if the river were (in the
same place) narrow on one day and broad on the next day? Simply because
in the former case the ascriptions of width are made with respect to placerather than with respect to time. But this means that, unless we alreadyhave some satisfactory way of distinguishing time from space as a 'dimension of variation', we cannot distinguish between the literal change of the
banana in colour and the merely metaphorical 'change' of the river inwidth. And, in McTaggart's opinion, this prior distinction can only becaptured by drawing on the fact that we think of time, but not space, asbeing the dimension in which events (and times themselves) undergo
change from being future to being present and from being present tobeing past-a species of change which can only be described using A
series expressions. In short, without calling upon A-series expressions, we have no principled way of distinguishing between time and space
as dimensions of variation and so no way of characterizing adequatelyeven the kinds of change which it is thought that persisting objects cangenuinely undergo.
McTaggart's argument for the unreality of time
What we need to discuss next is why McTaggart thought that time must beunreal. As we shall soon see in more detail, his reason is that, in hisopinion, our use of A-series expressions inevitably involves us in contradiction, so that such expressions cannot be taken to describe anything.
312\n313TENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
existing in reality. Thus, in summary, his argument for the unreality of
time has the following form:
(1) Time essentially involves change.
(2) Change can only be
(3) A-series expressions involve contradiction and so cannot describe
reality.
explained in terms of A-series expressions.
Therefore,
(4) Time is unreal.
And what we now need to do is to focus on McTaggart's reasons for
maintaining premise (3) of this argument. For the argument would cer
tainly appear to be valid and hence the only way of avoiding its apparently
unwelcome conclusion is to challenge one or more of the premises. My
own opinion is that, of these premises, premise (3) is the one most open to
challenge, although there are a good many other philosophers who think
otherwise. Indeed, contemporary philosophers of time are customarily
divided into two classes-'A theorists' and 'B theorists'-the first of whom
typically accept premise (2) and deny premise (3) while the second typic
ally deny premise (2) and accept premise (3). This is a division to which I
shall return later, however, after we have examined the putative grounds for
holding premise (3).
Does the A series involve a contradiction?
McTaggart's reason for holding premise (3) is this. He contends, on the one
hand, that the A-series expressions 'past', 'present', and 'future', used to
characterize the A-series 'positions' of events, are mutually incompatible,
inasmuch as it is contradictory to describe one and the same event as being
both a past event, a present event, and a future event. If an event is a past
event, then, ipso facto, it is not either a present event or a future event. Simi
larly, if it is a present event, then it is neither a past nor a future event,
and if it is a future event, then it is neither a past nor a present event. And
yet, it seems, the passage of time requires that one and the same event can,
2 See further my 'The Indexical Fallacy in McTaggart's Proof of the Unreality of Time', Mind 96
(1987), 62-70, and my 'McTaggart's Paradox Revisited', Mind 101 (1993), 323-6. For a contrary view,
see D. H. Mellor, Real Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981), ch. 6, and Real Time II
(London: Routledge, 1998), ch. 7. \nSPACE AND TIME
and indeed must, be past, present, and future: for the passage of time isprecisely the process whereby an event changes from being future to beingpresent and from being present to being past-and if an event changes inthese respects, then it must indeed be characterizable as future, present, and past, in that order.
Now, the obvious response to this apparent problem is to point out that,
in order to participate in the passage of time, an event does not have to be
future, present, and past all at the same time: it only has to be successively
future, present, and past. That is to say, an event only has to be future at
one time, present at a later time, and past at a still later time. Contradiction
would only arise, it may be urged, if we had to say that one and the same
event must be future, present, and past at one and the same time-but we
do not have to, and indeed should not, say this. However, McTaggart does
not think that this move will enable us to escape the threat of contradic
tion. For, so far, we have only characterized the successive nature of an
event's being future, present, and past in B-series terms, that is, in terms of
an event's being future at one time, present at a later time, and past at a still
later time. In order to characterize this succession as being truly temporal
in nature, we need to be able to characterize it in A-series terms as well.
What we must say, then, is something like this: an event which is future at
the present moment of time is present at a future moment of time and past
at a still more distantly future moment of time. However, moments of
time, like events, participate in the passage of time: each moment of time,
just like each event, is future, present, and past. Once again, we can attempt
to avoid the threat of contradiction which this imposes by saying that each
moment of time is only successively future, present, and past. But, once
again, we have to be able to characterize this succession in A-series terms.
We seem, thus, to have embarked upon an infinite regress, at each step of
which we can only attempt to avoid a threat of contradiction by invoking
the next step, at which an exactly similar threat of contradiction arises.
Tenses and the regress problem
On the face of it, this is a rather compelling argument for the truth of
premise (3). But perhaps it is not as conclusive as it may at first appear to
be. It may be that an A theorist-someone who accepts premise (2), that
change can only be explained in terms of A-series expressions can resist
McTaggart's reasoning, perhaps by rejecting certain assumptions that
314\n315TENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
McTaggart makes. We have been assuming so far, along with McTaggart,
that moments of time participate in the so-called passage of time, just as
events do. But perhaps it is a mistake to reify moments of time-to treat
them as real entities, to be included in our ontology along with events and
persisting objects. Suppose we exclude moments of time from our ontol
ogy: how, then, can we hope to characterize, in A-series terms, the succes
sive nature of an event's being future, present, and past? We shall no longer
be able to characterize this in terms, say, of the event's being future at the
present moment of time, present at a future moment of time, and past at a
still more distantly future moment of time. What could we say instead? We
could say, perhaps, that an event which is presently future will futurely be
present and still more futurely be past. Similarly, we could say that an event
which is presently past was pastly present and was still more pastly future.
This is hardly an everyday way of talking, invoking as it does the unfamiliar
A-series adverbs 'pastly' and 'futurely', modelling these on the existing
adverb 'presently'. However, it seems perfectly intelligible. But where now,
exactly, is the threat of contradiction supposed to arise, allegedly only to be
deflected by embarking, futilely, upon an infinite regress?
Perhaps it will be urged that the seeds of the regress can already be seen
in the use of the past, present, and future tenses in the sentences just used
to characterize, in A-series terms, the successiveness of an event's being
future, present, and past. I said, thus, that an event which is presently
future will futurely be present and will still more futurely be past, and that
an event which is presently past was pastly present and was still more pastly
future. However, it seems to me that this charge is unfounded because, in
these sentences, the various tenses of the verbs do not appear to contribute
anything to the meaning of the sentences over and above what is contrib
uted by the A-series adverbs which qualify them. To say, for example, that a
certain event is presently future'-where the 'is' is present-tensed rather
than tenseless-is to say nothing more than that the event is future', where
the 'is' is present-tensed, or that it is presently future', where the 'is' is
tenseless. Similarly, to say, for the purposes that I did, that an event was
pastly present' is to say no more than that it was present', or that it is
pastly present', where the 'is' is tenseless. This is not to deny that, for
certain other purposes, one can use the construction 'was pastly' to mean
something like 'is pastly past', where the 'is' is tenseless. This, in effect, is
what the pluperfect tense achieves when we say something like 'John had
already eaten when Mary arrived', meaning that his eating was already past
when the past event of Mary's arrival occurred. My point is merely that, in\nSPACE AND TIME
used earlier to characterize, in A-series terms, the successive
ness of an event's being future, present and past, the tenses were not, infact, contributing anything to the meaning of the sentences over and abovewhat was contributed by the A-series adverbs qualifying them. That beingso, those sentences exhibit, after all, no signs of the feared
the sentences
regress.
Perhaps, however, the threat of a regress will instead be raised in the
following way. Perhaps it will now be said that, in order to account, in A
series terms, for the way in which events participate in the passage of time, we shall have to say not merely that every event is successively future, present, and past, but also that every event is successively futurely present,
presently present, and pastly present. However, it does not seem to me that
these two successions are in any way different. For an event to be 'futurely
present for it to be going to happen-is just for it to be a future event.
Every event is inevitably 'present' when and only when it takes place. But
another possible objection, which is superficially more substantial, is this.
Every event, it would seem, is at some time X-ly Y, where 'Y' stands for any
one of the A-series adjectives 'past', 'present', and 'future' and 'X-ly' stands
for any one of the A-series adverbs 'pastly', 'presently', and 'futurely': and
yet no event, on pain of contradiction, can be characterized in all of these
nine ways at the same time-whence, if one is an A theorist, one must
distinguish between the times at which the same event can be character
ized in all these different ways by introducing a third level of A-series
expressions and thereby embarking once more upon the feared regress. 3
The first thing to be said about this objection is that it once againinvokes times, which, on behalf of the A theorist, we had decided to exclude
from our ontology. But let us set that issue aside now. The second and
more important thing to be said is that, even if it is true that (as I put it)
every event is at some time X-ly Y, it seems that this is really nothing more
than an innocuous consequence of the original point that every event is
successively future, present, and past: it is certainly not clear that it involves
us either in contradiction or in a vicious infinite regress. Consider, for
instance, the Battle of Hastings. At one time-for example, in 1050-it wasfuturely future, because at the then future time of 1060, it was still a future
event. Equally, however, in 1050 the Battle of Hastings was also futurely
past and futurely present: it was futurely past, because at the then future
time of 1070, it was a past event; and it was futurely present, because at the
Michael Dummett, ' A Defence of McTaggart's Proof of the Unreality of Time', Philosophical Review 69 (1960), 497-504, reprinted in his Truth and Other Enigmas (London: Duckworth, 1978).
See further
316\nTENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
then future time of 1066, it was a present event. Now, there was also a time
at which the Battle of Hastings was pastly future-for example, in 1080,
because at the then past time of 1060, it was a future event. At that time,
1080, the Battle of Hastings was also pastly past and pastly present, for
reasons which should now be obvious. It is true that in 1050, when the
Battle of Hastings was futurely future, futurely present, and futurely past, it
was not also pastly future, pastly present, and pastly past, as it was in 1080.
But none of this is particularly surprising or perplexing, once we under
stand how these A-series expressions work. Moreover, there seems to be no
reason, in principle, why we should object to the use of third-level (and
higher) A-series expressions. These would only pose a problem for the A
theorist if it could be argued that the A theorist can neither make sense of
nor apply first- and second-level A-series expressions until he has already
made sense of and can apply A-series expressions of every higher level. But
I see no reason to suppose that the A theorist is in this predicament.
Note also that there are significant differences between the objection
that we have just been examining and the problem that McTaggart origin
ally raised. The problem that he raised drew on two considerations. The
first was that the A-series expressions 'past', 'present', and 'future', used to
characterize the A-series 'positions' of events, are mutually incompatible,
inasmuch as it is contradictory to describe one and the same event as being
a past event, a present event, and a future event. The second was that
the passage of time apparently requires that one and the same event can,
and indeed must, be past, present, and future-a point to which we envis
aged the A theorist responding by saying that an event which is presently
future is not also presently present and presently past (which would indeed
involve a contradiction), but only futurely present and still more futurely
past. Now, however, regarding the nine second-level A-series expressions of
the form 'X-ly Y', we have just seen that these are not all mutually
incompatible. For instance, in 1080, it was correct to describe the Battle of
Hastings as being pastly future, pastly present, and pastly past and, indeed,
also as being presently past. And, while it may be conceded, as we have just
seen, that every event is at some time X-ly Y, for each possible value of 'X'
and 'Y', there is no suggestion that every event must successively take on
each of these second-level A-series characteristics, one at a time and in a
certain order, paralleling at a higher level the way in which each event,
through the passage of time, must be successively future, present, and past.
Rather, the order in which an event takes on certain combinations of the
second-level characteristics simply duplicates the order in which it takes on
317\nSPACE AND TIME
level characteristics: first of all the event is presently future butalso futurely future, futurely present, and futurely past; then the event ispresently present; and finally the event is presently past but also pastlyfuture, pastly present, and pastly past. What we see here is simply theordinary effect of the passage of time, from future to present to past. Altogether, then, it would seem that the attempt to argue that the A theorist's conception of time and its passage forces him into either a contradiction or a vicious infinite regress is ultimately confused and unconvincing. Its superficial appeal arises, I suspect, chiefly from the delight that philosophers seem to take in concocting what appear to be paradoxes. When wepress them to explain in detail how the alleged contradiction arises, we alltoo often find that the seeming paradox crumbles in their hands. That, Ithink, is what we find in the case of McTaggart's reasoning in defence ofpremise (3) of his argument against the reality of time.
A diagnosis of McTaggart's mistake
Lest it be suspected that I have escaped from McTaggart's conclusion by
sleight of hand, let me say quite explicitly where I think that his argument
falls down. It does so, I believe, at the point at which he maintains that, in
order to account for the passage of time, we must say that every event is
past, present, and future. My response is that we need not, and should not,
say any such thing. What we should say, and what it suffices for us to say in
order to account for the passage of time, is something rather more compli
cated, but at the same time something which poses no threat whatever of
harbouring a contradiction. It is this. Every event is such that it is (i)
either pastly past or presently past or futurely past and (ii) either pastly
present or presently present or futurely present and (iii) either pastly
future or presently future or futurely future. What we have here is a con
junction of disjunctions. Some of the nine disjuncts are, indeed, mutually
incompatible. For instance, an event which is futurely present cannot also
be pastly present. However, each event needs to be characterizable by at
most one disjunct from each group of three in order for it to satisfy the
principle-and this it can be without being characterized by mutually. For
See further my 'Tense and Persistence', in Robin Le Poidevin (ed. ), Questions of Time andTense (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), or my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), 91.
318\n319TENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
reasons explained earlier, this event is pastly past, presently past, and
futurely past (thus satisfying conjunct (i)), it is pastly present (thus satisfy
ing conjunct (ii)), and it is pastly future (thus satisfying conjunct (iii)). But
it is not presently present or presently future (which would conflict with its
being presently past) and it is not futurely present or futurely future
(which would conflict with its being pastly past and pastly present). My
suggestion, then, is that McTaggart confuses the untenable claim that every
event is past, present, and future with the more complicated but perfectly
tenable claim that I have just articulated. And the latter claim is all that is
needed to sustain the A theorist's notion of the passage of time.
The B theorist's conception of time and tense
If the foregoing diagnosis is correct, we need not conclude, with McTag
gart, that time is unreal, because we can reject premise (3) of his argument.
However, this alone does not suffice to show that the A theory of time is
correct. The A theorist still has to contend with the B theorist's claim that
premise (2) of McTaggart's argument that change can only be explained
in terms of A-series expressions-is false. (We have already noted McTag
gart's reasons for believing (2) to be true, but perhaps those reasons can be
challenged. ) The B theorist's view is that A-series expressions
expressions such as 'yesterday', 'now', and 'two years ago'-do not serve to
characterize features of mind-independent temporal reality. As it is some
times put, the B theorist holds that there are no 'tensed facts', only 'tense
less' ones. At the same time, the B theorist maintains (if s/he is sensible)
that sentences containing A-series expressions cannot simply be translated,
without alteration of meaning, into sentences whose only temporal expres
sions are B-series expressions. To use an earlier example, the B theorist will
accept that 'Rain is now falling in Durham', even when spoken on 12
November 2000, does not simply mean 'Rain falls in Durham on 12
November 2000'. So what kind of meaning do A-series expressions have,
according to the B theorist, given that they do not have the same meaning
as B-series expressions and do not serve to characterize features of mind
independent temporal reality? The answer is that the B theorist regards A
series expressions as being merely a species of indexical or token-reflexive
expression, exactly on a par with such spatial expressions as 'here' and
'twenty miles away'. What makes the sentence 'Newcastle is twenty miles
away' true, when that sentence is spoken in Durham, is the fact that\nSPACE AND TIME
Durham is twenty miles away from Newcastle. Similarly, according to theB theorist, what makes the sentence 'The Battle of Waterloo took place 185years ago' true, when that sentence is spoken in 2000, is the fact that 2000is 185 years later than the year of the Battle of Waterloo, 1815. This fact, which is here reported using only the B-series expression 'later than', is a'tenseless fact'. So, more generally, according to the B theorist it is alwaysand only tenseless facts that make tensed sentences true (where by 'tensedsentences' I mean sentences which contain A-series expressions). Fromthis the B theorist concludes that a perfectly adequate ontology of timehas no need of A-series expressions, for everything that we can meaningfully say about time and temporal relations has its truth or falsehood
determined by purely tenseless facts. For the B theorist, A-series expres
sions have only practical, not theoretical, value. If I need to catch a train
at noon on 12 November 2000, I need to know whether today is 12
November 2000 and whether it is now earlier or later than noon. But
what I know when I know that today is 12 November 2000 is not, accord
ing to the B theorist, a tensed fact-the fact that today is 12 November
2000-for, according to the B theorist, there is no such fact for me to
know.
Is the passage of time illusory?
Whether or not we can ultimately make sense of the B theorist's view of
these matters, the A theorist will still complain that the B theory of time
treats the passage of time as being at best an illusion. It is questionable
whether what remains, when we strip away the notion of the passage of
time from our everyday conception of time, still deserves to be called a
conception of time. In any case, very arguably we should only strip away
that notion if it is, for some reason, incoherent or otherwise defective. But
is it? McTaggart's argument does not seem to show that it is. However,
perhaps there are other and better arguments for thinking that the passage
of time is illusory. One consideration that is sometimes advanced is this. If
time passes, then there must, presumably, be some rate at which it passes,
but what could that rate possibly be? We do, of course, sometimes speak of
time as passing 'quickly' or 'slowly'-slowly, for instance, when we have a
See further D. C. Williams, "The Myth of Passage', Journal of Philosophy 48 (1951), 457-72, reprinted in Richard M. Gale (ed. ), The Philosophy of Time: A Collection of Essays (Garden City, NY: Anchor Doubleday & Co. , Inc. , 1967).
320\nTENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
tedious or monotonous task to complete. But here, clearly, we are referring
to a subjective feature of our experience of temporality rather than an
objective feature of temporality itself. How could it make sense to speak of
an objective rate, or 'speed', at which time passes? Well, we could of course
respond by saying that time passes objectively at the rate of one second per
second, or one hour per hour-in other words, at the uniform rate of one
unit of time per unit of time. This response seems to be technically
unimpeachable but at the same time oddly vacuous. Another thing that we
could say, in my view quite correctly, is that it is wrong to think of the
passage of time as a kind of motion-an error fostered, no doubt, by our
use of the verb 'pass' to describe this phenomenon. Metaphors of motion
abound in our talk about time: we speak, for instance, of time as a 'river'
and of its 'flowing'. But we should not be tempted to construe these meta
phors literally. If the passage of time really were a kind of motion, then,
since motion involves change of position with respect to time, it seems that
we would have to think of the passage of time as involving a change of
'position of the moments of time with respect to some second-order or
second-level dimension of time. In other words, it seems that we would
have to suppose there to be two different kinds of time, or at least two
different temporal dimensions and if two, then presumably more than
two and perhaps even infinitely many. This is not, perhaps, inconceivable:
but we do not want to be driven to embrace this idea for the wrong or bad
reasons. A bad reason for embracing it, it seems to me, would be the belief
that the passage of time is literally a kind of motion. In the end, maybe the
A theorist should simply say this: the passage of time is something that is
objectively real, but is at the same time a feature of reality that is so
fundamental that we should not try to reduce it to or model it on any other
kind of feature of reality. There is nothing defeatist or intellectually cow
ardly about taking such a stance. Some features of reality, after all, must be
fundamental and irreducible: and the passage of time, if it is real, has as
good a claim as any to have this status.
6
For discussion, see Murray MacBeath, 'Time's Square', in Robin Le Poidevin and Murray
MacBeath (eds. ), The Philosophy of Time (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
321\nSPACE AND TIME
Dynamic conceptions of time and the reality of
the future
The distinction between those theories of time which hold the passage of
time to be real and those which do not is often described as a distinction
between 'dynamic' and 'static' conceptions of time-although these terms,
depending as they do on metaphors of motion, harbour certain dangers,
for reasons that have just been indicated. Static conceptions of time are
often said to represent all the moments of time as being 'stretched out' in a' line', all the parts of which are equally real- whereas
dynamic concep
tions of time are often said to represent different parts of time as having a
different ontological status, depending on whether they are past, present,
or future. Thus many dynamic conceptions of time treat the future-and
sometimes also the past-as being 'unreal', or at least as being 'less real'
than the present, which is treated as being pre-eminently 'real'. The doc
trine of presentism, indeed, regards only the present as being real (see
Chapter 3). It is sometimes objected against such views that they are incon
sistent with the doctrine of the relativity of simultaneity, which is a con
sequence of Einstein's special theory of relativity-the problem being that
if, as the doctrine implies, events that are 'past' or 'present' relative to one
frame of reference may be 'future' with respect to another frame of refer
ence, and yet the future (unlike the past or present) is unreal, then reality
itself must be frame-dependent or relative, which seems absurd. However,
as we saw in Chapter 14, the doctrine of the relativity of simultaneity,
consistent though it is with the available empirical evidence, is not
altogether unassailable and it is possible, in principle, to reconcile an abso
lute theory of time with the very empirical evidence that appears to sup
port the doctrine of the relativity of simultaneity. It is not inconceivable
that a compelling metaphysical argument for the reality of the passage of
time could exist, which would rationally commit us to denying the doc
trine of the relativity of simultaneity and therewith Einstein's special the
ory of relativity-though I do not claim to be in possession of such an
argument myself.
The question of whether the future is 'real' has an obvious, if also rather
See, for example, Hilary Putnam, "Time and Physical Geometry', Journal of Philosophy 64(1967), 240-7, reprinted in his Mathematics, Matter and Method: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975). For an opposing argument, see J. R. Lucas, TheFuture: An Essay on God, Temporality and Truth (Oxford: Blackwell, 1989), 7-8 and 219-20.
322\n323TENSE AND THE REALITY OF TIME
contentious, connection with the truth or falsehood of the doctrine of
determinism to the extent, indeed, that some philosophers consider that
an acceptance of the static conception of time is logically incompatible
with a belief in the existence of genuine choice or 'free will'. Earlier, it may
be recalled, I assumed that a tenseless sentence, such as 'Rain falls in
Durham on 12 November 2000', is, if true at any time, then true at all
times. Certainly, a typical B theorist would be happy to say this. But con
sider what an A theorist should say regarding the truth or falsehood of the
future-tensed sentence 'Rain will fall in Durham on 12 November 2000',
spoken, say, on 12 November 1995. If such a theorist regards the future as
unreal, should he not say that this sentence, spoken on that date, is neither
true nor false-the reason being that, according to the dynamic conception
of time, reality apparently does not include, at that date, any future facts
which can make the sentence true or false? Perhaps so. However, against
this suggestion it may be remarked that, after the passage of five years, one
of the following two present-tensed sentences will be true and the other
one false: 'Rain is falling in Durham on 12 November 2000' and 'Rain is
not falling in Durham on 12 November 2000'. Suppose, then, that the first
of these two sentences turns out to be true. Then will it not have been true,
five years earlier, to assert 'Rain will be falling in Durham on 12 November
2000'? But, equally, if the second of the two present-tensed sentences turns
out to be true, will it not have been false, five years earlier, to assert 'Rain
will be falling in Durham on 12 November 2000'? Either way, then, it seems
that the future-tensed sentence 'Rain will be falling in Durham on 12
November 2000', spoken on 12 November 1995, must have a truth value,
even if that truth value is unknowable at the time.
I shall not attempt to resolve this dispute here, turning as it does quite as
much on the nature of truth as on the nature of time. But I might remark
that it doesn't seem to me at all inevitable that an A theorist-that is, a
philosopher who adheres to the dynamic conception of time-should
regard the future as being unreal; nor does it seem to me that a rejection of
the doctrine of determinism requires one to regard the future as being
unreal. Indeed, if, as I have been assuming hitherto, an A theorist is
someone who thinks that the passage of time is a process through which
For discussion, see Michael Tooley, Time, Tense, and Causation (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1997), 307 ff.
See Storrs McCall, A Model of the Universe: Space-Time, Probability, and Decision (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1994), 194 ff. , and, for discussion of McCall's position, Tooley, Time, Tense, and
Causation, 239 ff. \nSPACE AND TIME
events change from being future to being present and from being presentto being past, then it might be urged that such a theorist had better not
deny the reality of the future-for unless future events are in some sensereal, how can one regard them as changing from being future to beingpresent and from being present to being past? If one denies the reality ofthe future, then, it seems, one can at best adhere to a rather different sort of
A theory-one which holds that the passage of time is a process throughwhich, in some mysterious way, the sum total of reality is continually being
'added to', with events first springing into existence as present events andthen 'receding' into the ever-growing past. " How far one can make senseof such a conception of time and existence I leave for the reader to judgefor him or herself. "
10 See C. D. Broad, Scientific Thought (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1923), ch. 2, andTooley, Time, Tense, and Causation, ch. 2.
"For further material on the topics of this chapter see, in addition to the items alreadymentioned, L. Nathan Oaklander and Quentin Smith (eds. ), The New Theory of Time (New Haven, Conn: Yale University Press, 1994).
324\n18
CAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION
OF TIME
Temporal asymmetry and the structure of time
Even if we assume time to be a dimension of reality, comparable in some
respects with the three (known) dimensions of space--although this
assumption is itself open to challenge-it seems manifest that time differs
radically from any of the spatial dimensions in being intrinsically directed.
More precisely, all events and moments in time would appear to be
ordered, by certain intrinsically asymmetrical temporal relations in which
they stand to one another, so as to fall into a single temporal sequence.
(Here I ignore, for the time being, considerations arising from Einstein's
special theory of relativity which may lead us to suppose that events do not
all occur in a unique temporal sequence, on the grounds that events which
are simultaneous with respect to one frame of reference may not be so with
respect to another. ) An 'A theorist', as we saw in the previous chapter,
would say that events and moments in time are ordered by being (more or
less) past or (more or less) future relative to the present moment. In con
trast, a 'B theorist' would say that events and moments in time are ordered
by being earlier than or later than one another-'simultaneous' events
being those which stand in exactly the same 'earlier than' or 'later than'
relations as each other to all other events (again ignoring, for the time
being, the supposed relativity of simultaneity). Whichever description we
prefer, however, the important point is that these asymmetrical temporal
relations confer both a 'forward' and a 'backward' direction on the tem
poral sequence of events and moments-the 'forward' direction being
from past to future or from earlier to later events and moments, the back
ward' direction being from future to past or from later to earlier events and
moments. When philosophers and scientists talk of 'the' direction of time, \nSPACE AND TIME
they ordinarily intend to refer to its 'forward' direction, although often
they also mean to allude to the very fact that time is directed or asym
metrical in the ways that we have just described. It might be clearer, then, if
we alluded to the latter fact by speaking of the directedness or asymmetry of
time and if, when speaking of temporal direction, we referred, quite
explicitly, either to the 'forward' or to the backward' direction of time,
thereby acknowledging that time strictly has two directions.
Now, of course, we should acknowledge that there is also a perfectly
good sense in which each spatial dimension may be said to have two
'directions', simply because all of the points in any straight line are posi
tioned relative to one another in a unique order, as we saw when discussing
Zeno's paradoxes of motion in Chapter 16. Thus, for example, all of the
points in a straight line between any two given points, X and Y, are ordered
by being further from, or less far from, one of the points X and Y: for
instance, the midpoint of the line is less far from X than is the point Y.
None the less, it seems clear that there is no intrinsic difference between
the two different 'directions' of a line-between, say, the east-to-west direc
tion and the west-to-east direction, or the north-to-south direction and the
south-to-north direction in the way in which there appears to be an
intrinsic difference between the two different directions of time. It is true
that it might turn out, purely as a matter of contingent fact, that a particu
lar spatial direction has some special physical significance--as we discover
when we find that a compass needle naturally points north. However, this
sort of phenomenon, we assume, arises not from some internal asymmetry
in space itself or in the spatial relations between points of space, but only
from some contingent asymmetry in the distribution or orientation of
some physical entity existing in space, such as the direction of the earth's
magnetic field. The asymmetry of time, we suppose, is internal to time
itself, rather than just being a matter of the asymmetrical distribution or
orientation of physical entities existing in time. So we suppose. But we
might be mistaken-and this is a possibility that we shall have to contem
plate in due course. For the time being, however, I shall continue to accept
the supposition.
Another thing that we commonly assume concerning the nature of time
is that, although 'linear', it is not 'circular' or 'closed'. That is to say, if an
event e, is earlier than another event e, , then it is not also the case that e, is
earlier than e, . We do not so readily assume that the equivalent principle
holds for space: for although the space of Euclidean geometry is not closed,
we can certainly envisage the possibility that physical space might be
326\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME 327
'curved', so that by travelling continuously in a 'straight' line
understanding this to be the shortest route between any two points-one
might eventually return to one's point of departure (a possibility that we
considered when discussing the problem of incongruent counterparts in
Chapter 15). But even if time were circular, this would not prevent it from
being 'directed', in the sense explained earlier. There could-and plausibly
would still be both a 'forward' and a 'backward' direction of time, even
though every event would be in the future of every other event and also in
the past of every other event: for instance, my birth would lie both in the
past, relative to the present moment, and also in the future (albeit, presum
ably, only in the very distant future). Again, however, I shall assume for
present purposes that time is not circular, interesting though it might be to
speculate on the implications of its being so. '
To accept that time is not 'circular' or 'closed' is not, incidentally, to
assume either that time does, or that it does not, have a beginning' or an
'end'. Nor is it to assume that time does, or that it does not, have infinite
duration. If time were non-circular and of infinite duration in both 'direc
tions' (that is, if both past and future were of infinite duration), then, of
course, time would have neither a beginning nor an end. But a non
circular time of finite duration could equally lack either a beginning or an
end, or both. This is because time could be topologically analogous to a
line of finite length which lacks an endpoint at either or both of its extrem
ities. Think, for instance, of finite line between (and including) two
points X and Y, and then 'delete', as it were, the points X and Y: what one is
then left with is a line which has the same length as the original line, but
which lacks any endpoints. For any point on the line west (let us say) of the
line's midpoint, there is another point on it further west of the midpoint:
there is no point on the line which is the point furthest west of the mid
point and, similarly, no point on it which is the point furthest east of the
midpoint. I shall not assume, for present purposes, either that time does,
or that it does not, have a beginning or an end; nor shall I assume either
that it is, or that it is not, of infinite duration. Indeed, it is difficult to see
how we could determine, whether by metaphysical argument or by
empirical scientific means, either that time has or lacks a beginning or an
end, or that time is of finite or infinite duration. It is true that many
modern cosmologists favour the hypothesis of the so-called 'Big Bang', a
See further W. H. Newton-Smith, The Structure of Time (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1980), ch. 3. \nsupposedly 'first' event which brought into existence not only the entire
physical universe but space and time themselves. According to this hypoth
esis, then, nothing whatever happened 'before' the Big Bang, because time
itself began at the moment of the Big Bang. 2 However, it would seem that
any empirical evidence which is consistent with this hypothesis must also
be consistent with the hypothesis that there were in fact times before the
physical universe came into existence, even supposing it to have come into
existence through the occurrence of some singular event like the 'Big
Bang'. It would seem, indeed, that we could have no physical evidence of
the existence of times before such an initial event, assuming one to have
occurred, because, by hypothesis, nothing physical now existing could be a
relic of such earlier times. But, quite generally, the fact that we can have no
evidence for the existence of some state of affairs provides no compelling
reason for us to believe that such a state of affairs does not exist. It seems
best, then, to remain agnostic on the question of whether or not time had a
beginning or will have an end.
Temporal asymmetry and the passage of time
SPACE AND TIME
These considerations in place, let us turn to the somewhat easier-but still
very difficult-question of why time, unlike space, should be 'directed'.
That is to say, why should time have both a 'forward' and a 'backward'
direction which are significantly different from one another, unlike the two
different 'directions' of any straight line in space? What, if anything, gives
time these directions and what makes the directions different? Some A
theorists may be inclined to answer that time has a distinguished direction
from past to future because the passage of time actually consists in the
'growth' of reality itself, which is continually being 'added to' by the suc
cessive coming into being of new events-each event subsequently 'reced
ing' into the ever-growing stock of past events. This was a view that I
briefly considered at the end of the previous chapter, although I confess
that it is one which I find it difficult to make clear sense of. For that reason,
I shall say nothing much more in the current chapter about this view of
time, with its implication that only the present and the past are fully 'real'.
* For extended discussion, see William Lane Craig and Quentin Smith, Theism, Atheism, and
Big Bang Cosmology (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1993).
See, for example, C. D. Broad, Scientific Thought (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1923),
66-7.
328\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME
If it were correct, though, it would certainly seem to explain, after a fash
ion, the directedness of time and time's fundamental difference, in this
respect, from space. For, according to this view, the difference between the
past-to-future direction of time and the future-to-past direction of time is
fundamentally an ontological one: the former being grounded in a relation
between what is fully real and what is not (yet) fully real, the latter being
grounded in a converse relation between what is not (yet) fully real and
what is fully real-if, indeed, one can properly speak of 'relations' between
existent and non-existent entities. If one doesn't like talk of such rela
tions', however, perhaps one can say instead that the two different direc
tions of time are, on this view, differentiated by the fact that one of them
(the forward, or past-to-future direction) is that in which reality's 'growing
edge' advances, whereas the other direction (the backward, or future-to
past direction) is that in which reality's stock of events is continually being
'added to'. Again, I don't pretend to be able to make complete sense of
these suggestions, resting as they seem to do on dubious metaphors of
growth.
Causation and temporal asymmetry
But let us set aside, from now on, any idea that the difference between past
and future rests on a distinction between what is and what is not fully
'real'. And let us see whether, none the less, we can come to some under
standing of the nature and ground of the directedness of time. One obvi
ous and quite promising suggestion is that the directedness or asymmetry
of time is grounded in the asymmetry of causation. (Causation itself is very
plausibly an asymmetrical relation: if an event, e, is a cause of another
event, e, , then it is not the case that e, is also a cause of e. ) According to this
suggestion, what distinguishes the past-to-future or earlier-to-later direc
tion of time from its future-to-past or later-to-earlier direction is the fact
that it is always earlier events that are causes of later events, never later
events that are causes of earlier events. There are various ways in which one
might draw on this suggestion in order to define more precisely what it is
for one event to be 'earlier' than another. One might propose, for example,
that an event, e, , is earlier than another event, e, , if and only if e, is at least a
potential cause of e2. I say only 'is at least a potential cause' rather than
simply 'is a cause' because, obviously, we cannot with any degree of plausi
bility maintain that, whenever one event, e, , is earlier than another event,
329\n330 SPACE AND TIME
e, e, is actually a cause of e; nor, indeed, can we rule out the possibility of
there being some events which either actually lack any cause whatever or
else actually lack any effect whatever. What is now being proposed, though,
is that e, is earlier than e, if and only if it is metaphysically possible for e, to
be a cause of e-that is to say, if and only if there either is or could have
been a chain of causation leading from e, to e, -the presumption being
that it is metaphysically impossible for an effect to precede, or even to be
simultaneous with, one of its causes. is also being presumed-perhaps
more contentiously-that if e, is actually later than e, , then e, could not
have been earlier than e: for if it could have been, then, clearly, e, could
have been a cause of e, without violating the prohibition on an effect's
preceding one of its causes. Yet another presumption-though this time a
rather more plausible one-is that it is never metaphysically necessary that
an event should have any of the causes and effects that it actually has (that
is, in the terminology of Chapter 6, that it is not part of the individual
essence' of any event that it has any of the causes and effects that it actually
has).
Now, if we adopt anything like the foregoing suggestion, then we obvi
ously cannot hope to account for the asymmetry of causation itself in
temporal terms: we shall not be able to say that, given any two events that
are related to one another as cause and effect, what determines which of
these events is the cause and which the effect is their temporal order-the
cause being the earlier event and the effect the later one-for this would
involve us in a blatant circularity. However, a frequently voiced objection
to any such account of the asymmetry of causation is that it is implausible,
in any case, to insist that a cause must precede its effect in time, either as a
matter of definition or as a matter of metaphysical necessity. That is to say,
it is often urged that 'backward' causation-the causation of an earlier
event by a later event-is at least metaphysically possible, even if such
causation never actually takes place. But, of course, no one who maintains
this can also support our earlier proposal that the earlier-to-later direction
of time simply is the direction of causation-the proposal, as I expressed it,
that for one event to be earlier than another is just for that first event to be
at least a potential cause of the second event. However, what such a person
might, perhaps, be able to maintain instead is that the earlier-to-later
*See, for example, Michael Dummett, 'Bringing About the Past', Philosophical Review 73 (1964),
338-59, reprinted in his Truth and Other Enigmas (London: Duckworth, 1978) and in Robin Le
Poidevin and Murray MacBeath (eds. ), The Philosophy of Time (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1993). \nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME 331
direction of time is the direction in which most causation necessarily takes
place the idea being that backward causation, even if it is metaphysically
possible, could only ever be an exceptional phenomenon rather than one
that is commonplace (as commonplace as forward causation, at any rate).
As for the question of what determines the asymmetry of causation,
though, it may be claimed with some plausibility that this is an intrinsic
feature of the causal relation and that any theory of causation which needs
to explain the asymmetry of causation in terms of the temporal order of
cause and effect is, for that very reason, a defective theory. '
So far, I have suggested two different possible causal accounts of
the directedness or asymmetry of time: the first account holding that the
earlier-to-later direction of time simply is the direction of causation, the
second holding that it is the direction of most causation. On the second
account, how might we define more precisely what it is for one event to be
'earlier' than another, given that we could not now say, as on the first
account, that it is for that first event to be at least a potential cause of the
second event? Perhaps, if we are still allowed to presume that cause and
effect are never simultaneous and that every event has at least some causes
or effects, we could say something like the following. First, we could say
that those events are simultaneous which necessarily stand in no relation of
cause and effect to one another. Then we could say that an event, e, is
earlier than another event, e, , if and only if most events that are simul
taneous with e, are effects of events that are themselves simultaneous with
e. This formulation suggests, incidentally, an alternative and perhaps bet
ter way of defining, on behalf of our first causal account of the directedness
of time, what it is for one event to be earlier than another. Rather than
saying that it is for the first of those events to be at least a potential cause of
the second, we could simply say instead that an event, e, , is earlier than
another event, e, if and only if at least some event that is simultaneous with
e, is an effect of events that are themselves simultaneous with e. This
definition has some advantages over the previous one, but also, perhaps,
some disadvantages of its own; I leave to the reader the task of seeing what
some of these advantages and disadvantages might be.
For discussion, see J. L. Mackie, The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1974), ch. 7, and Michael Tooley, Causation: A Realist Approach (Oxford: Claren
don Press, 1987), ch. 7. \nSPACE AND TIME
Backward causation and time travel into the past
Of course, if a causal account of the directedness of time is what we seek,
then we shall only need to appeal to the second sort of causal account just
described if we are persuaded that backward causation is indeed meta
physically possible. If we are persuaded that it is indeed possible, then, in
order to sustain such an account, we shall also need to be able to argue
that backward causation cannot be commonplace. But let us provisionally
set aside that further concern now, in the hope that it will not arise, and
concentrate on the prior question of whether or not backward causation
really is possible. How, though, should we attempt to settle this question?
Is it a question to be settled, if at all, only by a priori metaphysical
argument or is it, rather, a question which empirical science alone can
hope to answer satisfactorily? My own view-held for reasons explained
more fully in Chapter 1-is that empirical science alone cannot defini
tively determine the answer to a question concerning metaphysical possi
bility, such as the one with which we are now concerned, although I do
not wish to deny that scientific theorizing and empirical data can throw
useful light on a question like this. The key point is that empirical data
can only be taken to be good evidence for the truth of a scientific theory
if its hypotheses are already entitled to be viewed as expressing meta
physical possibilities: that they can be so viewed is not, thus, something
that can be determined on merely empirical grounds. With this point in
mind, let us then see what purely philosophical reasons there might be for
admitting or disallowing the metaphysical possibility of backward caus
ation, before we try to take into account any of the claims of current
scientific theory.
One very useful philosophical strategy for exploring whether or not
backward causation is possible is the construction of thought experiments
involving 'time travel' into the past. Time travel into the future, of course,
is something that we all engage in all of the time, the only interesting
question being whether the 'speed' at which we travel can be varied. If
Einstein's special theory of relativity is correct, then it would appear that
this 'speed' is indeed variable, in the following sense: the lapse of time
between two events, as measured by a traveller moving at a high velocity
relative to a given frame of reference, may be appreciably less than it is as
measured by an observer who is stationary with respect to that frame of
reference. This is the so-called 'time-dilation' effect, which becomes
332\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME 333
noticeable only for relative velocities which are an appreciable fraction of
the speed of light. Thus, for example, someone who travelled between the
earth and a nearby star in a time period of twenty years or so, as measured
by a clock which he carried with him, might be judged to have spent eighty
years or more on his journey by an observer on Earth who used an earth
bound clock to measure the traveller's journey time. During that interval,
the traveller will appear to himself to have aged somewhat, but nothing like
as much as the observer on earth will appear to himself to have aged.
However, Einstein's theory may seem to present an insuperable obstacle to
time travel into the past, because it prohibits any object from moving faster
than the speed of light (or, more exactly, it prohibits any object from
accelerating from a velocity which is less than the speed of light to one
which is greater than the speed of light).
The difficulty can be seen immediately if we represent the space-time
trajectory of a moving object on a space-time diagram of the kind
described in Chapter 14, in which the vertical axis represents time, t, and
the horizontal axis represents the three dimensions of space, s, as measured
relative to some selected frame of reference. For, in such a diagram, the
trajectories of two light rays emitted in opposite directions at a point
represented by the origin of the axes, O, will be represented by a pair of
diagonal lines through O of a certain steepness, as is depicted in Fig. 18. 1.
(These diagonal lines represent a cross-section through what is commonly
called O's 'forward light cone'. ) And any object moving away from O at a
subluminal velocity in that frame of reference will obviously have to have a
trajectory which is represented by a steeper diagonal line (and thus a trajec
tory which is confined within O's forward light cone). However, any such
object which supposedly changes from moving forward' in time to moving
'backward' in time, to arrive at its final destination earlier than the start of
its journey, will apparently have to have a trajectory represented by a line
whose steepness at some point is less than that of one of the diagonal lines
representing the trajectory of a light ray (because it will have to break
through' O's forward light cone). For example, in Fig. 18. 1, let O represent
the place and time of the 'start' of the time traveller's journey and let the
point X represent the place and time of the finish of his journey (where X
is, of course, earlier than O). Then, clearly, even though the time traveller
begins his journey by travelling forward in time at a velocity less than the
speed of light, his complete trajectory can only be represented on the
diagram by a line which at some point crosses one of the diagonals which
represents the trajectory of a light ray emitted at O, implying that he must\nSPACE AND TIME
Fig. 18. 1
at some time during his journey exceed the speed of light. (I shall explain
shortly why the time traveller must begin his journey by travelling forward
in time at a velocity less than the speed of light. )
However, I undertook to discuss philosophical reasons for and against
the possibility of backward causation without prior reference to the
claims of current scientific theory, so let us ignore, at least for the time
being, the apparent conflict between the notion of time travel into the
past and Einstein's special theory of relativity (bearing mind too that,
for reasons given in Chapter 14, as metaphysicians we are not absolutely
committed to the truth of Einstein's theory). The relevance of such time
travel to the issue of backward causation is simply that time travel into
the past inevitably involves backward causation. And, indeed, it might
with some plausibility be argued that, conversely, if backward causation is
possible, then time travel into the past must also in principle be possible,
so that the possibility of each phenomenon stands or falls with the possi
bility of the other. Clearly, the mere fact that the time traveller succeeds in
travelling from a later to an earlier time entails that an earlier event can
have a later event amongst its causes, for his success partly consists in the
fact that the event of his arrival at his destination has, amongst its causes,
the event of his embarking upon the journey at a later time. It is impos
sible, then, to engage in time travel into the past without causally affecting
the past.
S
334\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME 335
Affecting the past versus changing the past
It is important here not to confuse the notion of causally affecting thepast, which may or may not constitute a genuine possibility, with themanifestly incoherent notion of changing the past. If a time traveller fromthe twenty-first century succeeds in travelling back to the time and place ofthe Battle of Hastings, in 1066, then it follows that there must be eventswhich occurred in 1066 which had amongst their causes events whichoccurred in the twenty-first century-notably, the event of the time traveller's arrival at the time and place of the Battle of Hastings. But we cannotcoherently think of the time traveller as changing what happened in 1066. Ifhe succeeds in travelling back to the time and place of the Battle of Hastings, then it was a fact that he was present at the Battle of Hastings longbefore he set out on his journey: it cannot somehow be a fact that he wasnot there before he set out on his journey and yet be a fact that he was thereafter he arrived--for history is not given twice over, once in a version inwhich the time traveller is absent from the Battle of Hastings and once in a
version in which he is present. However, by being careful to distinguishbetween the notion of affecting the past (which simply involves backwardcausation) and the notion of changing the past (which involves incoherentdouble-talk), we can dismiss as misconceived some superficial attempts to
discount the possibility of time travel into the past.
'
Personal' time versus '
external' time
Another overly simplistic way to challenge the possibility of time travelinto the past is to maintain that the notion of such time travel involvescontradictory claims about the amount of time separating two events.
Consider again the person who supposedly travels back to the time andplace of the Battle of Hastings, starting his journey one thousand yearslater, in 2066. How long will his journey take him? Presumably, that willdepend on how 'fast' he travels-but if he travels quite fast, one maysuppose that he might take at most only a few years. Suppose, then, that hetakes three years to complete his journey. This means that three yearsseparate the event of his departure, in 2066, and the event of his arrival, in1066. But, it may be protested, these two events are separated by one thousand years, so how can they also be separated by a mere three years? The\nanswer, of course, is to distinguish between the lapse of time as measured
by a clock which the traveller carries with him and the lapse of time as
measured by clocks which are simply travelling forward in time in the
normal way. As measured by the traveller's own clock, his journey takes
him a mere three years, during which period he will have aged a corres
ponding amount (for instance, if he doesn't shave during his journey, he
will have accumulated a normal three-years' growth of beard). But as
measured by 'earthbound' clocks, the traveller's journey takes one thou
sand years and during this period he will appear to have grown younger
by three years (for instance, in 1066 he had three years' growth of beard,
but one thousand years later, in 2066, he is clean-shaven). In making this
distinction between what we may call the time traveller's own 'personal'
time and the 'external' time of ordinary historical records, it seems that we
are merely extending a distinction which, as we saw earlier, is endorsed in
any case by Einstein's special theory of relativity, which treats the measure
of elapsed time as being dependent upon the choice of a frame of
reference.
Problems of multiple location and
multiple occupancy
Yet another sort of problem which, in the opinion of some philosophers,
makes time travel into the past impossible is that which arises when the
time traveller supposedly travels back to a time and place at which his
'younger self' was present. Suppose, for instance, that the traveller embarks
upon his journey as a middle-aged adult and travels back to the time and
place at which he was born. There he will encounter a baby which is, in
fact, himself. But this seems to imply that at that time and place there exist
two people-a middle-aged man and a newborn baby-who are in fact one
and the same person. We appear, thus to have a conflict with the very laws
of identity, which do not allow two different things to be one. But if, in
response to this difficulty, we simply deny that we have two different things
in this case-maintaining that the middle-aged man and the newborn
baby really are strictly identical persons-then we seem to be faced with
See further David Lewis, 'The Paradoxes of Time Travel', American Philosophical Quarterly 13
(1976), 145-52, reprinted in his Philosophical Papers, vol. 2 (New York: Oxford University Press,
1986) and in Le Poidevin and MacBeath (eds. ), The Philosophy of Time. I am indebted to Lewis's
paper for several of the points concerning time travel made in the present chapter.
SPACE AND TIME336\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME
the equally unpalatable implication that one and the same person can be in
two different locations at exactly the same time (for the middle-aged man
cannot literally coincide, spatially, with the newborn baby). However, this
sort of problem can be relatively easily overcome if we are prepared to
adopt the doctrine of 'temporal parts', described in Chapter 3. (Even if we
are not prepared to adopt that doctrine-and for my own part I am
inclined not to-we may still be able to overcome the problem, but not, I
suspect, so straightforwardly. ) For what we can then say is that it is only a
middle-aged temporal part of the time traveller which encounters an infant
temporal part of himself when he travels back to the time and place of his
birth. These temporal parts are numerically distinct three-dimensional
objects, each of which is a different temporal segment of the four
dimensional entity which constitutes the time traveller 'as a whole' (that is,
as a temporally persisting object extending from birth to death). Hence, we
have no violation of the laws of identity on our hands. And the principle
that one and the same object cannot be in two different locations at exactly
the same time must-but plausibly can-be reconstrued as implying only
that one and the same temporal part of an object cannot be in two different
locations at exactly the same time, in which case we have on our hands no
violation of that principle either.
One particular variant of the foregoing sort of problem may not appear
to be quite so easy to resolve, however. I have in mind a difficulty which
seems to attend the very notion of the time traveller reversing his direction
of travel through time, from forward to backward. ' For is he not bound to
'collide' with his earlier self? Suppose, for instance, that he embarks upon
his journey at exactly 10. 00 a. m. , at which time he occupies a certain spatial
location. Where, then, will he be located at exactly one second before 10. 00
a. m. ? If we suppose that he did not change his spatial location for a few
seconds before embarking upon his journey, then a younger temporal part
of himself will be in exactly the same spatial location as the location
occupied by him at the time of his departure, 10. 00 a. m. (ignoring, for
present purposes, the fact that the Earth is moving on its axis and in its
orbit around the Sun). But since the traveller is supposed to travel back
ward in time, beginning at 10. 00 a. m. , it seems that an older temporal part
of himself will also have to occupy exactly the same spatial location, at one
second before 10. 00 a. m. , as is occupied by the younger temporal part of
7 See Michael Dummett, 'Causal Loops', in Raymond Flood and Michael Lockwood (eds. ), The
Nature of Time (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986).
337\nSPACE AND TIME
himself of which we have just spoken. And this conflicts with the principle,
which we surely ought to accept, that two different temporal parts of the
same object cannot be in the same location at exactly the same time.
However, this difficulty, too, seems to have a relatively straightforward
solution: we must simply recognize that there can be no travel backward in
time which is not accompanied by movement in space. The time traveller
cannot simply reverse his direction of travel in time while staying in
exactly the same spatial location. In fact, it seems, if he is to avoid 'collid
ing' with his younger self, he must first move very rapidly in space, but still
forward in time, eventually exceeding the speed of light and only after that
beginning to travel backward in time. This should be evident if we attempt
to represent his trajectory on the space-time diagram provided earlier (Fig.
18. 1 above), making sure that we draw this trajectory as a smooth curve.
The Grandfather Paradox and the problem of
causal loops
So far, we have discovered no insuperable obstacle, from a purely logical or
metaphysical point of view, to the notion of time travel into the past. But,
in the opinion of some philosophers, the serious difficulties attending this
notion really only begin to arise when we consider in detail the kind of
backward causation which time travel into the past must apparently
involve. Perhaps the best-known problem of this kind is that confronting
the time traveller who is presented with an opportunity to prevent his own
birth from occurring-say, by travelling back to a time before his birth and
killing his own grandfather before his parents were conceived. The prob
lem is that if he were to perform this act, then he would bring it about that
he never existed and yet the very act requires his existence. Clearly, we
must say that, for some reason, the time traveller cannot kill his own
grandfather. But it may be hard to see why he cannot. That is to say, it may
be hard to see what prevents the time traveller from performing this act, for
he may apparently have both the necessary means for carrying it out and
the opportunity to do so: for instance, he may be equipped with a loaded
gun and be standing only a few feet away from his grandfather.
However, this, too, does not really present a serious difficulty for the
notion of time travel into the past. What we should evidently say is that, for
some reason or other, the time traveller must in fact fail to kill his grand
338\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME
father, despite his best efforts to succeed in doing so. His failure to do so
will not simply be a miracle. It will have a perfectly ordinary causal explan
ation of some kind, even if we cannot specify, in advance of knowing the
details of the specific case, what this explanation will be. Perhaps the gun
will jam, or perhaps the time traveller will suddenly be distracted, or per
haps the person whom he takes to be his grandfather will not in reality be
his grandfather. The possible explanations of his failure are infinite in
number and hence most of them will never be thought of by anyone. But
all that is required is that one of them is correct as a matter of fact-and it
is not required that this one be known by the time traveller or anyone else.
In this respect, the time traveller who attempts, vainly, to kill his own
grandfather is in somewhat the same position as someone who has been
told by a reliable oracle that he will not perform a certain act in the future,
even though that act appears to be perfectly within the agent's power. If the
oracle tells the agent that, for instance, he will not eat an egg for breakfast
the next day, even though it would seem to be perfectly within the agent's
power to do so, then the agent knows-if he knows that the oracle is
reliable that he will indeed not eat an egg for breakfast the next day, no
matter what steps he may take to try to do so. The agent knows that, for
some reason or other, his attempt to eat an egg for breakfast the next day
will be frustrated. His failure will have a perfectly ordinary causal explan
ation, even though the explanation may come as a complete surprise when
(and if) it becomes known to the agent.
The foregoing problem seemed to involve the notion of time travel into
the past in a potential contradiction, whereby a time traveller might be able
to bring about an event which would result in his own non-existence. We
have just seen that, although the time traveller might indeed be said to have
this 'ability' in the sense of possessing both the necessary means and the
opportunity bring about such an event, there is also a perfectly clear
sense in which he cannot bring about such an event and in that sense lacks
the 'ability' to do so. But since the two senses of 'ability' are quite distinct,
there is no inconsistency in our description of the time traveller's pre
dicament. We can simply conclude that the time traveller will never in fact
succeed in bringing about the event in question (the death of his own
grandfather), but that this fact may still have a perfectly ordinary causal
explanation.
However, a much more worrisome sort of time travelling scenario, I
think, is that which involves a causal loop of some kind-this being more
worrisome precisely because it does not even appear to involve any kind of
339\nSPACE AND TIME
logical inconsistency but none the less defies certain principles of causal
explanation and thus plausibly involves a metaphysical impossibility.
An example of such a scenario is one in which the time traveller acquires
the plans for his time machine from his older self, who, having built the
machine from the plans, has travelled back in time to meet his younger
self, precisely in order to give his younger self the plans from which to
build the time machine. The problem is that the plans appear to come
from nowhere: even though every event in their circular history may seem
to be causally explicable in terms of other such events, the 'explanations'
involved are ultimately circular and hence not genuine explanations at all
(assuming, as we seem entitled to do, that explanation is an asymmetrical
relation). Notice that it is not being suggested here that the paper on which
the plans are drawn somehow materializes out of nothing and that this is
why the scenario involves a metaphysical impossibility-only that the
information contained in the plans seems to have no origin. In this scen
ario, no one ever invented the time machine. But that is enough to make
the scenario at least extremely puzzling and, very arguably, metaphysically
impossible, even though it does not appear to involve a logical inconsis
tency. The problem, then, is this. If the scenario is logically consistent
unlike one in which a time traveller supposedly kills his own
grandfather-then what, exactly, is there to prevent such a scenario from
being realized, if time travel into the past is genuinely possible? Why
shouldn't the time traveller's older self be able to hand over the plans for
the time machine to his younger self and his younger self be able to use
them to construct the time machine? In this case, it doesn't appear that we
can simply insist, as in the case of the time traveller who attempts to kill
his own grandfather, that, for some reason or other, any attempt to enact
this scenario will inevitably fail, even if we cannot say in advance what,
precisely, the reason will be in any specific instance. That being so, it is
very tempting to conclude that what the metaphysical impossibility of the
scenario implies-assuming that it is indeed metaphysically impossible
is that time travel into the past is itself metaphysically impossible, whether
or not the time traveller actually attempts to enact the scenario in
question.
'See further Murray MacBeath, 'Who was Dr Who's Father? ', Synthese 51 (1982), 397-430.
340\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME 341
Time travel, general relativity, and
informational loops
Our tentative conclusion so far is that the only purely philosophical reason
for supposing time travel into the past to be metaphysically impossible is
that it would potentially involve the time traveller in a metaphysically
impossible causal loop. But let us now try to reconnect our discussion of
these matters with some of the doctrines of modern physical science. Earl
ier in the chapter, I implied that time travel into the past is incompatible
with Einstein's special theory of relativity and, more particularly, with that
theory's prohibition on any object's accelerating from a subluminal to a
superluminal velocity. However, it is worth pointing out that in the wider
context of Einstein's general theory of relativity, applied on a cosmological
scale, time travel into the past does not appear to be completely ruled out.
It has been shown, indeed, that there are solutions to the field equations of
Einstein's general theory which do permit such time travel, in principle. "
These are solutions according to which space-time as a whole has a pecu
liar kind of internal 'curvature', as a consequence of which a traveller could
arrive at a space-time destination which was earlier than his point of
departure, without ever transcending the speed of light in any locally
determined frame of reference. However, one might still worry that this
would potentially involve the time traveller in puzzling causal and infor
mational 'loops' of the sort we have just been considering.
In scientific terms, a serious difficulty with such loops is that they seem
to involve a violation of the basic laws of thermodynamics-more particu
larly, the second law, which states that entropy in a closed physical system
generally increases with the lapse of time. " (The physical universe as a
whole, many scientists and philosophers would say, is a 'closed system' par
excellence, being necessarily immune to any 'outside' interference. ) The
'entropy' of a physical system can be thought of as a measure of its 'dis
order' and increase of entropy is accordingly associated with decrease of
See Kurt Gödel 'A Remark about the Relationship between Relativity Theory and Idealistic
Philosophy', in P. A. Schilpp (ed. ), Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, 3rd edn. (La Salle, Ill. :
Open Court, 1970). For discussion, see Paul Horwich, Asymmetries in Time (Cambridge, Mass. :
MIT Press, 1987), ch. 7, and Palle Yourgrau, The Disappearance of Time: Kurt Gödel and the
Idealistic Tradition in Philosophy (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991).
"This is a concern that Einstein himself raises in connection with Gödel's proposal: see Schilpp
(ed. ), Albert Einstein: Philosopher-Scientist, 687-8. For more on entropy and temporal asymmetry,
see Horwich, Asymmetries in Time, ch. 4. \n342
'information'. For we can only encode information in a physical form by
imposing some order on a physical system-say, by inscribing ink marks
on a piece of paper-and if this system becomes increasingly disordered
over time (in the case of a piece of paper, through normal processes of
wear and tear), the encoded information will correspondingly become
increasingly degraded and ultimately lost. Consequently, a causal and
informational 'loop'-even one which is consistent with Einstein's general
theory of relativity in the manner indicated above-appears to defy the
laws of thermodynamics, since information cannot consistently decrease
all the way round such a loop. It is true that, since these laws are ultimately
only statistical or probabilistic in character, they do allow for the possibility
of occasional anomalies: it is possible, for instance, if very highly improb
able, that all of the fragments of a shattered glass vase should come
together again in exactly their original arrangement (without anyone
deliberately making this happen). But time travel into the past would
apparently open the door to systematic and regular violations of the laws
of thermodynamics, which are scientifically very difficult to countenance.
The laws of thermodynamics and the 'arrow'
of time
Some physical scientists consider, indeed, that it is the very laws of
thermodynamics, and these laws alone, that hold the key to the problem of
the directedness or asymmetry of time: the idea being that the forward
direction of time just is the direction in which entropy generally increases.
But this, I think, is going too far. Here we should appreciate that the basic
idea behind the second law of thermodynamics is just that, of all the
possible ways in which a system of elements can be arranged, there are
many more which are very similar than are very dissimilar. For instance, if
we think of all the possible distributions of several million particles of blue
and red dye in a tank of water, most of these distributions will be ones
which make the water look uniformly purple, rather than red in one part
of the tank and blue in the other. Hence, if we start with a tank in which
the dye particles are segregated for instance, by inserting a dividing plate
between the two halves of the tank and adding blue dye to the water in one
half and red dye to the water in the other half-and then leave the particles
to move freely throughout the tank (in the case described, simply by
SPACE AND TIME\nCAUSATION AND THE DIRECTION OF TIME 343
removing the plate), the chances are extremely high that a few hours later
the water will look uniformly purple in colour. (The assumption here is
that the particles are moving randomly in virtue of the thermal energy of
the water, so that any one possible distribution of the particles is just as
probable as any other. ) None the less, if we left the tank long enough
without in any way interfering with its contents-and 'long enough' would
doubtless be a very long time indeed-there would be nothing to prevent
the particles from eventually regaining a segregated distribution once
more.
Now, applying this last thought to the case of the entire physical uni
verse, it would seem that, as far as the laws of thermodynamics are con
cerned, there is nothing to prevent the universe as a whole from eventually
entering a phase in which its entropy decreases and processes which we
normally associate with the forward direction of time all occur in
reverse the fragments of smashed glass vases coming together again,
people growing 'younger' rather than 'older', and so forth. But it would
surely be mistaken-indeed, simply incoherent-to describe such a phase
of the universe as being one in which time itself is reversed, because this
would imply, absurdly, that there could be three distinct events, e, , e, , and
e, such that e, is a little earlier than e, and e, is also a little earlier than e2
and yet e, occurs at a time which lies between the times at which e, and e,
occur. (Let e, be an event occurring at the time at which the universe
undergoes a phase change, let e, be an event occurring near in time to e
during one of the phases, and let e, be an event occurring near in time to e
during the other phase. ) Indeed, it would seem that the fact that it is in the
forward (earlier-to-later) direction of time that entropy generally increases
can only be a contingent one, depending on the contingent fact that the
early universe was in a state of markedly low entropy-that is, was in a
highly ordered state. If the 'Big Bang' hypothesis is correct, this has some
thing to do with the circumstances in which the physical universe came
into being. But, for our purposes, the important point is that we appar
ently cannot simply define the earlier-to-later direction of time as being the
direction in which entropy generally increases.
In saying that, as far as the laws of thermodynamics are concerned, there is
nothing to prevent the universe from eventually entering a phase in which
its entropy decreases and processes which we normally associate with the
forward direction of time all occur in reverse, I should stress that I do not
mean to imply that such an eventuality is a genuine metaphysical (or even
causal) possibility, much less that it will sooner or later actually happen. \n344 SPACE AND TIME
That these laws do not preclude it from happening merely demonstrates
their predictive limitations. Above all, these laws plausibly do not, as some
scientists and philosophers seem to think, hold the key to the problem of
the 'arrow' of time. I strongly suspect that the key to that problem lies,
rather, in the asymmetry of causation. From our examination of the ques
tion of whether time travel into the past is possible, we have seen that the
main obstacle to such time travel and therewith to the backward caus
ation that such time travel would inevitably involve-is its potential to give
rise to causal loops. Events caught up in such loops would not be amenable
to causal explanation, because genuine explanations cannot be circular.
And while we cannot reasonably insist that every event whatever is amen
able to causal explanation, it is, I think, unreasonable to suppose that large
tracts of spatiotemporal reality might exist which are unamenable to
causal explanation on account of the presence within them of widespread
and systematic causal loops. If this reasoning is sound, then even if we are
inclined to admit that backward causation and causal loops are in principle
possible, we have grounds for supposing that these phenomena are neces
sarily extremely rare, thus enabling us at least to endorse some version of
the second of the two causal accounts of the asymmetry of time described
earlier the account according to which the earlier-to-later direction of
time may be identified with the direction of most causation. "
*For rather more advanced discussion of some of the topics covered in this chapter, see Steven
F. Savitt (ed. ), Time's Arrow Today: Recent Physical and Philosophical Work on the Direction of Time
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995). \nPART VI
UNIVERSALS AND
PARTICULARS\n\n19
REALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
The distinction between universals.
and particulars
In this chapter I shall examine one of the most fundamental of all onto
logical distinctions: the distinction between universals and particulars.
Although discussion of this distinction has a very long history, there con
tinues to be controversy both about how the distinction should be drawn
and about whether it has genuine application. That is to say, there is still
disagreement as to what should be understood by the terms 'universal' and
'particular' and even some disagreement as to whether anything is usefully
describable by either of these terms. However, it is widely assumed
amongst modern metaphysicians, I think rightly, that if the distinction
ought to be drawn at all then it ought to be drawn in such a way that the
terms denote mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive ontological
categories that is, in such a way that every entity whatever is either a
universal or a particular, but not both. But even those philosophers who
accept this assumption are divided over the question of whether both of
these categories are actually occupied-some holding that both universals
and particulars exist, others that only universals exist, and yet others that
only particulars exist. Moreover, those who hold that both universals and
particulars exist are further divided over the question of whether entities in
one of these categories are reducible to entities in the other, and if so,
which. Some philosophers hold that universals and particulars are mutu
ally irreducible and thus that these two ontological categories are equally
fundamental. Others hold that universals are somehow reducible to par
ticulars or else, conversely, that particulars are somehow reducible to uni
versals. But before we can more fully describe and attempt to evaluate
some of these rival ontological doctrines, we need to consider how, \n348 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
precisely, the distinction between the universal and the particular should
be drawn.
A spatiotemporal account of the distinction
An approach favoured by some philosophers is to attempt to draw this
distinction in spatiotemporal terms. The idea here is, roughly speaking,
that particulars are distinctive in being individuated by their spatiotempo
ral locations, so that no two particulars (or, at least, no two particulars of
the same kind) can exist in exactly the same place at the same time and no
single particular can exist in two wholly distinct places at the same time.
(Two places are 'wholly distinct' just in case they share no common spatial
part, that is, just in case they do not 'overlap' spatially. ) A single universal,
by contrast, is said by such philosophers to be capable of existing in two
wholly distinct places at the same time and any number of universals are
said to be capable of existing in exactly the same place at the same time.
Some illustrative examples of paradigm instances of the two categories
will be helpful here. Consider, then, a paradigm particular such as a par
ticular material object of a certain kind-for example, a particular chair
made entirely of some uniformly blue plastic material. And suppose that
this chair fully and exactly occupies a certain region of space at a certain
time, so that the region of space in question has exactly the same shape and
size as the chair. Then, it seems correct to say, this very chair cannot also
fully and exactly occupy some other, quite distinct region of space at this
same time. Furthermore, it would seem that it cannot be the case that
another chair, exactly like this one, simultaneously occupies the very same
region of space which this one occupies at the time in question. By way of
contrast, consider a paradigm universal, such as the property of blueness
that is possessed by the particular chair just mentioned. Then it will be
said, by the philosophers in question, that although this blueness-like the
chair itself-fully and exactly occupies the region of space which is occu
pied by the chair, the very same blueness may also at the same time occupy
an entirely distinct region of space, such as the region of space occupied at
that time by any other particular chair made of plastic material of exactly
the same shade of blue. Furthermore, it will be said that many other
universals may exist in the very same regions of space as are occupied by
this blueness, such as the various other properties of any of these particular
blue chairs. \nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
foregoing proposal, however, There is a technical difficulty with thewhich emerges from our discussion in the previous chapter of the possibility of time travel. If time travel into the past is possible, then it should bepossible, in principle, for a particular blue chair to be 'sent back in time' toa time and place at which it formerly existed. Of course, it plausibly cannotbe sent back to exactly the same place as the place it occupied at someearlier time, because then it would 'collide' with its earlier self. But it couldperhaps be sent back to another nearby place which was not then occupiedby any other material object. In that case, however, one and the sameparticular chair would exist in two wholly distinct places at the sametime-which, according to the foregoing proposal, is something that only auniversal can do. One solution, it would seem, is to modify the proposal inline with the doctrine of temporal parts (see Chapter 3) and say only that aparticular cannot be wholly present in two different places at the sametime-implying by this that if a particular is in two wholly distinct placesat the same time, then this can only be in virtue of the fact that one part ofthe particular is in one of those places while another part of it is in theother. (Conveniently, this caters not only for the possibility of time traveljust mentioned, but also for the case of 'scattered' objects, which havedifferent spatial parts rather than different temporal parts in two ormore wholly distinct places at the same time: an example being, perhaps, atemporarily dismantled watch. Indeed, of course, even ordinary, unscattered particulars, such as a fully assembled watch, have different spatialparts in two or more wholly distinct places at the same time. ) By way ofcontrast, it may now be said that what is distinctive of a universal is that itcan indeed be wholly present in two different places at the same time. 'foregoing way of trying to disBut even with this amendment, thetinguish between universals and particulars is open to serious objection, especially if one considers that there can be entities belonging to either ofthese categories which do not exist in space or time at all. Some philosophers, for instance, believe in the existence of particular 'Cartesian egos', or immaterial souls, which exist in time but not in space. And manyphilosophers believe in the existence of abstract particulars, such asparticular mathematical objects (numbers and sets, for example) and particular propositions, which they conceive of as existing neither in space nor. (I shall say more about the distinction between 'abstract' andin timeBoulder, Colo. :
See further D. M. Armstrong, Universals: An Opinionated, 1989), 98-9.
349\n350 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
'concrete' entities in the next chapter. ) Furthermore, many philosophers
who believe in the existence of universals-such as the property of
blueness consider that all universals are themselves abstract entities and
consequently do not exist in space or time. And even if one believes that
the properties of material particulars, such as the blueness of a blue chair,
exist in space and time, one can hardly suppose that this is true of the
properties of abstract particulars-if there are such particulars-such as a
particular number's property of being a prime or a particular proposi
tion's property of being true (assuming truth to be a property of proposi
tions). Accordingly, one cannot consistently adhere to a spatiotemporal
account of the distinction between universals and particulars, of the sort
outlined earlier, unless one holds that everything that there is or could be
necessarily exists in space and time-in other words, unless one holds that
only concrete, not abstract, entities can exist. Notice that it is not enough
merely to hold that only concrete entities do exist, for once one admits that
it is so much as possible for there to be either universals or particulars
which do not exist in space or time, one cannot regard a spatiotemporal
criterion of the distinction between universals and particulars as being
adequate. But, surely, it cannot be right to insist upon an account of this
distinction which imposes such a strong constraint on what is held to be
metaphysically possible. To insist upon such a criterion would be to raise
an insuperable barrier to discussion and argument between oneself and a
large number of other philosophers whose metaphysical views cannot be
dismissed out of hand. I conclude that we are obliged to seek some alterna
tive and metaphysically more neutral way of drawing the distinction
between universals and particulars, if this is a distinction that we wish to
endorse.
Instantiation and an alternative account
One such alternative is to define the distinction between universal and
particular in terms of the relationship of instantiation in which one entity
may stand to another. Every particular, it may be said, instantiates is an
instance of some universal. For example, a particular chair is an instance
of the kind chair or (if one prefers this way of putting it) instantiates the
property of being a chair. Universals may themselves be instances of other,
This is the view I favour myself: see my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and
Time (Oxford: arendon Press, 1998), 155. \n351
REALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
'
higher- order' universals. For
 example, we might
 plausibly
 say that
property of blueness is an instance of the second-order property of being acolour property. After all, just as it is true of a particular chair that it is achair, so it is true of blueness that it is a colour property. Accordingly, if wemay take the predicates is a chair' and 'is a colour property' to denote
be pos
certain properties-universals-then it would seem that the first of thesepredicates denotes a 'first-order' property (a property which maysessed only by particulars) while the second denotes a 'second-order'property (a property which may be possessed only by a first-order property). Suppose we accept all this. Then, it seems, we can define the distinction between universal and particular in the following way. A particular isan entity which, although it can instantiate (be an instance of) anotherentity, cannot itself be instantiated by any other entity (cannot haveinstances). By contrast, a universal is an entity which can not only instantiate (be an instance of) another entity, but can also be instantiated by
another entity (can have instances). this proposal too.
the
with
There may appear to be a technical difficultySome philosophers want to maintain that there can be properties-that is, universals-which lack any instances, not just contingently but necessarily. Contingently uninstantiated universals pose no problem for the proposal, for the proposal was only that any universal can have instances, unlike anyparticular. It could allow, therefore, for the existence, say, of colour properties which no object, as a matter of contingent fact, has ever possessed--just so long as some object could possess them. But if a philosopher wantsto say that there exists, for example, such a universal as the property ofbeing both round and square, then he must concede that there are universalswhich necessarily lack instances (because, obviously, no object can be bothround and square). Hence, such a philosopher could not endorse the proposal now under consideration. Perhaps, however, he could say insteadthat a universal is something which either can have instances itself, or elseis somehow entirely 'composed by' or 'constructed out of' entities whichcan have instances. This would allow him to acknowledge that the propertyof being both round and square is a universal, on the grounds that it is a
'
conjunctive' property
 whose
 conjuncts ( the
 property of being
 round and
the property of being square) are both universals according to the modified criterion (because they can both have instances). Of course, this solution will not work for 'simple' universals which necessarily lack instances, though it is hard to see why anyone should think that such properties exist. it, the foregoing modification gets around the difficulty,
On the face of\n352 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
although it might seem to exchange that difficulty for another one. This is
because there are some philosophers who maintain that particulars are
reducible to combinations (or 'bundles') of universals. The problem is that
such a combination of universals would appear to be something which is,
as I put it a moment ago, entirely 'composed by' or 'constructed out of'
entities which can have instances-so that, according to the modified pro
posal, it will qualify as a universal, rather than as a particular. However,
perhaps this problem could be circumvented by distinguishing two differ
ent ways in which something can be entirely composed by or constructed
out of entities which can have instances-one way which is exemplified in
the case of the property of being both round and square, and a different
way in which particulars are supposedly 'composed by' or 'constructed out
of universals and by then insisting that only the first of these ways is to
be invoked for the purposes of the modified proposal. Alternatively, per
haps it could be urged, quite plausibly, that the philosophers who maintain
that particulars are 'reducible' to combinations of universals are simply
committed, whether they like it or not, to saying that everything that can
exist really is some sort of universal, including so-called 'particulars'.
Either way, it seems to me that something like the original proposal, or
some modification of it, whereby the distinction between universals and
particulars is defined in terms of the notion of instantiation, is probably
defensible. (Notice that, according to that original proposal, the distinction
between universals and particulars is certainly mutually exclusive, but will
only be exhaustive on the assumption that every entity whatever can
instantiate some other entity. If there are entities which cannot instantiate
any other entity, then they will qualify neither as universals nor as particu
lars according to the proposed definition. Whether, and if so how, we
should modify the proposal to accommodate such entities, if they exist, are
questions that I shall not pursue here. )
Nominalists versus realists
Having decided, at least for present purposes, how best to define the
distinction between universals and particulars, let us now consider some
rival doctrines concerning the existence of and relations between entities
putatively belonging to these two ontological categories. Some
philosophers who are usually, though somewhat misleadingly, described
as 'nominalists'-believe that only particulars exist. Others believe that, \nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
whether or not particulars exist, universals certainly do exist-and theseare usually described (again, somewhat misleadingly) as 'realists'. Nominalists believe what they do for various reasons, not only purely metaphysical reasons but also ones which are partly epistemological or semanticin character. Some hold, for instance, that it is ontologically extravagant to
posit the existence of universals in addition to that of particulars, or thatuniversals are metaphysically repugnant in some way. Some maintain thatuniversals, if they existed, would have such a nature that we could have no
knowledge of them, so that nothing that we do know can give us reason tobelieve in their existence. Some consider that universals are mistakenly
invoked by realists to explain semantic features of language which can bequite adequately explained in other ways. On the opposing side of thedebate, some realists contend that these semantic features-more specific
ally, the meanings of predicative expressions and of certain kinds of general term-can indeed only be explained by invoking universals. Somebelieve that universals must be invoked to explain our psychological cap
acity to recognize, classify, and group together various particulars. Andsome urge that universals must be invoked to explain the ontological statusof laws of nature, which they conceive to involve relationships betweenuniversals. There is not space in this chapter to consider all of theseaspects of the debate between nominalists and realists, however, so Ishall focus principally on the semantic considerations. (Some of the other
considerations will be aired in the next chapter. )
Predicates and properties
As far as semantic considerations are concerned, the keyrealist point of view is that a predicate typically denotes a property, thelatter being conceived as a universal (although it may and indeed should beconceded by the realist that not every meaningful predicate denotes aproperty). Thus, to use previous examples, the predicate 'is a chair' supposedly denotes the property of being a chair and the predicate 'is blue'supposedly denotes the property of being blue, or blueness. Indeed, thelatter term, 'blueness', is not a predicate at all, but a noun or name and as
idea from the
UniversityCambridge
Cambridge University
See, especially, D. M. Armstrong, What is a Law of Nature? (Cambridge: Press, 1983), pt. 2. For a more general survey of the debate between realism and nominalism, see D. M. Armstrong, Nominalism and Realism: Universals and Scientific Realism, Volume I (Cambridge: Press, 1978).
353\n354 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
such, one might naturally suppose, an expression which refers to some
really existing entity: plausibly, the very same entity as is supposedly
denoted by the predicate 'is blue'. After all, instead of saying "This chair is
blue', we can say 'Blueness characterizes this chair': these two sentences
appear to be logically equivalent. However, what one should make of this
logical equivalence, accepting that it obtains, is a matter for some debate.
The realist may say that, since 'Blueness characterizes this chair' clearly
makes reference to-and therefore implies the existence of a universal
(namely, blueness), it follows that the logically equivalent sentence 'This
chair is blue' likewise implies the existence of that same universal, which it
can apparently do only in virtue of the fact that the predicate, 'is blue',
denotes that universal. The nominalist, on the other hand, may urge that
the sentence 'This chair is blue' makes reference to and hence implies the
existence of only one entity, which is a particular, namely, this chair. Then
he may draw on the putative fact that 'Blueness characterizes this chair' is
logically equivalent to 'This chair is blue' to argue that the former sentence
likewise implies the existence of only one entity, which is a particular. To
this, however, the realist may reply that the nominalist now owes us an
account of the meaning of the predicate 'is blue', given that it is not to be
taken to denote a certain universal, namely, blueness.
There are various things that a nominalist may say in response to this
challenge. One is to urge that the realist's challenge is based on a mistaken
view of meaning, which sees words and phrases as having meaning only in
virtue of their denoting or signifying entities of certain kinds--a view
which might be correct as far as some names and noun phrases are con
cerned (those that are used to refer to particulars), but which does not
apply to predicative expressions, nor to general terms (like 'blueness')
whose use can apparently be replaced by the use of corresponding predi
cates (like 'is blue'). Here the realist may contend that the use of such a
general term cannot, in fact, always be replaced by the use of a correspond
ing predicate. He concedes that it can be so replaced, of course, in a
sentence such as 'Blueness characterizes this chair', which he accepts is
logically equivalent to "This chair is blue'. But for other sentences involving
such general terms it is not so easy to find logically equivalent sentences in
* See further F. P. Ramsey, 'Universals', Mind 34 (1925), 401-17, reprinted in his The Foundations
of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays (London: Kegan Paul, 1931) and in D. H. Mellor and Alex
Oliver (eds. ), Properties (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
See further W. V. Quine, 'On What There Is', Review of Metaphysics 2 (1948), 21-38, reprinted
in his From a Logical Point of View, 2nd edn. (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1961)
and in Mellor and Oliver (eds. ), Properties. \nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM 355
instance,
which they are replaced by corresponding predicates. Take, forthe sentence 'Blueness is a cooler colour property than redness', or thesentence 'Blueness is more similar to greenness than it is to redness'. It isfar from evident how these sentences could be paraphrased by logicallyequivalent sentences employing no general colour terms but, instead, onlythe specific colour predicates is blue', 'is red', and 'is green', togetherperhaps with the non-specific colour predicate 'is coloured'.
Resemblance classes and
resemblance nominalism
Another and more positive way in which the nominalist may respond tothe realist's challenge is to try to offer an alternative and nominalisticallyacceptable account of the meaning of general terms like 'blueness' andtheir corresponding predicates, according to which these expressions do, after all, denote entities of some sort, but entities that are all uncontro
versially particulars. For example, accepting that sets or classes are particulars, the nominalist may contend that 'blueness', say, denotes a certain setor class of particulars. Which set or class, though? The obvious thing to sayis that 'blueness' (and, likewise, the corresponding predicate, 'is blue')denotes the class of all blue particulars. (For present purposes, we may treatthe terms 'set' and 'class' as synonymous. ) But what determines whether agiven particular belongs to this class? The nominalist can hardly say, onpain of uninformative circularity, that a particular belongs to the class ofblue particulars if and only if the particular in question is blue. Nor can hesay, on pain of conceding victory to the realist, that a particular belongs tothe class of blue particulars if and only if the particular in question possesses the property of being blue, or blueness. But perhaps he can say, without circularity, that a particular belongs to the class of blue particularsif and only if the particular in question belongs to a certain resemblanceclass of particulars-a class which can consequently be identified with theclass of blue particulars. Nominalists who adopt this line of thought are, unsurprisingly, called 'resemblance nominalists'. one might attempt to specify, nonwith
There are various ways in whichcircularly, a resemblance class of particulars which can be identified reprinted in
See further Frank Jackson, 'Statements about Universals', Mind 86 (1977, .), Properties.
)427-9, \nUNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
the class of blue particulars. One way would be to select some blue particu
lar as a paradigm-for instance, a particular sapphire-and specify the class
in question as being the class of all particulars which resemble the para
digm (or better, perhaps, the class of all particulars which resemble the
paradigm at least as much as they resemble the paradigms for other resem
blance classes). But there are obvious objections to this sort of strategy.
One is that we need to be told, non-circularly, on what basis the relevant
paradigm is to be selected-and it is not clear how this can be done.
Another is that there appears to be no guarantee that the method will
result in the same resemblance class being specified no matter which
paradigm happens to be selected, which seems unsatisfactory. More fun
damentally still, however, it may be objected that resemblance between
particulars is always resemblance in some respect-for instance, in respect
of size, or shape, or colour-and that unless the respect in which particu
lars in the relevant resemblance class are meant to resemble the paradigm
is appropriately specified, an appropriate resemblance class will not be
specified by the proposed method. Thus, in the case under consideration, it
must be specified that the relevant resemblance class-the class which is to
be identified with the class of blue particulars-is the class of all particu
lars which resemble the paradigm in respect of its colour. For, clearly, it
would be inappropriate, for example, to include in the resemblance class
some particular which resembles the paradigm in respect of its size or
shape, but which is green or red in colour rather than blue. However, such
talk of 'respects' in which particulars resemble paradigms seems to involve
nothing less than reference to universals and thus effectively concedes vic
tory to the realist. For instance, to say that some particular resembles the
paradigm 'in respect of its colour' involves, surely, a quite blatant reference
to the colour of the paradigm, which is a property-a universal.
Another way in which one might attempt to specify, non-circularly, a
resemblance class of particulars which could be identified with the class of
blue particulars is this. One might suggest that the resemblance class in
question is a maximal class of particulars which are such that any two of
them resemble each other. What is meant by calling such a resemblance class
'maximal' is simply that it is not a subclass of any larger such resemblance
class; and maximality is required because every blue particular must evi
dently be included in the class of blue particulars. This suggestion has the
advantage of doing away with 'paradigms' altogether. However, there is
another apparent defect in the notion of a 'resemblance class' that is being
invoked here. This can be brought out by reflecting on the fact that, for
356\nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
357, as
example, any red particular resembles an orange particular-becausethe realist would put it, their colours are similar. (It is true, of course, that ared particular does not resemble an orange particular exactly-but, then, two red particulars may not resemble each other exactly either, for one maybe scarlet while the other is crimson. ) One implication of this fact is that, in a universe containing only red and orange particulars, the class of allthese particulars will qualify as a maximal resemblance class in the sensenow being understood, even though there is no colour property that therealist would say is possessed by all of these particulars. Another is that, insuch a universe, neither the class of red particulars nor the class oforange particulars will qualify as a maximal resemblance class (becauseeach is a subclass of a larger resemblance class), even though the realistwould say that there is a colour property which is possessed by all andonly the particulars belonging to the first class and another colourproperty which is possessed by all and only the particulars belonging tothe second class. These implications, however, clearly undermine thenominalist's suggestion that his maximal resemblance classes are suitablesubstitutes for the realist's universals. What the nominalist needs, itwould seem, is a definition of 'resemblance class' which both takes intoaccount the fact that resemblance is always a matter of degree and issensitive to the fact that no red particular resembles, at least in respectof its colour, any orange particular more than it resembles another red
particular.
Some problems for resemblance nominalism
In the light of these desiderata, the nominalist might suggestof resemblance class with which we could more plausibly identify the classof blue particulars is a maximal class of particulars which are such that anytwo of them resemble each other at least as much as either of that pairresembles any particular which is not a member of the class. However, thissuggestion still falls foul of the fact that resemblance between particulars isalways resemblance 'in some respect', which gives rise to the followingproblem. Suppose, to make things simple, that the universe contains justfive objects, O, to O, , and suppose that each of them has a size (large orsmall), a shape (round or square), and a colour (blue or red). More specifically, suppose that these objects have the following characteristics: O, islarge, round, and blue; O, is small, square, and red; O, is large, square, and
that the sort\n358 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
TABLE 19. 1
size
shape
colour
large
round
blue
02
small
square
red
large
square
blue
01
small
round
red
02
small
round
blue
blue; O is small, round, and red; and O, is small, round, and blue. This
information is set out more perspicuously in Table 19. 1. Now, we know
which class is the class of blue particulars in this universe: it is the class
whose members are O1, O2, and O1. But the question is this: is this class a
resemblance class in the sense just defined? Well, O, resembles O, in being
large and blue, O, resembles O, in being round and blue, and O, resembles
O, just in being blue. This means that O, and O, do indeed resemble each
other at least as much as either of them resembles anything not belonging
to the class in question: for the things which do not belong to the class are
O2 and O-and whereas O, resembles O, in both size and colour, O,
resembles O2 in no way at all and O, only in shape, while O, resembles O2
only in shape and O4 in no way at all. Similarly, O, and O, resemble each
other at least as much as either of them resembles anything not belonging
to the class in question. However, O, and O, do not resemble each other at
least as much as either of them resembles anything not belonging to that
class: for whereas O, and O resemble each other only in colour, O̟ and
O, resemble each other in both size and shape and thus more than 03
resembles O1. So the answer to our question is 'No'.
Another problem may be discerned by considering the universe that is
depicted if we delete O, from Table 19. 1. to give Table 19. 2. Consider the
class of red particulars in this reduced universe. It is the class whose mem
bers are O2 and O. Now, this class clearly is a resemblance class in the sense
TABLE 19. 2
size
shape
colour
02
small
square
red
large
square
blue
01
small
round
red
01
small
round
blue\nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
in both size
some
just defined, because O2 and 0, which resemble each otherand colour, evidently resemble each other at least as much as either ofthem resembles anything not belonging to the class in question. However, the class of red particulars in this universe is not a maximal resemblanceclass, because it is a subset of a larger such class, namely, the class whosemembers are O̟2, O̟, and O, the class of small particulars. For O2 and O̟, aswe have already noted, resemble each other in both size and colour, O, andO, resemble each other in both size and shape, and O2 and O, resembleeach other in size: whereas O2 resembles O, only in shape, O, resembles Oin no way at all, and O, resembles O, only in colour. This problem (sometimes referred to as the problem of companionship') arises partly because, in this universe, every red particular is a small particular, even though not
every small particular is a red particular. ways, than either so
Yet another problem which is even worse, infar mentioned is one which is manifested if we consider the universe that isrepresented by deleting both O, and O, from Table 19. 1, as in Table 19. 3. Clearly, the class whose members are the particulars O2, O3, and 0, constitutes a resemblance class, in the sense defined earlier; that is, it is aclass of particulars which are such that any two of them resemble eachother at least as much as either of that pair resembles any particular whichis not a member of the class (there are, of course, no particulars which arenot members of the class in this case). And it is obviously 'maximal', in thesense that it is not a subclass of any larger such resemblance class. Indeed, any two members of the class do clearly resemble one another, for O2 andO, resemble each other in shape, O, and O, resemble each other in colour, and O2 and O, resemble each other in size. However, there is no size, shape, or colour which is common to all the particulars of this class and consequently the class cannot be regarded as one that is denoted by any of the
TABLE 19. 3
size
shape
colour
small
square
red
02
large
square
blue
02
small
round
blue
edn.
7 The problem was named by Nelson Goodman: see his TheReidel, 1977), 116-17.
Structure of Appearance, 3rd
(
Dordrecht: D.
1
359\n360 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
predicates or general terms used to describe particulars in the universe in
question. But the whole point of the nominalist's appeal to maximal
resemblance classes of particulars was to propose them as being the entities
denoted by predicates or general terms, in place of the universals which,
according to the realist, such predicates and general terms denote. What
the present problem (sometimes referred to as the problem of 'imperfect
community') indicates is that maximal resemblance classes as currently
defined are entirely unsuited to this proposed role. (I should remark,
incidentally, that even if, as was briefly entertained earlier, a 'resemblance
class' is defined more simply as a class of particulars any two of which
resemble each other-without stipulating that they resemble each other at
least as much as either of them resembles anything which is not a member
of the class-the problem of imperfect community evidently still arises, as
does the problem of companionship. But it is worth seeing that these
problems also arise for the more complex definition with which we just
have been working. )
The bundle theory
What we have been looking at, in effect, are various attempts to reduce
universals to, or eliminate them in favour of, particulars, by substituting
certain classes of particulars for the realist's universals-classes themselves
being particulars, albeit abstract ones. From what we have seen of them,
these attempts look unpromising. However, even less promising, I think,
are attempts to reduce particulars to, or eliminate them in favour of, uni
versals, by substituting 'bundles' of universals for particulars. If such
'bundles' are understood to be sets or classes and the latter are still
conceived as being particulars, albeit abstract ones, then the strategy is
self-evidently doomed to failure as it stands-though perhaps the talk of
'bundles' can be reconstrued in a non-particularist fashion. Another and
more serious difficulty is that the strategy appears to commit its adherents
* This problem was also named by Nelson Goodman: see The Structure of Appearance, 117-19. For further discussion and an attempted solution, see Gonzalo Rodriguez-Pereyra, 'Resemblance
Nominalism and the Imperfect Community', Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 59 (1999),
965-82.
For discussion, see James Van Cleve, Three Versions of the Bundle Theory', Philosophical
Studies 47 (1985), 95-107, reprinted in Stephen Laurence and Cynthia Macdonald (eds. ), Con
temporary Readings in the Foundations of Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998) and in Steven D.
Hales (ed. ), Metaphysics: Contemporary Readings (Belmont, Calif. : Wadsworth, 1999). \nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM 361
of indis
to an implausibly strong version of the principle of the identitycernibles. For it seems at least logically possible that there should be twodistinct particulars which exemplify all and only the same universals, suchas two exactly similar material spheres in an otherwise empty universe: andyet, if any 'particular' is to be identified with the 'bundle' of universalswhich it would ordinarily be said to exemplify, then it appears that thesespheres must in fact be identical with each other, making them one sphererather than two. " So it would seem that reductionism or eliminativism ofeither variety has little chance of success and we should endorse some formof non-reductive pluralism, according both universals and particulars anequally fundamental ontological status. However, such a conclusion wouldbe premature at this stage of our discussion, because we have so far nottaken into account an important species of particularism, or nominalism, which escapes the difficulties which we observed earlier when discussingresemblance nominalism. There we were assuming that the 'nominalist' issomeone who regards properties as being universals and accordingly asentia non grata and candidates for reduction or elimination. But an alternative position is to regard properties themselves as particulars of a special
sort, currently often called 'tropes'. "
Trope theory
particular blue chair is
taken 152-64,
The trope theorist holds that the blueness of asomething that really exists just as much as the chair itself does, but that itis not something that can be identified with the blueness of any other bluechair, even if the two chairs resemble each other exactly in respect of thecolour that each of them has. In short, on this view, each blue chair possesses its own distinct property of blueness, which is a particular, just as thechair itself is a particular. So what, according to such a theorist, does thepredicate 'is blue' or the general term 'blueness' denote? They cannot, ofcourse, be taken to denote any one particular blueness, such as the bluenessof this chair or the blueness of that chair. But what they could plausibly beto denote is a resemblance class of tropes, that is, a class of tropes anyreprinted in his
10 See Max Black, The Identity of Indiscernibles', Mind 61 (1952), Problems of Analysis: Philosophical Essays (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1954). For furthersee Dean W. Zimmerman, 'Distinct Indiscernibles and the Bundle Theory', Mind 106Oxford: Blackwell, 1990).
discussion, .
"See Campbell,
(
1997), 305-9
Keith\n362 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
two of which resemble each other at least as much as either of that pair
resembles any trope which is not a member of the class. Because tropes are
conceived to be properties, this variety of resemblance nominalism does
not seem to run into the difficulties (such as those of companionship and
imperfect community) which beset the varieties of resemblance nominal
ism discussed earlier, which regarded a member of a resemblance class as a
particular which a multiplicity of different predicates might be taken to
describe-such as 'is blue', 'is round', 'is large', and so on. Any blue trope
is, clearly, properly describable by the predicate 'is blue'-but not, it would
seem, by a shape predicate, such as 'is round', nor by a size predicate, such
as 'is large'. Rather, if we are in the presence of a particular material object,
such as a cushion, which is blue, round, and large, this will be because that
object simultaneously possesses a blueness trope, a roundness trope, and a
largeness trope. Indeed, what the trope theorist will say is that the cushion
just is a certain 'bundle' of tropes, which includes a blueness trope, a
roundness trope, and a largeness trope. Thus, the trope theorist not only
has a way of reducing universals to, or eliminating them in favour of,
resemblance classes of particulars (such classes themselves being
particulars), s/he also has a way of reducing particulars which possess
properties such as chairs and cushions-to 'bundles' of particulars,
namely, to 'bundles' of the particular properties or tropes which these
particulars 'possess'. 'Possession' of such a property by a particular now
becomes identified with the inclusion of that property in the 'bundle' of
properties which allegedly constitutes the particular in question.
The problem of resemblance
The reason, then, why a resemblance nominalism founded on tropes seems
to escape the difficulties besetting a resemblance nominalism founded on
'concrete' particulars-entities like chairs and cushions-is that whereas
in the latter case the particulars appealed to may resemble each other in
one 'respect' but not in another, in the former case the particulars appealed
to resemble each other unqualifiedly or simpliciter, even if such resem
blance is still a matter of degree. A red trope may resemble another red
trope to a very high degree (indeed, to the highest possible degree if they
resemble each other exactly) and resemble an orange trope to a much
lesser degree: but it is not necessary to say in what 'respect' these tropes
resemble one another, for there is no other dimension of comparison than\nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
that of colour in which any two colour tropes may be said toadvantage over a resem
resemble one
this of.
another. However, although trope nominalism hasblance nominalism founded on 'concrete' particulars, both formsresemblance nominalism face apparent difficulties arising from the factthat resemblance itself, being a relation in which many different pairs ofentities can stand to one another, would seem to be a universal. The realist's universals that we have so far been considering are all properties-such
as blueness and roundness-which single particulars are said to exemplifyBut other universals are relations which are exemplified by, for example,
(
ordered) pairs or triples
 of particulars
 which
 stand to one another in
those relations--such as, perhaps, the relation of being taller than in whichMount Everest stands to Mont Blanc or the spatial relation of betweennessin which Leeds stands to London and Edinburgh. And, on the face of it, resemblance is just such a universal: a relation which is exemplified by pairsof particulars which resemble one another (either simpliciter or in somerespect'). It seems, then, that to be consistent, a resemblance nominalistmust regard resemblance itself as being reducible to, or eliminable infavour of, a certain class of pairs of particulars-just as, for example, therealist's property of blueness is supposedly reducible to, or eliminable infavour of, a certain class of particulars (namely, the class of blue particulars). The class in question will, of course, be the class of pairs of resemblingparticulars. But, as with the class of blue particulars, it would be circularand uninformative for the nominalist merely to specify the class in question in that way. He must try to specify it non-circularly as being a certainmaximal resemblance class of pairs of particulars. But then the problemseems to be that talk of 'resemblance' is obviously unavoidable for theresemblance nominalist, being the basis of his entire strategy for doingaway with the realist's universals: so that if that strategy has to be appliedby the nominalist to the relation of resemblance itself, it will involve him incircle or else a vicious infinite regress. 12for the nominalist is for himrealist, as
either a viciousOne possible way out of this difficultysimply to deny that resemblance should be regarded, even by thean ordinary relation that is, as a relational universal-on a par with sucha spatial relation as betweenness. Very arguably, the realist should regardresemblance as a so-called 'internal relation, on the ground that factsand Norgate, 1912), ch. 9,
Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (London: Williams(eds. ), Properties. 12 See Bertrand Mellor and Oliverreprinted in
363\n364 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
about resemblance between entities are entirely founded on and deter
mined by facts about the properties of the entities in question. " Indeed, the
relation of being taller than, unlike that of betweenness, is clearly an
internal relation in this sense, because whether or not one object is taller
than another is determined entirely by the heights of the two objects. But
similarly, it may be said, the realist should acknowledge that whether or
not two concrete particulars, such as two chairs, resemble each other in
respect of their colour is determined entirely by the colours of the two
particulars. Certainly, he should acknowledge that if two chairs possess
exactly the same colour (exemplify the same colour universal), then that is
sufficient to determine that they resemble each other exactly in respect of
their colour. And maybe he should also say that a degree of partial resem
blance between two concrete particulars in respect of their colour is like
wise determined by a partial identity of the colours of those particulars.
For instance, perhaps he should account for the partial resemblance in
colour between a reddish-orange cushion and a yellowish-orange cushion
in terms of each of these cushions having a colour which is partly the same
(orange) and partly different (red in the one case and yellow in the other).
But if the realist should acknowledge that facts about resemblance between
concrete particulars are entirely founded on and determined by facts about
the properties of the particulars in question, then not even the realist
should regard resemblance as an ordinary relation that is, as being one of
his universals. And that being so, the nominalist is not called upon to apply
his strategy for reducing or eliminating universals to resemblance itself.
(Here it is worth emphasizing that the realist should not, in any case,
regard every meaningful predicate as denoting a universal, for a reason
remarked upon in Chapter 6. For to do so leads inevitably to a logical
contradiction via a version of Russell's paradox. Simply consider the mean
ingful predicate 'is non-self-exemplifying' and then ask whether the prop
erty that it putatively denotes exemplifies itself or not. 14 Hence, the mere
fact that the predicate 'resembles' is meaningful does not commit the
realist to regard it as denoting a universal. )
Unfortunately, this sort of consideration is not ultimately of much help
to a resemblance nominalism founded on concrete particulars, because, in
the case of such particulars, the realist is now envisaged as explaining facts
about their resemblance as being entirely founded on and determined by
"See further, Campbell, Abstract Particulars, 37 ff.
See further, Michael J. Loux, Metaphysics: A Contemporary Introduction (London: Routledge,
1998), 34 ff. \nREALISM VERSUS NOMINALISM
particu
universals, then
facts about the properties-conceived as universals which thoselars exemplify (their colours and shapes and so forth). But since such aresemblance nominalist wants to substitute resemblance classes of concreteparticulars for such universals, he is committed to regarding facts aboutresemblance between such particulars as being more, not less, fundamentalthan facts about the properties' which those particulars putatively possess. The trope theorist is not in this uncomfortable situation because, while hetoo may and plausibly should regard resemblance as being an internalrelation, he regards it as being primarily a relation between tropes--andconsequently he can say that facts about resemblance are entirely foundedon and determined by the intrinsic characters of tropes, thereby avoidingthe need to postulate the existence of any relational tropes of resemblancein order to generate his resemblance classes of tropes. This is not to say thattrope nominalism may not be subject to other difficulties-difficultiesconcerning, for instance, the individuation of tropes and how 'bundles' ofthem can be understood to constitute concrete particulars-but it doesseem safe to conclude that, if one aspires to defend some form of resemblance nominalism in order to avoid having to accept the existence oftrope nominalism is probably the most promising option.
5
365\n20
THE ABSTRACT AND THE
CONCRETE
Two notions of concreteness and the status
of tropes
More than once in the preceding chapter, I had occasion to distinguish
between 'abstract' and 'concrete' objects. But the careful reader may have
noticed that I used the term 'concrete' in two rather different senses.
Earlier in the chapter, I used the term quite generally to denote objects
existing in space and time (or at least in time): and in this sense concrete
objects are to be contrasted with those putative objects, such as the objects
of mathematics (numbers and sets, for instance), that supposedly do not
exist in either space or time. The latter objects, then, may be described as
being 'abstract' objects, in the sense of the term 'abstract' which corres
ponds to the foregoing sense of the term 'concrete'. But, towards the end
of the chapter, I also used the term 'concrete' in a rather more specific
sense, in which concrete objects are to be contrasted with so-called
tropes examples of concrete objects in this sense being particular
material things, such as a particular chair or a particular cushion. Tropes,
by contrast, are conceived of as being particular properties or qualities of
such things, such as the particular blueness of a particular blue chair or
the particular roundness of a particular round cushion. And, of course,
properties or qualities as thus conceived should not be confused with the
realist's universals, which are precisely not particulars and any one of
which may be exemplified by many different 'concrete' objects, in this
second sense of the term 'concrete'. Unsurprisingly, then, tropes are some
times also called 'abstract particulars' by their devotees, in a sense of the\nTHE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE 367
second sense of the
term 'concrete'abstract' in this sense
term 'abstract' which is meant to contrast with this
'. ' is not, of course,
What is meant by calling tropesthat they do not exist in space and time. For trope theorists believe, on thecontrary, that a blueness trope, for example, certainly is something thatexists in space and time, being located precisely where the concrete objectpossessing it is located and existing precisely at the time or times at whichit is possessed by that object. Rather, the implication of calling tropes
'
abstract' in this sense is that, unlike the '
concrete' objects
 that possess
them, they are ontologically dependent entities which are incapable of existing 'separately' from such concrete objects. Since, as we saw in the preceding chapter, trope theorists regard such concrete objects as being 'bundles'of tropes, what gives rise to the ontologically dependent status of tropes, inthe view of such theorists, is the impossibility of any trope existing otherthan as a member of some trope bundle which constitutes a concreteobject. 2 So the idea is that there can be no 'free' tropes, such as a bluenesstrope which is not the particular blueness of any particular blue object: every blueness trope must be 'bundled together' with other tropes ofappropriate sorts, such as a size trope, a shape trope, a weight trope, and soon, all of which together constitute a particular 'concrete' object-forexample, a large, round, heavy, blue cushion. This picture still leaves anumber of important questions unanswered concerning, for instance, thenature of the 'bundling relation between tropes which enables them toconstitute concrete objects and the nature of the necessity with whichtropes are supposedly confined to a 'bundle' which constitutes such anobject. For some trope theorists, the 'bundling' relation is simply one ofcompresence-existence in the same place at the same time and there isdisagreement as to whether the necessity in question is metaphysical or
merely causal in character.
1
See Keith Campbell, Abstract Particulars (Oxford: Blackwell* See further, Peter Simons, 'Particulars in Particular Clothing: Three Trope Theories ofSubstance', Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (1994), 553-75, reprinted in StephenLaurence and Cynthia Macdonald (eds. ), Contemporary Readings in the Foundations of Meta
(
Oxford:
 Blackwell,
 1998) and in Steven D. Hales ( ed.
),
 Metaphysics:
 Contemporary
 Readings
Wadsworth, 1999). physics, Calif. :, 1990). \nUNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
The spatiotemporal and causal criteria of
abstractness
However, these questions, interesting though they may be, are not ones
that I shall pursue any further here. 3 In the present chapter, my principal
concern will be with the first of the two ways in which the distinction
between the 'abstract' and the 'concrete' has been drawn, so that, in what
follows, when I speak of abstract objects I shall always be referring to
objects which purportedly do not exist in space and time, understanding a
concrete object to be, correspondingly, something that exists at least in
time, if not in both space and time. In this connection, however, it is worth
drawing attention to another criterion of the abstract/concrete distinction
which is sometimes offered in place of or in addition to the spatiotemporal
criterion now at issue, namely, a causal criterion. Here the idea is that
concrete objects are those that are capable of entering into causal relations
or that possess causal powers and liabilities, whereas abstract objects are
those that are incapable of entering into such relations and do not possess
such powers and liabilities. On the face of it, the spatiotemporal and the
causal criterion may seem to coincide in how they divide objects between
the two categories of the 'abstract' and the 'concrete', because one might
suppose that an object is capable of entering into causal relations, or pos
sesses causal powers and liabilities, if and only if it exists at least in time, if
not also in space. Thus, for instance, a spatially unextended and unlocated
'Cartesian ego' or 'immaterial soul' (assuming that such a thing could
exist) would qualify as a concrete object by both criteria, for it supposedly
exists in time (although not in space) and it is supposedly capable of
entering into causal relations with other things, notably with the ego's
material body. Again, a mathematical object, such as the number seven,
seems to qualify as an abstract object by both criteria, for it apparently
exists neither in time nor in space and it is apparently incapable of entering
into causal relations with anything, altogether lacking any causal powers or
liabilities.
However, it should be acknowledged that there are other putative
objects which the two criteria do not unquestionably categorize in the
same way. Consider, for instance, such an 'object' as the centre of mass of
I discuss them further in my The Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998), 205 ff.
368\nTHE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE 369
the solar system. This is something that has a spatial location at any given
time and, indeed, it moves as the material bodies comprising the solar
system move through space. But it is not a material object itself: indeed, the
point of space which it occupies at any given time may be entirely devoidof matter (if that point happens to fall outside the volume of space occupied by the Sun, by far the most massive of all the bodies concerned). But
the centre of mass of the solar system certainly lacks any causal powers of
its own and it is a moot point whether it even possesses any causalliabilities that is, whether it can be causally acted upon by anything. It is
true that, when the bodies comprising the solar system move, the centre of
mass of the solar system moves as a consequence: but it is not at all clear
that it moves as a causal consequence of the movements of those bodies. For the position of the centre of mass of the solar system is simply a
logical or mathematical consequence of the positions and masses of the
various bodies comprising the solar system. Moreover, when the centre ofmass of the solar system moves as a consequence of the movements of the
bodies concerned, the change in its position occurs at the very instant at
which those bodies move-and if, as is widely assumed, instantaneous
action at a distance is impossible, this means that its movement cannot be
caused by the movements of those bodies. Furthermore, it would seem to
be impossible for anything to act directly upon the centre of mass of the
solar system, in the causal sense of 'act upon', without involving the
material bodies which comprise the solar system. All in all, then, it
appears that we should say that, by the causal criterion but not by the
spatiotemporal criterion, the centre of mass of the solar system is an
abstract object.
However, we should not regard this disagreement as unduly trouble
some. We can simply accept that, even setting aside the sense of the
abstract/concrete distinction that is associated with trope theory, the
abstract/concrete distinction is ambiguous in a further way, one sense of it
being captured by the spatiotemporal criterion and another by the causal
criterion. For many purposes, the two criteria will effectively coincide, even
though, as we have just seen, there are certain cases in which they deliver
different verdicts. 4
For more on the distinction(s) between the abstract and the concrete, see Bob Hale, Abstract
Objects (Oxford: Blackwell, 1987), and my 'The Metaphysics of Abstract Objects', Journal of
Philosophy 92 (1995), 509-24, or my The Possibility of Metaphysics, ch. 10. \nUNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
Existence in space and time
As I have already indicated, my chief concern in this chapter is with the
abstract/concrete distinction in the sense that is captured by the spatio
temporal criterion stated earlier. However, this criterion itself is in need of
some further elucidation. When it is said that abstract objects are those
that do not exist 'in' space or time, it should not thereby be suggested that
they literally exist outside space and time. For, understood literally, the
preposition 'outside' expresses a spatial relation (as when one describes a
certain apple as lying 'outside' a basket which contains some other apples)
and so describing something as literally existing 'outside' space itself is
self-contradictory. (If the object literally existed outside space, then it
would stand in a certain spatial relation to space and thereby to all the
parts of space: but anything which stands in a spatial relation to any part of
space must thereby occupy a part of space itself, in which case it cannot
after all exist outside space. ) So, in saying that abstract objects (in the sense
of 'abstract' now at issue) do not exist 'in' space and time, one must be
careful to imply only that, while these objects exist, they do not occupy any
part of space or exist at any time. However, it may wondered now whether
it really makes sense to suppose that an object can exist without existing at
any time whatever. On reflection, might it not be better, instead of saying
that an abstract object (in the sense now intended) is one that does not
exist 'in' time, to say, rather, that it is one that exists at all times and never
undergoes any sort of change over time? Such an object would be eternal
(or, at least, coeval with time itself) and immutable. But, while there might
conceivably be an object answering to this sort of description, since it
seems to fit one traditional conception of God Himself, it is not clear that
we should want to describe such an object as being 'abstract'. If we think of
such paradigm abstract objects as the natural numbers, do we really want
to say that such objects exist at any time at all, let alone at all times? After
all, the truths of pure mathematics carry no reference to time whatever and
are uniformly tenseless-truths such as 'Seven is a prime number' and
'Seven plus five equals twelve'.
We cannot, I think, hope to make further headway with this issue with
out reflecting more on what it means to say that an object exists 'in' time.
We surely cannot simply take the notion of existence 'in' time as primitive
or as self-explanatory and thus requiring no elucidation. However, if we
are prepared to adopt a 'tensed' theory of time (see Chapter 17), then
370\nTHE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE |
perhaps what we can say is that for an object to exist 'in' time is just forthat object to be a possible subject of true tensed predications. And by thisstandard, it might seem, mathematical objects such as the natural numbers do not exist 'in' time, precisely because the truths of pure mathematics are tenseless. But, unfortunately, matters cannot be quite as simple asthis. If, by describing an object as being a possible subject of true tensedpredications, one means that we can truly say of this object that it nowhas, or formerly had, or will in future have some property, then it wouldappear that even mathematical objects are, after all, possible subjects oftrue tensed predications. For I can truly say, for instance, that the numberseven used to be my favourite number, but is so no longer or that thenumber twelve is now being thought about by me. It is true that purelymathematical discourse has no use for tensed predications, but referenceto numbers can occur in other kinds of discourse than the purely. plausibly,
mathematical
In response to this point, however, it may be contended, quite
that every true statement about a mathematical object which involvestensed predication is contingent in character. It is thus a merely contingenttruth that the number seven used to be my favourite number, as it is thatthe number twelve is now being thought about by me. In contrast, it is anecessary truth that seven is a prime number and that seven plus five equalstwelve. So, perhaps we can say that what is distinctive of mathematicalobjects and of 'abstract' objects quite generally, in the sense which we arenow trying to elucidate-is that the only true tensed predications of whichthey can be the subjects are contingent ones, and that this is what itamounts to to say that such objects do not exist 'in' time. However, eventhis last proposal will not quite work: for there evidently are necessarytruths concerning numbers which involve tensed predications--such as'
Either the number twelve is now being
 thought
 about by me or it is not
the case that the number twelve is now being thought about by me', whichis a necessary truth simply because it is a statement of the form 'Either p ornot-p'. But in this sort of case, clearly, the necessity of a statement involving reference to a number as the subject of a tensed predication is quiteindependent of the fact that the statement involves reference to a number. So perhaps we can say, finally, that the sense in which such abstract objectsas numbers do not exist 'in' time is that the only true tensed predicationsof which they can be the subjects and which are not necessary truths quite
See, 96 ff.
371\n372 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
independently of the fact that it is these objects that are their subjects are
contingent ones.
How is knowledge of abstract objects possible?
We have been trying to determine more precisely what we should mean by
saying that abstract objects, such as the natural numbers, do not exist 'in'
either space or time, given that this cannot be taken crudely to mean that
they exist 'outside' space and time in any purely literal sense. And the idea
towards which we have been gravitating is that what is distinctive of such
objects is that it is no part of their essential nature that they bear any
relation whatever to the occupants of space and time-that is, to such
entities as material objects, persons, and events, all of which correspond
ingly qualify as 'concrete' by this standard. Abstract objects can contin
gently stand in various relations to concrete objects-as, for instance, the
number twelve may stand in the relation of being thought about by to a
certain person, who exists in a certain place at a certain moment of time.
But, plausibly, the number twelve would still have existed even if no one at
all had ever thought about it. However, if it is no part of the essential
nature of abstract objects, as presently conceived, that they bear any rela
tion whatever to the occupants of space and time, does this not threaten to
undermine any reason that we (as occupants of space and time ourselves)
might have to believe in their existence?
In one use of the term 'nominalist'-which does not coincide exactly
with the use of that term employed in the preceding chapter-a nominalist
is someone who denies the existence of abstract objects in the sense now
under discussion, often on the grounds that, given their purported nature,
we can have no reason to believe in the existence of such objects. It is
complained that, in view of the non-spatiotemporal character of abstract
objects such as numbers, we cannot possibly perceive such objects and have
knowledge of them in that way. Moreover, if, in virtue of their non
spatiotemporal character, such objects are causally inert, then we cannot
have knowledge of them in any other way, given the correctness of a causal
theory of knowledge of the kind that is currently quite widely favoured
by epistemologists. For, according to such a causal theory, knowledge
• See Paul Benacerraf, 'Mathematical Truth', Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973), 661-80, reprinted
in Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam (eds. ), Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, 2nd
edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983). \n373
THE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
by the objects
difference
consists, roughly speaking, in beliefs caused in a reliable wayof belief. However, it is far from evident why we should not be able to thinkabout abstract objects-why they should not be objects of thought. For wecan even think about non-existent objects, such as the objects of myth andfiction. Indeed, even the opponents of abstract objects may have toconcede that we can think about them, since they seem to regard them
as a species of fictional object. between an abstract
precisely
None the less, there is an important
object, such as the number seven, and the typical objects of myth andfiction, such as unicorns and dragons. This is that unicorns and dragonsare supposed to be concrete objects which, if they existed, would exist 'in'space and time. Because, as far as we know, no such objects have beendiscovered amongst the occupants of space and time, we can conclude thatunicorns and dragons do not exist at all. But since abstract objects are notsupposed to exist 'in' space and time, our failure to discover any amongst
the occupants of space and time in no way undermines our belief in their
existence. Moreover, given that we can think about abstract objects andthat whether or not they exist is an open question, it would seem that wemay hope to resolve that question by processes of reasoning, which isundoubtedly one possible source of knowledge. So, one possible responseto nominalist doubts of the kind just described is to say that we may aspire tohave knowledge of the existence and nature of abstract objects by means ofrational arguments which do not appeal to any ability on our part to perceivesuch objects. If this means repudiating a causal theory of knowledge, then sobe it: perhaps such a theory is really only appropriate, at best, as an accountof our knowledge of the existence and nature of concrete objects.
The indispensability argument advanced in favour of the
One sort of rational consideration that is oftenexistence of abstract objects, especially the objects of mathematics, is thatthe postulation of their existence is indispensable for adequate scientificexplanation of the nature and behaviour of concrete objects. The thoughthere is that successful scientific theories, at least in the more advancedempirical sciences such as theoretical physics, depend heavily upon maththeir formulation and application. For example, Newton's-Hall, 1970), 98 ff. ,
ematics
7See
 further, W. V. Quine, Philosophy of Logic (
Englewood
 Cliffs,
Putnam, Philosophy of Logic (London: George Allen and Unwin, 1972), 53 ff.
and Hilary\n374 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
inverse square law of gravitation, which states that the gravitational force
exerted by a pair of bodies on each other is proportional to the product of
their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance
between them-as expressed by the mathematical equation F= Gm, m2/r2,
where G is the universal constant of gravitation, m, and m2 are the masses
of the two bodies concerned, and r is the distance between the centres of
mass of those bodies (all measured in appropriate units)-quite explicitly
involves mathematical functions and numbers in its formulation and
application. (For instance, it involves in its formulation the square function,
which takes a number as its argument and another number-the square of
the first number-as its value; and in its application it involves numbers in
the specification of quantities of mass and amounts of distance. ) If a
scientific theory has to be true in order to provide an adequate explanation
of some range of natural phenomena and if the truth of a scientific theory
which has a mathematical component depends upon the existence of
certain mathematical objects, then we may apparently conclude that
any adequate scientific explanation by means of a theory which has an
indispensable mathematical component implies the existence of
mathematical and hence abstract-objects.
However, there are several substantial 'ifs' here which stand in the way of
a conclusive argument for the existence of abstract objects. It may disputed
whether a scientific theory has to be true in order for it to provide an
adequate scientific explanation of some range of natural phenomena. R
After all, we still use Newton's law of gravitation to explain and predict the
trajectories of projectiles, even though it is no longer believed to be strictly
true. Again, it may be disputed whether mathematical truths depend upon
the existence of mathematical objects and also disputed whether the math
ematical components of scientific theories are indispensable. For, on the
one hand, it may be that mathematical statements which appear to make
reference to mathematical objects can be reconstrued as making no such
reference, without impugning the truth of those statements. And, on the
other hand, it may be that the mathematical component of a scientific
theory is merely an abbreviatory device which could, in principle, be
excluded from a logically equivalent (if more long-winded and cumber
some) formulation of the theory. 9
* See further, Bas C. van Fraassen, The Scientific Image (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980).
See further, Hartry H. Field, Science without Numbers: A Defence of Nominalism (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1980). \n| 375
THE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
Mathematical truths and mathematical objectstruths imply
Let us look more closely at the suggestion that mathematicalthe existence of mathematical objects, conceived as a species of abstractobjects. For if this suggestion can be sustained, perhaps it provides anargument sufficient in itself to support a rational belief in the existence ofabstract objects, on the grounds that it would be difficult to deny that thereare mathematical truths. (Difficult, but perhaps not impossible: for itmight be argued that mathematics does not, or should not, aim at truth. But let us set aside this line of thought for present purposes. ) On the faceof it, there are mathematical truths which quite explicitly imply the existence of mathematical objects, such as numbers, which cannot but be construed as objects which are not concrete. Consider, for instance, the truemathematical statements 'There is a natural number greater than zero', and 'For every natural number, n, there is exactly one number which is thesuccessor of n', and 'No natural number is identical with its successor'. These statements together imply that there are infinitely many naturalnumbers. But, in all probability, there are not infinitely many concreteobjects in existence at least, we have no good reason to believe that this isso. Hence, it seems, the natural numbers must be abstract objects (on theassumption that the abstract/concrete distinction is exhaustive as well asexclusive, so that every object must be either a concrete object or else an
abstract object but not both). the natural numbers to
However, there is an apparent difficulty in takingbe abstract objects: for if they are abstract objects, then it is not clear whichsuch objects they are. This difficulty can be made vivid by reflecting on thefact that, if abstract objects do indeed exist and include sets, then there areindefinitely many different abstract objects which could, in principle, beidentified with any given natural number, consistently with known mathematical truths. For instance, it would be quite possible, in principle, toidentify the number zero with the empty set (the set which uniquely possesses no members), the number 1 with the unit set of the empty set (theset which has the empty set as its sole member), the number 2 with the unitset of the number 1 (the set which has the number 1 its sole member), thenumber 3 with the unit set of the number 2-and so on ad infinitum. But,
Review 74 (1965), Be', Philosophical
47-73, reprinted. 10 See further, Paul Benacerraf, 'What Numbers Could Not
1\n376 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
equally, it would be quite possible, in principle, to identify the number zero
and the number 1 as before, but to identify the number 2 with the set which
has as its sole members the number zero and the number 1, the number 3
with the set which has as its sole members the number zero, the number 1,
and the number 2--and so on ad infinitum. The problem with this embar
rassment of riches is that we seem to have no principled way of deciding
which, if any, of these abstract objects any given natural number is: and, of
course, since the various candidates for identity with any given natural
number (greater than 1, at any rate) are indisputably distinct from one
another, no natural number can be identified with all of the relevant
candidates. One conclusion that one might be tempted to draw from this is
that mathematical truths cannot, after all, imply the existence of specific
abstract objects of any kind. Arithmetical truths, for instance, may be said
to be truths not about relationships between a quite specific class of
abstract objects, 'the' natural numbers, but rather truths which, suitably
interpreted, hold of any class of objects possessing a certain kind of struc
tural organization-the kind of structural organization in virtue of which
the class has a 'first' member (representable by the symbol 'o') and a
unique 'successor' for each of its members.
It may be protested that this still requires there to be infinitely many
objects of some kind or kinds-and hence abstract objects of some kind
or kinds if mathematical statements are to be true, even if we cannot
identify any specific kind of abstract objects which must exist for that
reason. But even this may be questioned, for it may be contended that
arithmetical truths, for instance, are made true by facts concerning any
possible class of objects possessing the requisite structural organization, so
that it is not necessary, in order for such truths to obtain, that some such
class of objects should actually exist: it suffices that some such class of
objects exists in some possible world'. " Now, however, even though it
may be implausible to suppose that infinitely many concrete objects exist
in the actual world, it is surely very plausible to suppose that infinitely
many concrete objects exist in some possible world: in which case, the
truths of arithmetic, it would appear, do not depend for their truth on
the actual existence of abstract objects of any kind at all, but merely on the
"See further, Hilary Putnam, 'Mathematics Without Foundations', Journal of Philosophy 64(1967), 5-22, reprinted in his Mathematics, Matter and Method: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975) and in Benacerraf and Putnam (eds. ), Philosophyof Mathematics: Selected Readings. See also Geoffrey Hellman, Mathematics Without Numbers: Towards a Modal-Structural Interpretation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989). \nkind or
THE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
possible existence of infinitely many concrete objects of some
kinds.
The ontological status of sets
far calls
Of course, it may be protested now that nothing we have said sointo question the existence of sets or classes, even in the actual world-andthese are supposed to be abstract objects themselves. Moreover, althoughthere may be a problem concerning the identity of the natural numbers, there is no problem concerning the identity of sets: for the so-called axiomof extensionality of set theory provides sets with a quite unambiguouscriterion of identity. This axiom states that for any sets x and y, x isidentical with y if and only if x and y have the same members. It was thisaxiom, indeed, which enabled us to say that certain candidates for identitywith the natural numbers were distinct from one another: that, forinstance, the number 2 could not be identical both with the unit set of thenumber 1 and with the set whose sole members are the number zero andthe number 1. For these sets have different members and are thereforedistinct according to the axiom. However, both the claim that sets areabstract objects and, more radically, the claim that sets exist may be challenged. On the one hand, it might conceivably be urged that sets all ofwhose members are concrete objects are concrete objects themselves. 12 Onthe other hand, it might conceivably be urged that talk about 'sets' is just aconvenient grammatical device for talk about their members. More specifically, it might be contended that what appears to be singular reference to a'set' of objects is merely a convenient grammatical substitute for pluralreference to those very objects-so that, for instance, instead of sayingsomething like 'British women are more numerous than British men', wemay say, equivalently, 'The set of British women is larger than the set ofBritish men'. Given that these two sentences are logically equivalent andthat the only objects whose existence is implied by the first sentence arecertain men and women, it may be argued that the second sentence, too, only implies the existence of these concrete objects and not, in addition, the existence of two allegedly abstract objects, the 'sets' to which the menwomen in question supposedly belong'. ,
 Realism
 in
 Mathematics ( Oxford:
 Clarendon Press,
 1990), 50 ff.
George Boolos, "To Be is To Be a Value of a
and
12
 See
 further,
 Penelope
 Maddy
13
 For
 more
 on
 plural
 reference
 and set
 theory,
 see
Variable (or To Be Some Values of Some Variables)', Journal of Philosophy 81 (1984), 430-49, in his Logic, Logic, and Logic (Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1998).
reprinted
377\nUNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
The ontological status of possible worlds
At this point, the devotee of abstract objects may call attention to the fact
that, in explaining earlier how it might be contended that the truths of
arithmetic depend for their truth merely on the possible existence of infin
itely many concrete objects of some kind or kinds, I made reference to
possible worlds. For now it may be urged that possible worlds are them
selves abstract objects-maximal consistent sets of propositions, according
to one widely held theory-so that we cannot really escape a commitment
to the existence of abstract objects of some kind by adopting the strategy
outlined earlier. (For such a view of possible worlds, see Chapter 7. )
In answer, it may be pointed out that, even if it is granted (which,
perhaps, it need not be) that a commitment to the existence of possible
worlds is an unavoidable consequence of a satisfactory account of the
status of modal truths-truths concerning what is possible or necessary
not every theory of possible worlds represents such worlds as being
abstract objects. According to one widely respected view, indeed, possible
worlds, including the actual world, are indisputably concrete objects, each
such world being a maximal sum of spatiotemporally related objects-that
is, a whole whose parts include every object that is spatiotemporally related
to any one of those parts (see Chapter 7).
But it may perhaps be objected now that if possible worlds are conceived
of in this way, then, with the sole exception of the actual world (of which
we ourselves are a part), they might as well be abstract objects as far as we
are concerned for they and their inhabitants stand in no spatiotemporal
or causal relation to us, any more than abstract objects do. That is to say, if
the source of one's concern about admitting the existence of abstract
objects is just that they stand in no spatiotemporal or causal relation to us,
then concrete' possible worlds of the type now under consideration
should be a source of quite as much concern. It seems, thus, that unless one
can offer a satisfactory account of the status of modal truths which does
not commit one to the existence of possible worlds, either abstract or
concrete, the strategy outlined earlier for maintaining that the truths of
arithmetic depend for their truth merely on the possible existence of
infinitely many concrete objects will lack a coherent motivation.
378\nTHE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
Universals and laws of nature
So far, I have mentioned some rational considerations in favour of andsome against belief in the existence of numbers, sets, and possible worlds, conceived as species of abstract objects, but have identified no very compelling argument either way. However, we have yet to consider the case ofuniversals, which many of their devotees take to be abstract objects parexcellence. In Chapter 19, we looked at the debate between 'nominalists'there understood as the opponents of universals-and 'realists', concluding that a resemblance nominalism founded on tropes is probably the mostpromising approach for the opponent of universals to adopt. Tropes, as Imentioned earlier in this chapter, are conceived of by their adherents asbeing spatiotemporal particulars and thus as 'concrete' objects, in thesense of 'concrete' with which we are now concerned (even though, inanother sense, they are sometimes called, rather confusingly, 'abstractparticulars'). However, it is important to appreciate that a belief in theexistence of tropes is not incompatible with a belief in the existence ofuniversals, even though many trope theorists wish to defend a form ofresemblance nominalism founded on tropes. One can quite consistentlyhold that tropes--that is, particular properties or qualities exist but onlyas particular instances of corresponding universals: for example, that theparticular bluenesses of this chair and of that chair are both instances ofthe same universal blueness, which exists in addition to all of its particularinstances. But why should anyone wish to hold such a view? One reason, ofcourse, is that it may be doubted whether any form of resemblance nominalism can be successfully founded upon tropes. More positively, however, one may consider that the existence of universals must be acknowledged ifone is to provide an adequate account of facts or states of affairs of acertain kind: I have in mind, especially, those facts or states of affairs thatstatements of natural law are said to express. (On a point of terminology: the term 'natural law', or 'law of nature', is often used to refer to a speciesof statement or proposition, but it is also sometimes used to refer to thekind of fact or state of affairs which would make such a statement orproposition true. For the rest of this chapter, I shall adopt the latter usage, although either usage is acceptable, provided that it is made clear which isbeing adopted. So, in what follows, I shall be assuming that a truestatement of natural law is something that is made true by a law of nature. )For reasons similar to some of those raised in Chapter 9 in objection to
379\n380 UNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
the so-called 'constant conjunction' analysis of event causation, it is dif
ficult to sustain a view of natural laws which represents them as consisting
merely in exceptionless regularities amongst particular events or states of
affairs of certain types. Consider, for instance, Newton's law of gravitation,
which was mentioned earlier in this chapter and was there expressed by the
following statement: the gravitational force exerted by a pair of bodies on
each other is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely
proportional to the square of the distance between them. And let us
assume, for present purposes, that this law actually obtains (even though
Newton's theory of gravitation has now been superseded by Einstein's).
Then it is hard to suppose that the law simply consists in the fact that every
particular pair of bodies, throughout the universe in space and time, exert
a force on each other of the stated magnitude. Apart from anything else,
this would be consistent with the law being a mere 'cosmic accident' and
would fail to explain our conviction that, if another pair of bodies had
existed, in addition to any of those that actually do exist, then they too
would have exerted a force on each other of the stated magnitude. In short,
the 'regularity' theory of natural law fails to account for our conviction
that statements of natural law imply the truth of corresponding
counterfactual conditionals.
In the light of this and other difficulties with the 'regularity' theory of
natural law, some philosophers maintain that laws consist not in exception
less regularities amongst particular events or states of affairs of certain
types, but rather in some sort of 'second-order' relationship between cer
tain 'first-order' properties or relations, conceived as universals. 14 For
instance, in the case of Newton's law of gravitation, the universals in ques
tion will be the gravitational force relation and the spatial distance relation
in which particular bodies may stand to one another in varying degrees,
together with the property of mass which all particular bodies exemplify in
some degree. So, the idea is that the law consists fundamentally in a rela
tionship between these universals which is most perspicuously expressed
by the mathematical equation stated earlier, F = Gm1m2/r2, in which F, m,
and r denote, respectively, the universals force, mass, and distance. Because
the law consists in this relationship between universals, it has implications
for any particulars exemplifying these universals and thus explains why an
exceptionless regularity amongst such particulars obtains throughout the
14 See, for example, D. M. Armstrong, What is a Law of Nature? (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1983), pt. 2. \nTHE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
universe in space and time--that is, it explains why such a regularity is nomere cosmic accident' and consequently also explains why, if another pairof bodies had existed, in addition to any of those that actually do exist, then they too would have exerted a force on each other of a magnitudedetermined by the law. I should add that many philosophers who adoptthis sort of approach consider that the 'second-order' relationship betweenthe universals involved in a law is, or involves, some distinctive kind ofnecessitation, which is to be distinguished from the relation of logicalnecessitation in which two propositions stand when one of them entailsthe other-in short, a kind of 'natural' necessitation, our knowledge of
posteriori. which is purely a raised about a con
There are many questions and doubts that may beception of natural law of the foregoing sort and I do not have enough spaceto discuss all of them here. One important question, however, concerns therelationship between a natural law, as here conceived, and the corresponding exceptionless regularity amongst particulars: for it may be asked why, given that the law concerns only universals, it has any implications whatever for particulars. " The suggestion, of course, is that it has such implications simply because the particulars in question exemplify the universalsinvolved in the law. But why should it follow, just because certain particulars exemplify the universals involved in the law, that those particularsmust participate in an exceptionless regularity which 'conforms' to thelaw? For instance, granted that Newton's law of gravitation consists in acertain second-order relationship between the universals force, mass, anddistance, why should it therefore follow that every pair of particular bodiesexemplifying in some degree the universal mass and standing to oneanother in some degree of the relational universal distance (as, of course, all particular bodies do) must also exert upon each other a degree of therelational universal force of a magnitude suggested by the law? As we mightmore figuratively pose this question: why should all particulars exemplifying the universals in question 'obey' the law, given that the law as suchinvolves only the universals? Perhaps, in the end, this question rests upon amisunderstanding of what it is for a particular to exemplify a universal. Iam sympathetic to such a response myself, but shall not venture to developit further here. Suffice it to say that, while the conception of natural laws asconsisting in relationships between universals has considerable attractions,
ff. ,
where this is called 'the
See further, Bas C. van Fraassen, Laws and Symmetry (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 96inference problem'.
381\nUNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
those attractions may not provide entirely compelling reasons to believe in
the existence of universals.
Are universals abstract or concrete objects?
Suppose, however, that one were persuaded to believe in the existence of
universals for the foregoing sort of reason. That would still not necessarily
provide one with a reason to believe in abstract objects of any kind,
because we cannot simply assume without argument that universals must
be abstract objects (in the sense of 'abstract', of course, with which we have
primarily been concerned in this chapter). Indeed, there are some philo
sophers who believe in the existence of universals chiefly on account of
their supposed involvement in laws of nature and hold that universals are
not abstract objects, but exist entirely 'in' space and time. " According to
such philosophers, every universal is 'wholly present' in each particular
which exemplifies it and accordingly has a 'scattered' spatiotemporal loca
tion which is the sum of the spatiotemporal locations of all the particulars
in question. On this view, the universal blueness, for instance, is located
at all the places and times at which any blue particular is located. A
consequence of this doctrine is that no universal can exist unless it is
exemplified by some particular, existing at some place and time. But the
philosophers in question are happy to accept that implication, because
they believe that only concrete objects exist and that an unexemplified
universal could not be a concrete object, since, lacking any particular
instances, it could have no spatiotemporal location.
Against this doctrine that all universals are concrete objects, it may be
objected, first, that the idea of something being 'wholly present' in more
than one spatiotemporal location borders on incoherence and, second,
that it is in danger of collapsing into a pure trope theory. The claim that
universals may be 'wholly present' in more than one spatiotemporal loca
tion (which we first discussed in Chapter 19) is difficult to grasp clearly.
The idea is that all of a universal, such as blueness, may simultaneously be
located both in one place-say, where a certain blue chair, A, is located
and also in another place, where another blue chair, B, is located. But if all
of the universal is located where A is located, it surely follows that A is
16 See D. M. Armstrong, A World of States of Affairs (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1997), 135 ff.
382\nTHE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
located where all of the universal is located, for co-location would appear
to be a symmetrical relation. And if A is located where all of the universal is
located and all of the universal is located where B is located, it surely
follows that A is located where B is located, for co-location would appear
to be a transitive relation. However, A and B are not, of course, co-located.
So, it would seem that it cannot, after all, be the case that all of the
universal is simultaneously located both where A is located and where B is
located. Now, of course, the philosophers who adhere to the view currently
under discussion will challenge this argument, claiming, in all likelihood,
that it rests upon a question-begging assimilation of universals to particu
lars where matters of spatiotemporal location are concerned. However,
what the argument is intended to bring out is precisely the difficulty we
experience in trying to think of such matters other than in the terms in
which they indisputably apply to particulars. And therefore what the philosophers in question owe us is a perspicuous explanation of how there canbe a class of entities which, although spatiotemporally located, do not
behave like particulars in this respect. objection is not to
It is important to appreciate here that the foregoing
the idea of something's having a scattered spatiotemporal location, for evencertain particulars would seem to satisfy this description. Consider, forinstance, the case of a particular watch which has been taken to the watchmaker for repair and now sits upon his workbench in a disassembledcondition, its various parts scattered over the surface of the workbench. Itseems fair to say that, for a certain period of time, the watch has a scatteredlocation, being located in the sum of the places occupied by its variousparts. However, what we do not want to say, in the case of this watch, is thatall of it is located in each of these places: that it is 'wholly present' in eachof them. Rather, it is 'partly present' in each of these places, in virtue ofhaving a different part in each of them. This brings us to the secondobjection to the doctrine that universals are concrete objects, namely, thatit is in danger of collapsing into a pure trope theory. For we may askadherents of the doctrine to explain what the difference really amounts tobetween saying that one and the same blueness (a so-called universal) existsdifferent spatiotemporal locations and saying that many distinct
but resembling bluenesses (tropes) exist in all those different spatiotemporallocations. Indeed, it would seem to be perfectly possible for a philosopherto maintain that what is meant by saying the first of these things is preciselywhat is said by saying the second of them: for it might be urged that the sois in reality nothing more nor less than the sum of
in many
d'universal' blueness
383\nUNIVERSALS AND PARTICULARS
all the particular bluenesses, having (rather like the disassembled watch) a
'scattered' location which is the sum of the locations of all of its particular
parts. In short, it may seem that the distinction that the advocate of 'con
crete universals' wants to make between his own position and that of the
pure trope theorist is really a distinction without a difference. No such
objection can be raised, of course, against the advocate of universals who
holds them to be abstract objects, because this theorist maintains that
universals lack a characteristic that is shared by all particulars, namely,
spatiotemporal locatedness.
The ontological status of facts and states of affairs
Discussion of the abstract/concrete distinction would not be complete
without some consideration of the application of that distinction to one
important category of entities that has already received some mention in
this chapter-namely, facts or states of affairs. The important point to
register here is that there is a good deal of disagreement over whether facts
or states of affairs should be classified as abstract or as concrete entities,
because there are at least two very different ways of conceiving of such
entities. " A view which holds that all states of affairs are abstract entities
was aired in Chapter 7, in connection with the doctrine that possible
worlds are maximal consistent states of affairs. According to this view,
states of affairs are necessary beings-entities which exist 'in every possible
world'-and a 'fact' is simply a state of affairs which 'obtains'. As
such, states of affairs are conceived of as being very similar to, if not
indistinguishable from, propositions, as these have traditionally been
conceived and thus as abstract entities of a certain kind. But according to
another widely favoured view, facts should instead be conceived of as
'complexes' which contain certain universals and particulars quite literally
as their constituents'. Thus, for example, the fact that a certain chair is
blue would, on this view, be held to contain as its constituents that very
chair and the universal blueness, with the former standing in the relation of
exemplification to the latter. (Of course, an adherent of this view would be
wise not to regard exemplification itself as being a relational universal, as
this would threaten to generate a vicious infinite regress. ) But then we may
ask whether this fact should itself be categorized as a particular or as a
"See further my The Possibility of Metaphysics, 231 ff.
384\nTHE ABSTRACT AND THE CONCRETE
abstract or a
by
universal, as well as whether it should be classified as anconcrete entity on the presumption that each of these distinctions isexhaustive and mutually exclusive in character. adherents of the view now
The response most likely to be offeredunder consideration is that such a fact is a concrete particular. 18 But since itis far from easy to adjudicate between the two different conceptions offacts that have just been outlined, it is difficult to say with any confidencewhether facts should be classified as abstract or as concrete entities. Indeed, it is even debatable whether facts or states of affairs should be included inour ontology at all, because the supposition that they should be is subjectto an objection based on a version of the Slingshot Argument discussed inChapter 9. The version of the Slingshot Argument presented there purported to show that if any statement of fact causation is true, then everystatement of fact causation which refers to any two facts whatever is true. This version of the argument started from an arbitrarily chosen premise ofthe form 'The fact that p caused the fact that q' and concluded, for anarbitrary choice of true sentences r and s, 'The fact that r caused the factthat s'. But it easy to see how one can construct a parallel version of theargument from an arbitrarily chosen premise of the form 'The fact that p isidentical with the fact that q' and conclude, for an arbitrary choice of truesentences r and s, 'The fact that r is identical with the fact that s-theapparently absurd implication being that there can be no more than onefact, sometimes called, with deliberate irony, 'the Great Fact'. " As we saw inChapter 9, the Slingshot Argument is open to objection itself, so that, inthis latest version, it need not necessarily be seen as constituting aninsuperable objection to belief in the existence of facts. Even so, it wouldseem that the ontological status of facts is sufficiently controversial to callinto question any system of ontology which accords them a central and
fundamental role. victory of
States of Affairs, 126-7, where he speaks of this as 'the, reprinted in
18
See Armstrong, A World of
particularity'.
19 See Donald Davidson, 'True to the Facts', Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969), 748-64into Truth and Interpretation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
his Inquiries
385\nBIBLIOGRAPHY
Ackrill, J. L. , Aristotle the Philosopher (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981).
Alexander, P. , 'Incongruent Counterparts and Absolute Space', Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society 85 (1984/5), 1-21.
Alvarez, M. , and Hyman, J. , 'Agents and their Actions', Philosophy 73 (1998),
219-45.
Anscombe, G. E. M. , 'Causality and Determination', in G. E. M. Anscombe,
Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Mind: Collected Philosophical Papers, Volume II
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1981).
Aristotle, Metaphysics, in W. D. Ross (ed. ), The Works of Aristotle Translated into
English. Volume VIII: Metaphysica, 2nd edn. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1928).
Armstrong, D. M. , A Combinatorial Theory of Possibility (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1989).
- 'Identity Through Time', in P. van Inwagen (ed. ), Time and Cause: Essays
Presented to Richard Taylor (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980).
Nominalism and Realism: Universals and Scientific Realism, Volume I
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1978).
Universals: An Opinionated Introduction (Boulder, Colo. : Westview Press,
1989).
What is a Law of Nature? (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
A World of States of Affairs (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
Bach, K. , 'Actions Are Not Events', Mind 89 (1980), 114-20.
Bambrough, R. , 'Universals and Family Resemblances', Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society 60 (1960/1), 207-22.
Barrow, J. D. , and Tippler, F. J. , The Anthropic Cosmological Principle (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1986).
Benacerraf, P. , 'Mathematical Truth', Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973), 661-80.
'What Numbers Could Not Be', Philosophical Review 74 (1965), 47-73.
and Putnam, H. (eds. ), Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Readings, 2nd
edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983).
Bennett, J. , 'Classifying Conditionals: The Traditional Way is Right', Mind 104
(1995), 331-54.
'Counterfactuals and Temporal Direction', Philosophical Review 93 (198457-91.
Events and their Names (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988).
),
'Farewell to the Phlogiston Theory of Conditionals', Mind 97 (1988), 509-27.
Berkeley, G. , A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, in
G. Berkeley, Philosophical Works, ed. M. R. Ayers (London: Dent, 1975). \nBlack, M. , 'The Identity of Indiscernibles', Mind 61
Problems of Analysis: Philosophical Essays (London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul, 1954).
(1952), 152-64.
Boolos, G. , Logic, Logic, and Logic (Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press,
1998).
'To Be is To Be a Value of a Variable (or To Be Some Values of Some
Variables)', Journal of Philosophy 81 (1984), 430-49.
Boswell, J. , The Life of Samuel Johnson (London: Dent, 1906).
Brand, M. , and Walton, D. (eds. ), Action Theory (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1976).
Broad, C. D. , Scientific Thought (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1923).
Brody, B. A. , Identity and Essence (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1980).
Bunzl, M. , 'Causal Overdetermination', Journal of Philosophy 76 (1979), 134-50.
Burke, M. B. , 'Copper Statues and Pieces of Copper', Analysis 52 (1992), 12-17. Solution to an Ancient Puzzle', Journal of' Dion and Theon: An Essentialist
of the
Philosophy 91 (1994), 129-39.
'
Preserving the Principle of One Object to a Place: A Novel Account
Relations among Objects, Sorts, Sortals, and Persistence Conditions', Philosophy, 591-624. and
Burkhardt, H. , and Smith, B. ( eds. ), Handbook of Metaphysics and Ontology
Verlag, 1991). (Munich: Philosophia Blackwell, 1990). Campbell, K. , Abstract Particulars (Oxford:
Chandler, H. S. , 'Plantinga and the Contingently Possible', Analysis 36 (1976),
363-9. 106-9.
'Rigid Designation', Journal of Philosophy 72 (1975), pp. Chellas, B. F. , Modal Logic: An Introduction (Cambridge: Cambridge University
ActionPress, 1980).
Chisholm, R. M. , 'The Agent as Cause', in M. Brand and D. Walton (eds. ), Reidel, 1976). ), 1-8.
Theory (Dordrecht'Identity Through Possible Worlds: Some Questions', Noûs 1 (Person and Object: A Metaphysical Study (London: George Allen and Unwin,
1976).
A Realistic Theory of Categories: An Essay on Ontology (Cambridge: Press, 1996).
Cambridge UniversityCraig, W. L. , and Smith, Q. , Theism, Atheism, and Big Bang Cosmology (Oxford: ).
Clarendon Press,
Danto, A. C. , Analytical Philosophy of Action (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1973). American Philosophical Quarterly 2 (1965), 141-8.
'
Basic
 Actions,
Davidson, D. , 'Actions, Reasons, and Causes', Journal of Philosophy 60 (1963),
685-700. - 'Agency', in R. Binkley, R. Bronaugh, and A. Marras (eds. ), Agent, Action, andToronto: University of Toronto Press, 1971).
BIBLIOGRAPHY 387\nDavidson, D. , 'Causal Relations', Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), 691-703.
Essays on Actions and Events (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980).
'The Individuation of Events', in N. Rescher (ed. ), Essays in Honor of Carl G.
Hempel (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1969).
Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1984).
'The Logical Form of Action Sentences', in N. Rescher (ed. ), The Logic of
Decision and Action (Pittsburgh, Pa. : University of Pittsburgh Press, 1966).
- 'True to the Fa ', Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969), 748-64.
and Harman, G. (eds. ), Semantics of Natural Language (Dordrecht: D. Reidel,
1972).
Divers, J. , 'A Modal Fictionalist Result', Noûs 33 (1999), 317-46.
Donnellan, K. , 'Reference and Definite Descriptions', Philosophical Review 75
(1966), 281-304.
Dowe, P. , Physical Causation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
Dudman, V. H. , 'Interpretations of "If"-Sentences', in F. Jackson (ed. ), Conditionals
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991).
Dummett, M. A. E. , 'Bringing About the Past', Philosophical Review 73 (1964), 338-59.
'Causal Loops', in R. Flood and M. Lockwood (eds. ), The Nature of Time
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1986).
'A Defense of McTaggart's Proof of the Unreality of Time', Philosophical
Review 69 (1960), 497-504.
The Logical Basis of Metaphysics (London: Duckworth, 1991).
Truth and Other Enigmas (London: Duckworth, 1978).
Earman, J. , World Enough and Space-Time: Absolute versus Relational Theories of
Space and Time (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1989).
Einstein, A. , 'The Foundation of the General Theory of Relativity', in H. A.
Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowski, and H. Weyl, The Principle of Relativity
(New York: Dover, 1952).
- 'On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies', in H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein,
H. Minkowski, and H. Weyl, The Principle of Relativity (New York: Dover, 1952).
Evans, G. , 'Can There Be Vague Objects? ', Analysis 38 (1978), 208.
Field, H. H. , Science without Numbers: A Defence of Nominalism (Oxford:
Blackwell, 1980).
Forbes, G. , The Metaphysics of Modality (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985).
Frege, G. , The Foundations of Arithmetic, trans. J. L. Austin (Oxford: Blackwell,
1953).
Gale, R. M. (ed. ), The Philosophy of Time: A Collection of Essays (Garden City, NY:
Anchor Doubleday and Co. , Inc. , 1967).
Gallois, A. , Occasions of Identity: The Metaphysics of Persistence, Change, and
Sameness (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998).
Gardner, M. , The New Ambidextrous Universe: Symmetry and Asymmetry from
Mirror Reflections to Superstrings, 3rd edn. (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1990).
388 BIBLIOGRAPHY\nBIBLIOGRAPHY 389
Press,
Geach, P. , Reference and Generality, 3rd edn. (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University4 (1975), 187-222.
1980).
Gibbard, A. , 'Contingent Identity', Journal of Philosophical LogicGödel, K. , 'A Remark about the Relationship between Relativity Theory andPhilosophy', in P. A. Schilpp (ed. ), Albert Einstein: Philosopher.
Idealistic Salle, Ill. : Open Court, 1970)Reidel, Scientist, 3rd edn. (La
Goodman, N. , The Structure of Appearance, 3rd edn. (Dordrecht: D. Goosens, W. K. , 'Causal Chains and Counterfactuals', Journal of Philosophy 76
George Allen and
1977).
(1979), 489-95.
Grünbaum, A. , Modern Science and Zeno's Paradoxes (London:
Unwin, 1968). , 1987).
Hale, R. ,
Hales, S. D. (ed. ), Metaphysics: Contemporary Readings (Belmont: D. Reidel, , Calif. :
Wadsworth
Harper, W. L. , Stalnaker, R. C. , and Pearce, G. ( eds. ), Ifs (
Dordrecht
), 119-125. , 1999).
1981).
Haslanger, S. , 'Endurance and Temporary Intrinsics', Analysis 49Hausman, D. M. , Causal Asymmetries (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
Matter(1989). Hunks of
1998
Heller, M. , The Ontology of Physical
 Objects: Four-
Dimensional
University Press, 1990). : Cambridge Modal-Structural(
Cambridge
Hellman, G. , Mathematics
 Without
 Numbers: Towards a
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989). MolesworthW.
(London: S. , Substance among Other Categories
Interpretation (Hobbes, T. , De Corpore, in The English Works of Thomas Hobbes, ed.
John Bohn, 1839-45).
Hoffman, J. , and Rosenkrantz, G. Press, 1994). (
Cambridge: Cambridge
 University
Kegan
Hornsby, J. , Actions (London: Routledge andHorwich, P. , Asymmetries in Time (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press, 1987). Hughes, C. , 'Same-Kind Coincidence and the Ship of Theseus', Mind 106 (1997), to Modal Logic (London:
Paul, 1980).
53-67.
Hughes, G. E. , and Cresswell, M. J. , A New Introduction and Concerning the
Routledge, 1996).
Hume, D. , Enquiries Concerning Human UnderstandingPrinciples of Morals, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge and P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: ClarendonExplanation in the Social,
Press, 1975). Chances of Explanation: Causal Princeton University Press, 1989).
Medical, andJackson, F. , From Metaphysics to Ethics: A Defence:
Press, 1998). 86 (1977), 427-9. '
Statements
 Universals', Mind
(
Oxford: Oxford
 University
 Press,
(ed. ), Conditionals 1991).
Clarendon about\nJohnson, W. E. , Logic, Part I (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1921).
Jubien, M. , Contemporary Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1997).
Kant, I. , 'Concerning the Ultimate Foundation of the Differentiation of Regions
in Space', in I. Kant, Selected Precritical Writings, trans. G. B. Kerferd and
D. E. Walford (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1968).
Critique of Pure Reason, trans. N. Kemp Smith (London: Macmillan, 1929).
Prolegomena, trans. P. G. Lucas (Manchester: Manchester University Press,
1953).
Keefe, R. , Theories of Vagueness (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).
and Smith, P. (eds. ), Vagueness: A Reader (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press,
1997).
Kim, J. , 'Events as Property Exemplifications', in M. Brand and D. Walton (eds. ),
Action Theory (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1980).
and Sosa, E. (eds. ), A Companion to Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1995).
Kornblith, H. (ed. ), Naturalizing Epistemology (Cambridge, Mass. : MIT Press,
1985).
Kripke, S. A. , 'Identity and Necessity', in M. K. Munitz (ed. ), Identity and
Individuation (New York: New York University Press, 1971).
- Naming and Necessity (Oxford: Blackwell, 1980).
Laurence, S. , and Macdonald, C. (eds. ), Contemporary Readings in the Foundations
of Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1998).
Le Poidevin, R. (ed. ), Questions of Time and Tense (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998and MacBeath, M. (eds. ), The Philosophy of Time (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1993).
LePore, E. , and McLaughlin, B. (eds. ), Actions and Events: Perspectives on the
Philosophy of Donald Davidson (Oxford: Blackwell, 1985).
Leslie, J. , The End of the World: The Science and Ethics of Human Extinction
(London: Routledge, 1996).
Lewis, D. K. , 'Causation', Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973), 556-67.
'Causation as Influence', Journal of Philosophy 97 (2000), 182-97.
'Counterfactual Dependence and Time's Arrow', Noûs 13 (1979), 455-76.
Counterfactuals (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973).
- 'Many, but Almost One', in J. Bacon, K. Campbell, and L. Reinhardt (eds. ),
Ontology, Causality and Mind: Essays in Honour of D. M. Armstrong (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1993).
On the Plurality of Worlds (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986).
Papers in Metaphysics and Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 1999).
'The Paradoxes of Time Travel', American Philosophical Quarterly 13 (1976),
145-52.
Philosophical Papers, vol. 1 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1983).
Philosophical Papers, vol. 2 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986).
).
390 BIBLIOGRAPHY\n391
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Papers, vol. 1
Lewis, D. K. , 'Survival and Identity', in D. K. Lewis, PhilosophicalPress, 1983). of Philosophy( New York: Oxford
 University
Loeb, L. E. , 'Causal Theories and Causal Overdetermination', Journal and Kegan Paul,
71 (1974), 525-44.
Lombard, L. B. , Events: A Metaphysical Study (London: Routledge of Relativity
1986).
Lorentz, H. A. , Einstein, A. , Minkowski, H. , and Weyl, H. , The Principle
). Theory of
(New York: Dover, 1952Loux, M. J. , 'Kinds and Predications: An Examination of Aristotle'sPapers 26 (1997), 3-28. ).
Categories
- Metaphysics: A Contemporary
 Introduction (
London
- ( ed. ), The Possible
 and the Actual: Readings in the
 Metaphysics of Modality, 1979). Cornell University PressCriterion of Event(Ithaca, NY:
Lowe, E. J. , 'Impredicative Identity Criteria and Davidson's
(1989), 178-81. Time', MindIdentity',
- The Indexical Fallacy in McTaggart's Proof of the Unreality. University
Analysis 49 of
96 (An Introduction to the Philosophy of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge
Press, 2000). the Logic of Sortal Terms
Kinds of Being: A Study of Individuation, Identity and
(Oxford: Blackwell, 1989).
McTaggart's Paradox Revisited', Mind 101 (1993), 323-6. 92 (1995), '
' The
 Metaphysics of Abstract
 Objects', Journal of Philosophy
), 195-7.
', Analysis 46 (1986579-84. - 'On a Supposed Temporal/Modal Parallel'On the Alleged Necessity of True Identity Statements', Mind 91 (1982),
), 222-32.
509-24.
'On the Identity of Artifacts', JournalThe Possibility of Metaphysics: Substance, Identity, and Time (Oxford:
Press, 1998). Constitution', AnalysisClarendon 55
Lewis, (1995), 179-82.
'The Problems of Intrinsic Change: Rejoinder to Press, 1996).
72-7. Cambridge: Cambridge University of Time and Tense
Subjects of Experience ("Tense and Persistence ', in R. Le Poidevin (ed. ), Questions, 1998). 45 (1995), 41-59. (
Oxford: Clarendon
 Press
' The
 Truth
 about
 Counterfactuals', Philosophical
 Quarterly
'
Vague
 Identity and
 Quantum
 Indeterminacy', Analysis 54 ( 1994), 110-14.
'
What is a Criterion of Identity? ', Philosophical
 Quarterly 39 ( 1989), 1-21.
The Future: An Essay on God, Temporality and Truth (Oxford:
Lucas, J. R. ,. \nMacBeath, M. , 'Time's Square', in R. Le Poidevin and M. MacBeath (eds. ), The
Philosophy of Time (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
'Who was Dr Who's Father? ', Synthese 51 (1982), 397-430.
McCall, S. , A Model of the Universe: Space-Time, Probability, and Decision (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1994).
McGinn, C. , 'Modal Reality', in R. Healey (ed. ), Reduction, Time and Reality
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981).
'On the Necessity of Origin', Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 127-34.
Mach, E. , The Science of Mechanics (La Salle, Ill. : Open Court, 1960).
Mackie, J. L. , The Cement of the Universe: A Study of Causation (Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1974).
McTaggart, J. M. E. , The Nature of Existence, vol. 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1927).
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990).
Marcus, R. B. , Modalities: Philosophical Essays (New York: Oxford University Press,
1993).
Maddy, P. , Realism in Mathematics
Mellor, D. H. , The Facts of Causation (London: Routledge, 1995).
Real Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1981).
Real Time II (London: Routledge, 1998).
and Oliver, A. (eds. ), Properties (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997).
Merricks, T. , 'Endurance and Indiscernibility', Journal of Philosophy 91 (1994),
165-84.
- 'A New Objection to A Priori Arguments for Dualism', American
Philosophical Quarterly 31 (1994), 80-5.
- Objects and Persons (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001).
'On the Incompatibility of Enduring and Perduring Entities', Mind 104
(1995), 523-31.
Minkowski, H. , 'Space and Time', in H. A. Lorentz, A. Einstein, H. Minkowski, and
H. Weyl, The Principle of Relativity (New York: Dover, 1952).
Neale, S. , 'The Philosophical Significance of Gödel's Slingshot', Mind 104 (1995),
761-825.
Nerlich, G. , The Shape of Space, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1994).
Newton, I. , Opticks (New York: Dover, 1952).
The Principia: Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, trans. I. B.
Cohen and A. Whitman (Berkeley and Los Angeles, Calif. : University of
California Press, 1999).
Newton-Smith, W. H. , The Structure of Time (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1980).
Noonan, H. W. , 'Constitution is Identity', Mind 102 (1993), 133-46.
'Indeterminate Identity, Contingent Identity and Abelardian Predicates',
Philosophical Quarterly 41 (1991), 183-93.
392 BIBLIOGRaphy\nBIBLIOGRAPHY 393
North, J. D. , The Measure of the Universe: A History of Modern Cosmology (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1965).
Oaklander, L. N. , and Smith, Q. (eds. ), The New Theory of Time (New Haven,
Conn. : Yale University Press, 1994).
O'Connor, T. , Persons and Causes: The Metaphysics of Free Will (New York: Oxford
University Press, 2000).
Oderberg, D. S. , 'Coincidence Under a Sortal', Philosophical Review 105 (1996),
145-71.
Olson, E. T. , 'Material Coincidence and the Indiscernibility Problem', Philosophical
Quarterly 51 (2001), 337-55.
Parsons, T. , 'Some Problems Concerning the Logic of Grammatical ModifiersD. Davidson and G. Harman (eds. ), Semantics of Natural Language (Dordrecht:
1972).
', in
D. Reidel, 1974).
Plantinga, A. , The Nature of Necessity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, Prior, A. N. , Papers on Time and Tense (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968). Putnam, H. , Mathematics, Matter and Method: Philosophical Papers, Volume 1Press, 1975). (
Cambridge:
'
Mathematics
 Without
 Foundations', Journal of Philosophy 64 (
London: George Allen and Unwin, 1972). .
Logic (240-7. Philosophy of
'Time and Physical Geometry', Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), Quine, W. V. , 'Epistemology Naturalized', in W. V. Quine, Ontological Relativity(New York: Columbia University Press, 1969). (eds. ), Actions andEssays McLaughlinand Other'
Events
 and
 Reification', in E. LePore
 and B.
Events: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald Davidson (Oxford: Blackwell, Relativity and
1985). Quantification', in W. V. Quine, Ontological'
Existence
 and: Columbia
 University
 Press, 1969).
Mass. : Harvard
Other Essays (New YorkFrom a Logical Point of View, 2nd edn. (Cambridge, Logical Point
'
Identity,
 of
Mass. : Harvard 2 (1948), 21-38.
University Press, 1961). Ostension, and Hypostasis', in W. V. Quine, From aUniversity Press, 1961).
View, 2nd edn. (Cambridge,
-
 Ontological
 Relativity
 and
 Other
 Essays ( New York:
 Columbia University
Press, 1969). - 'On What There Is', Review of MetaphysicsPhilosophy of Logic (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970).
'
Speaking
 of
 Objects',
 in W. V. Quine,
 Ontological
 Relativity and Other Essays
Columbia University Press, 1969).
(
New
 York:
and
 Things (
Cambridge,
 Mass. :
 Harvard
 University, .
MassMIT Press1960). Theories Cambridge, .: ,
Word and Object (- 'Worlds Away', Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 859-64. Ramsey, F. P. , The Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays (London: 1931).
Kegan Paul, \nRamsey, F. P. , 'Universals', Mind 34 (1925), 401-17.
Redhead, M. , 'A Philosopher Looks at Quantum Field Theory', in H. R. Brown and
R. Harré (eds. ), Philosophical Foundations of Quantum Field Theory (Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1990).
Reichenbach, H. , The Philosophy of Space and Time (New York: Dover, 1957).
Robinson, D. , 'Matter, Motion and Humean Supervenience', Australasian Journal
of Philosophy 67 (1989), 394-409.
Rodriguez-Pereyra, G. , 'Resemblance Nominalism and the Imperfect Community',
), 965-82.
Rosen, G. , 'Modal Fictionalism', Mind 99 (1990), 327-54.
Rosenkrantz, G. S. , Haecceity: An Ontological Essay (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1993).
Russell, B. , The Problems of Philosophy (London: Williams and Norgate, 1912).
Ryle, G. , The Concept of Mind (London: Hutchinson, 1949).
Sainsbury, R. M. , Paradoxes, 2nd edn. (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1995).
Salmon, N. U. , 'The Logic of What Might Have Been', Philosophical Review 98
(1989), 3-34.
Reference and Essence (Oxford: Blackwell, 1982).
Savitt, S. F. (ed. ), Time's Arrow Today: Recent Physical and Philosophical Work on the
Direction of Time (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).
Schwartz, S. P. (ed. ), Naming, Necessity, and Natural Kinds (Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1977).
Seuren, P. M. (ed. ), Semantic Syntax (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974).
Shoemaker, S. , 'Causal and Metaphysical Necessity', Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
79 (1998), 59-77.
Identity, Cause and Mind: Philosophical Essays (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1984).
'Time Without Change', Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969), 363-81.
Sidelle, A. , Necessity, Essence, and Individuation: A Defense of Conventionalism
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1989).
Simons, P. , 'Particulars in Particular Clothing: Three Trope Theories of Substance',
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (1994), 553-75.
Sober, E. , Simplicity (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975).
Sorabji, R. , Time, Creation and the Continuum: Theories in Antiquity and the Early
Middle Ages (London: Duckworth, 1983).
Sosa, E. , and Tooley, M. (eds. ), Causation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993).
Stalnaker, R. C. , 'A Defense of Conditional Excluded Middle', in W. L. Harper, R. C.
Stalnaker, and G. Pearce (eds. ), Ifs (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1981).
'Possible Worlds', Noús 10 (1976), 65-75.
-'A Theory of Conditionals', in N. Rescher (ed. ), Studies in Logical
Theory, American Philosophical Quarterly Monograph 2 (Oxford: Blackwell,
1968).
394 BIBLIOGRAPHY\nStrawson, G. , The Secret Connexion: Causation, Realism, and David Hume (Oxford:
1989). Methuen, Clarendon Press,
Strawson, P. F. , Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics (London:
Holland, 1970). 1959).
Suppes, P. , A Probabilistic Theory of Causality (Amsterdam: NorthSwain, M. , Reasons and Knowledge (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1981). Taylor, R. , Action and Purpose (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966). Thomson, J. F. , 'Tasks and Super-tasks', Analysis 15 (1954), 1-13. Thomson, J. J. , Acts and Other Events (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1977). Tooley, M. , Causation: A Realist Approach (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987). Existence of States of Motion', Philosophical Topics 16' In Defense of the
(1988), 225-54. ).
Time, Tense, and Causation (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997Tye, M. , The Metaphysics of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989). Van Cleve, J. , 'Three Versions of the Bundle Theory', Philosophical Studies 47
(1985), 95-107. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989). van Fraassen, B. C. , Laws and SymmetryThe Scientific Image (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980). van Inwagen, P. , 'The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts', Pacific
Philosophical Quarterly 62 (1981), 123-37. Will (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983). ). An Essay on FreeBeings (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1990, 1993).
Material
Metaphysics (
Oxford: Oxford
 University
 Press
Ontology, Identity, and
 Modality: Essays in Metaphysics (
Cambridge:
of Philosophy
Cambridge University Press, 2001). Vlastos, G. , 'Zeno of Elea', in P. Edwards (ed. ), The Encyclopedia, 1972).
(
London: Routledge
 and Kegan
(New York: MacmillanExplanation and Understandingvon Wright, G. H. , 1952).
Paul, 1971).
Weyl, H. , Space-Time-Matter (New York: Dover, A. N. , The Concept of Nature (Cambridge: Cambridge University, (
Cambridge:
 Cambridge
Whitehead,
1920).
2nd edn.
and Russell, ,: Blackwell, 1980.
- University Press, 1927).
Wiggins, D. , Sameness and Substance (OxfordWilliams, D. C. , 'The Myth of Passage', Journal of Philosophy 48 (1951), 457-72. Wittgenstein, L. , Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, t
trans. D. F. Pears and B. F.
(
London:
 Routledge
 and
 Kegan Paul,
 1961).
of Time: Kurt Gödel and the Idealistic Tradition in
McGuinness Disappearance University Press, 1991).
Yourgrau, P. , ThePhilosophy (Cambridge: CambridgeD. W. , 'Distinct Indiscernibles and the Bundle Theory', Mind 106
Zimmerman, .
BIBLIOGRAPHY 395\nINDEX
absences, 16
absolute acceleration, 259,
261
amorphous lump
conception of the world,
absolute existence, 64
absolute identity, 17, 63, 65,
113-14
absolute motion, 19, 258-64
absolute position, 258
absolute possibility, 111
absolute space, 257-64, 265,
animate agents, 201, 202, 206
Anscombe, G. E. M. , 190n
anthropic argument, 284
appearance of change, 288-9
a priori truths, 70, 86, 87, 100
Aristotle, 1, 13-14, 216, 237
arithmetic, 217, 376, 378
Armstrong, D. M. , 133n,
1900, 349n, 353, 380,
382, 385n
271
absolute time, 268-70, 322
absolute velocity, 258, 259
abstract entities, 2, 10, 15, 20,
48, 84, 129, 131, 132, 254,
349-50, 366-85
118-20, 122, 181
arrow of time, 19, 342-4
Arrow Paradox, 289, 299,
abstract particulars, 366-7
acceleration, 260, 264
accessibility relations, 111,
accidental conjunctions,
160
300-3
artefacts, 24-5, 34, 67, 112, 221
A series, 307-10
accidental properties, 17,
96-7, 113
A-series adverbs, 315-16
A-series expressions, 308-20
A-series positions, 310
A theorists, 313, 314, 316-18,
319, 320, 321, 323, 324, 325,
328
Achilles Paradox, 289, asymmetry of causation, 161,
Bennett, J. , 138n, 148n, 156n
Berkeley, G. , 206, 257, 292
Big Bang, 327-8, 343
Binkley, R. , 195n, 224n
Black, M. , 306n, 361n
bodies, 93-5
Boolos, G. , 377n
Boswell, J. , 292
boundaries, 37, 52, 254
Brand, M. , 195n, 229n
Broad, C. D. , 324n, 328n
Brody, B. A. , 96n
Bronaugh, R. , 195n, 224n
Brouwerian system, 117-18,
176, 329-31, 344
atomism, 235-6
299-300
action at a distance, 369
actions, 18, 198-9, 219, 221-4
action sentences, 217-19
acts of will, 204
actualism, 18, 43, 132-3
actuality, 130-1, 132
actual overdetermination,
atoms, 31, 34, 60
178-80
Barrow, J. D. , 284n
basic actions, 198-201, 203,
204-5
297, 299, 303-4
beliefs, 203-4
Benacerraf, P. , 372n, 375n,
376n
axiom of extensionality, 377
Ayers, M. R. , 206n, 257n
66
Brown, H. R. , 235n
B series, 307-10
B-series expressions,
120
308-10, 312, 320
Bach, K. , 223n
background conditions,
actual world, 43, 83, 129, 131,
166-7
backtracking
adverbs, 47, 217-19
affecting the past, 88, 334-5
agent causation, 18, 156,
B theorists, 313, 319-20, 323,
325
counterfactuals, 148-9,
176-7, 178
bundle theory, 352, 360-1
Bunzl, M. , 18on
Burke, M. B. , 61n, 68n, 74n
Burkhardt, H. , 17n132
195-213, 223, 227, 230, 242
agents, 18, 156, 195-6, 206,
210-211, 217, 225
Alexander, P. , 275n
alien properties, 132-3
Alvarez, M. , 223n
backward causation, 19, 162,
175, 176-7, 205-6, 330-1,
332, 334-5, 338-40, 344
Bacon, J. , 38n
Bambrough, R. , 212n
Barcan-Kripke proof, 85-7
bare numerical differences,
basic particulars, 244
beginning of time, 327-8
beginning to exist, 34, 59
beginning to move, 291-2,
Campbell, K. , 38n, 361n,
364n, 367n
Cartesian dualism, 191
Cartesian egos, 245, 349, 368
categorial distinctions, 70
category mistake, 51, 196, 234,
causal chains, 183, 184-5, 330106
237\ncausal conjunctions, 160
causal explanation, 2, 58, 156,
171-2, 200, 201, 203, 205,
239, 339-40, 344
18, 157,
causal knowledge, 207-8
causal loops, 339-40, 341, 344
causal necessitation, 157, 165
causal overdetermination,
178-86
coincidences, 160, 207
coinciding entities, 29, 56, 61,
67, 68-76, 222, 225, 273,
337-8
causal powers, 195, 201, 211,
368-9
collections, 39, 40
co-location, 382-3
common causes, 175, 177, 207
companionship problem,
359, 362
causal precedence, 157, 158,
159, 162, 175
causal relata, 155-6, 171, 242
causal relations, 18, 155, 368
causal sequences, 207-8
causal statements, 155-6,
168-9, 189
causal sufficiency, 202
causal theory of knowledge,
372-3
causation, 2, 18, 131, 138-9,
155-73, 238, 325-4
causation at a temporal
distance, 248-9
382-5
causative action verbs,
198-201, 212
complete causes, 165, 166
composite objects, 17, 24, 28,
30, 33-4, 37, 52, 59, 60, 67,
68, 73
composition, 52, 53, 236,
254-5, 271
compound events, 180
compresence, 367
concepts, 12-13, 14, 157
conceptual priority, 207-9
concrete entities, 10, 15, 20,
81, 129, 130, 131, 350, 366-7,
372, 373, 376-7, 378, 379,
concreteness, 366-7
concrete particulars, 362,
363, 364, 366-7, 385
conditional excluded
ceasing to exist, 59, 68, 75
centres of mass, 368-9
centripetal force, 260
certainty, 9, 10
chance, 162, 165, 202-3,
204-5, 249
Chandler, H. S. , 92n, 110n
change of appearance, 288
change of composition,
congruence, 273conjunctive properties, 351
consequences, 224constant conjunctions, 158,
middle, 141, 153
conditional probability, 163-4
24-5, 55change of distance, 242-4change over time, 17, 23-4,
190, 380
constitution, 17, 73, 74, 75context-dependency, 18, 152, 153, 189, 59
79, 109, 288-9
changes, 165-6, 237-44changing the past, 87-8, 335
Chellas, B. F. , 115nChisholm, R. M. , 150, 26n, 225-8
150-1,
contingent identity, 84contingency, 10, 83, 182, 371continuants, 232
contraposability (CONTR),
142-3contributory causes, 165-7,
B. , 258n
circularity, 187-8, 189,
101n, 195n
circular time, 326-7classes, 355, 377closeness between possibleworlds, 81, 140-1, 144, 145-54, 188-9
Cohen, I. , 153
205
conventionalism, 96, 113-14cosmic accidents, 160, 380-1counterfactual analyses of
causation, 143, 145, 154,
160-2, 163, 174-91
counterfactual dependency,
183, 184-5
counterfactual possibility,
79-80, 96, 113, 116, 137
counterparts, 130-1
Craig, W. L. , 328n
Cresswell, M. J. , 115n
criteria of abstractness,
368-9
criteria of identity, 19, 175,
214, 220-1, 224-8, 231, 377
curvature of space, 255, 267,
326-7, 341
Danto, A. C. , 198n
Davidson, D. , 84n, 156n,
1950, 2030, 204n, 217, 218n,
2190, 224, 225n, 244n,
385n
decisions, 204
de dicto necessity, 116
definite descriptions, 88-9, , 173
degree of resemblance, 357, , 364
362Democritus, 60
de re necessity, 116
desires, 203-4,
counterfactual conditionals,
18, 137-54, 155, 160, 161,
183-4, 186-9, 380-1
determinism, 19, 56, 147-8202, 295-6, 323
dimensions, 50, 80-1, 253-5,
283-4, 311, 312, 321, 325,
326
directional tendencies,
302-4
direction of causation, 19,
177, 330-1
direction of time, 19, 177, , 332, 342-4
325-31
discrete
 space- time, 304-6
dispositional properties, 69,
70, 71, 72, 302-3
disposition statements, 154
distance, 380-1
Divers, J. , 126n
Donnellan, K. , 173n
Dowe, P. , 190n
Dudman, V. H. , 138n
Dummett, M. A. E. , 13n,
3160, 3300, 3370
dynamic conception of time,
322-4
INDEX 397\nfacts, 18, 20, 128, 156, 167-8, Earman, J. , 267n, 282n
Einstein, A. , 19, 49, 256,
262-3, 266-70, 332-4,
341-2, 380
electrical charge, 287
elementary particles, 60, 67
emergence, 237
empirical evidence, 10, 11
empirical knowledge, 10
empirical science, V, 2, 234,
266, 271, 332
empiricism, 211
empty set, 220, 226-7, 375
empty space, 233, 256, 267
end of time, 327-8
endurance, 49, 58
energy, 190, 236, 256
entities, 15, 16, 221, 228
entropy, 341-4
equivalence relations, 110
essentialism, 96-114
essential properties, 17, 53,
104-6
frames of reference, 233, 258268-9, 322, 325, 332-3, 336341
free will, 201-5, 323
96-101, 102, 113, 182
Euclid, 255
379, 384-5
fail-safe cases, 179-80
family resemblances, 212-13
fictional objects, 373
Field, H. H. , 374n
fields, 236
fission, 35-6, 37, 55, 56, 57
flashes, 229-30, 240-1
Forbes, G. , 104n, 133n
forces, 236, 243, 260, 380-1
four-dimensionality, 65, 66,
233-4, 253, 268, 337
four-worlds argument,
fourth dimension, 255, 277,
280, 281, 283
freezes, 247-9
Frege, G. , 124
functions, 374
Euclidian geometry, 117,
326-7
fusion, 35, 56, 57
INDEX
Euclidian space, 267
Evans, G. , 36n
fuzziness, 37
event causation, 18, 156,
157-67, 174-91, 195-213,
225, 226, 242
event-ontology, 233-7
event types, 158-60
events, 15, 18, 51, 156, 165-7,
180-2, 196, 197, 214-31,
232-49, 311, 329-31
evolution, 5, 6, 208
exemplification, 381, 384
existence, 64, 214-19
existence in space, 370
existence in time, 47, 48,
galaxies, 258
Gale, R. M. , 294n, 320n
Gallois, A. , 35n
Gardner, M. , 287n
Geach, P. T. , 37n, 63n
general terms, 354-5
general theory of relativity,
370-2
50, 256, 266-7, 341-2
Gibbard, A. , 92n
God, 83, 255, 257, 370
Gödel, K. , 341n
Goodman, N. , 359, 360n
Goosens, W. K. , 185n
Grandfather Paradox,
338-40
expansion of the universe,
258
experimentation, 208
explanation, 55, 274, 344
extensional relations, 168,
handedness, 274-9, 285-7
Harman, G. , 84n, 219n
Harper, W. L. , 141n
Harré, R. , 235n
Haslanger, S. , 47n
Hausman, D. M. , 165n, 177n
Healey, R. , 133n
Heil, J. , vi
Heller, M. , 58n
Hellman, G. , 376n
hierarchies of composition,
Hornsby, J. , 210n
Horwich, P. , 341n
Hume, D. , 18, 158, 182
'Humean' analysis of
causation, 158-60, 190
Humphreys, P. , 162n
Hughes, C. , 72n
Hughes, G. E. , 115n
Hyman, J. , 223n
identity, 17, 23, 36-7, 62-4, 73,
74, 84-9, 91, 92-5, 99-101,
123-4, 220, 225-6, 336-8
identity of indiscernibles, 62,
106, 361
identity propositions, 84, 85,
86, 88, 89
gravitation, 55, 147, 187, 266,
identical twins, 91-2
268, 284, 374, 380-1
171-2
gravitational mass, 267
Great Fact, 385
Grünbaum, A. , 306n
external time, 335-6
imagination, 87-8, 93
immaterial souls, 285, 349, 368
immaterial substances, 257
impenetrability, 273, 274
imperfect community
fact causation, 156, 157,
167-73, 174
haecceities, 102-3
Hale, B. , 369n
Hales, S. D. , 17n, 360n, 367n
half-distances, 289-92, 293
24, 52, 60
higher-order universals, 351,
380-1
historical properties, 61-2,
63, 66, 69, 70, 71, 97, 105
Hobbes, T. , 25
Hoffman, J. , 15n, 254n
151-2
Hoover argument, 143-4,
identity conditions, 94, 220,
228, 229
problem, 360, 362
incongruent counterparts,
137-8, 142
19, 273-82, 285-7, 327
indeterminacy, 36-7, 38
indexicality, 130, 132, 319-20
indicative conditionals, ,,
398\nINDEX | 399
indicative mood, 137
indispensability argument,
indistinguishability, 69, 71
individual essences, 101-4,
373-4
105, 112, 124, 181-2, 330
individuation, 221-2
inertial mass, 264
infinite divisibility, 293, 294,
infinite duration, 327-8
infinite series, 290, 292,
300
293-300, 301
infinite regress, 314-18
informational loops, 340,
341-2
instantaneous velocity, 299,
300-4
instantiation, 350-2
intentional actions, 195,
206-7
intermittent existence, 33-4
internal relations, 363-5
intrinsic change, 17, 238-9,
242, 243
intrinsic properties, 44, 45,
47, 102-3, 105, 243, 264,
275, 276
intrinsic qualities, 17, 46
inverted Racecourse
Paradox, 291-2, 297-9,
303-4
involvement, 197, 199-200,
203
language, 13, 114
late pre-emption, 185
Laurence, S. , 17n, 360n,
Jackson, F. , 14n, 138n, 14on,
life-forms, 284
light cones, 333
Loeb, L. E. , 178n
logic, 48, 218-19logical laws, 83Lombard, L. B. , 217nLorentz, H. A. , 263n, 268nLoux, M. J. , 146, 100n, loin, 364n
148n, 355n
Johnson, S. , 292-3
Johnson, W. E. , 232n
Jubien, M. , 14n
linear time, 326-7
living organisms, 24-5, 34237, 285
133n, 2150,
Lucas, J. R. , 322n273n
Leibniz, G. W. , 23, 62, 272
Leibniz's Law, 23, 36, 41, 62,
Lucas, P. G. ,
lumps of matter, 60-73, 221,
Kant, I. , 7-9, 13, 14, 19, 272-6, , 340n, 283
279, 28038n 367n, 261-4
MacBeath, M. , 321n, 330n
336nMacdonald, C. , 17n, 36on,
R. , Mach, E.
Mackie, J. L. , 167n, 177n,
killing and causing death,
223
Keefe,
Kerferd, G. B. , 273n
212,
Kim, J. , 17n, 229nkinds, 62, 70Kornblith, H. , 5nKripke, S. A. , 84, 89n, 103n, 104n, 124n
law of excluded middle, 83 368, 371, 373-756146, mathematical truths, 83, laws of nature, 2, ,
147-8, 162, 187, 190, 266,
295, 353, 379-82
48, 83, 84,
217,
matter, 266-7, 273
matters of fact, 146, 147-8
maximality, 82, 128, 356
64, 65, 66, 85
McCall, S. , 323n
McLaughlin, B. , 2251
50n, 127n, 130n, 133n, 140n
148n, 183, 185n, 336n
Lewis modal systems, 117-20
60, 67, 221,
locations, 81, 225, 382-4
26n
331n
Maddy, P. , 377n
Marcus, R. B. , 84
Marras, A. , 195n, 224n
mass, 260, 264, 266-7, 380-1
367n
laws of thermodynamics,
341-4
Le Poidevin, R. , 318n, 321n,
153, 168
material conditionals, 152,
material objects, 264-6
mathematical objects, 366,
370-2, 374-7, 378
mathematics, 9, 10,
366, 373-4
33on, 336n
McGinn, C. , 1031, 133n
McGuinness, B. F. , 277n
Lepore, E. , 225n McTaggart, J. M. E. , 19, Leslie, J. , 256n 307-8, 310-19
Lewis, D. K. , 38n, 4in, 49n, , meaning, 13means-end structure,
198-201
measurements, 234-5, 258,
269, 302
light rays, 267, 333
limits, 254
Mellor, D. H. , 156n, 162n,
234n, 239n, 313n, 354n,
355n, 363n
lines, 254,
mental events, 203-4
mere Cambridge change, 238mereological essentialism,
Merricks, T. , vi, 43n, 58n, , 93n
metaphysical knowledge, 5,
7, 9, 10
metaphysics, V, 1-16, 57, 241'might' counterfactuals, 142,
mind-body problem, 17,
153
Minkowski, H. , 2638, 268n
modal axioms, 117-18
modal deflationism, 121-3,
92-5, 263
124-6
modal
 fictionalism, 126-8
modality, 17, 91, 138
modal logic, no, 15-20, 121
modal operators, 115-16, 221
modal paradoxes, 18
modal properties, 61-2, 63, , 127, 128
65, 66, 69, 70, 71, 79, 131
modal realism, 127, 128-33
modal truths, 378\n400 INDEX
modes, 236
Moebius bands, 278-9
moments, 314, 315
312
motion, 71, 242-4, 257-64,
288-306, 307
non-reductive pluralism,
233, 244-5
non-substances, 15
non-temporal change, 311,
mountains, 36-7
movements, 210, 224
Moving Blocks Paradox, 289,
Noonan, H. W. , 66n
294, 304-6
multiple personality
syndrome, 222
Munitz, M. K. , 84n
particles of matter, 61, 67, 68,
70, 71, 72, 236, 241
North, J. D. , 256n
noumena, 272
now, 130, 132
numbers, 84, 217, 271, 349,
350, 366, 368, 370-1, 374,
375-6, 377
naturalism, 7, 201
numerical identity, 23-4
naturalized epistemology,
5-7, 10
Neale, S. , 169n
necessary beings, 83-4, 90,
Oaklander, L. N. , 324n
objectivity of causation, 186,
189
100, 128, 129, 131
truths, 82-4, 85, 86, necessary
87, 90, 100, 117-18, 153, 182,
371-2
necessitation relations, 190,
381
necessity, 17, 86, 115-16
necessity of constitution, 18,
103, 106-8, 112, 119-20
necessity of diversity, 91-2,
95, 119-20
objects, 229
objects of thought, 373
observations, 234-5
Occam's razor, 241-2
occurrents, 232
occurring, 215, 223
O'Connor, T. , 195n, 203n
Oderberg, D. S. , 72n
Oliver, A. , 354n, 355n, 363n
Olson, E. T. , 61n
necessity of identity, 84-90,
92-5, 99-100, 119-20
necessity of origin, 18, 103-6,
107, 112
necessity of self-identity, 85,
87
negative events, 238
neural events, 199, 205,
parts, 17, 24, 25-7, 30-3, 34,
35, 38-40, 50, 53, 59, 60, 73,
74, 75, 76, 107-10
parts of events, 161-2, 174-5
parts of space, 253-5, 258
passage of time, 239-40, 246,
310, 311, 313-18, 319, 320-4,
328-9
Pearce, G. , 141n
Pears, D. F. , 277n
perceptible properties, 69, 71
perception, 372, 373
perdurance, 49, 54, 55, 57, 58
performance, 223
persistence, 17, 49, 52, 54, 58
persistence conditions, 39,
61, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74
ontological categories, v, ,
13-16, 57, 131, 196, 214, 215220, 221, 232, 237, 284-5,
347
ontological commitment,
215, 216-19
Nerlich, G. , 282n
ontological dependency, 216,
241, 265, 272, 367
ontological priority,
208-9, 242
209-11
Newton, I. , 19, 55, 257-64,
265, 266, 267, 268, 272, 373,
374, 380-1
personal time, 335-6
persons, 93-5, 222, 284
phenomena, 272
physicalism, 2
physical objects, 256
physics, 1-2, 6, 49, 50, 60, 67,
ontology, 13-16, 219, 269
oracles, 339
persisting objects, 50, 51, 52,
53, 55, 57, 59, 66, 67, 68, 196,
211, 214, 215, 232, 233, 234,
244, 311-12
orientation, 275-7
Newtonian physics, 257
Newton-Smith, W. H. , 327n
Nidditch, P. H. , 158n
nominalism, 352-65, 372-3,
379
non-changes, 165-6
non-composite objects, 60, 67
non-occurrences, 164, 165,
paradoxes of motion, 19,
288-306, 326
non-beings, 16
paradox of the thousand and
one cats, 37-40, 57
paradigms, 356
Parsons, T. , 219n
partial causes, 158, 165, 166
participation, 232, 237, 244-5
particularity, 228-9, 385n
particulars, 15, 20, 229, 231,
232, 347-65
233-7, 253, 256, 294
places, 81, 221, 223, 232, 245, 265
Plantinga, A. , 129n
plenum, 256-7
plural reference, 377
Plutarch, 25
point-particles, 222, 294
points, 254
positivism, 234-5
possibilism, 132
possibility, 10, 11-13, 17, 29,
34, 43, 93, 111-12, 115-16,
162, 246, 248, 280, 330, 332,
340, 343
possible situations, 33, 80-1,
87, 128, 248
possible truths, 83-4, 117-18,
153
possible worlds, 18, 43, 81-2,
83-4, 87, 88, 89-91, 93,
96-113, 115-33, 139-41,
181-2, 187, 284-5, 376, 378,
384239\nINDEX 401
predicates, 353-5pre-emption, 178-86presentism, 42-3, 46, 49, 132,
recurrence, 221-2
Redhead, M. , 235n
reductio ad absurdum
Prior, A. N. , 43n
privations, 16
322
probabilistic causation, 18,
157, 162-5, 202
163, 202probability,
problem of Tibbles and Tib,
74-6
relations, 15, 23, 44-5, 237,
argument, 291
reference, 214-15, 377
regions, 234, 254, 348
Reichenbach, H. , 283n
Reinhardt, L. , 38n
processes, 51, 52, 234
proper names, 88-9
properties, 15, 61, 100, 197,
229, 230, 237, 286, 348,
353-5, 361, 362, 363, 366-7
property exemplifications,
relational change, 238, 242
relationalism, 264-7, 271-87
relational properties, 44, 46,
propositions, 82, 83, 88, 90,
110, 122, 128, 132, 145, 146,
150, 349, 350, 384
363-5, 380-1
47, 102, 105
relative existence, 64
relative identity, 17, 63, 64,
228-31, 232
66, 68
psychophysical identity
theory, 204
relative motion, 258-64
relative possibility, 112
relativism, 4-5, 13
relativity of simultaneity, 19,
Putnam, H. , 322n, 372n, 373n,
3750, 376n
qualitative change, 41-2,
45, 46, 47, 48, 54, 55, 57, 59
qualitative identity, 24
qualities, 41-2, 59
quantifiers, 116, 121, 216-19
quantum physics, 68, 162,
235-7, 241
reality of the future, 322-4
reality of time, 307-8,
scientific explanation, 248
scientific knowledge, 6
scientific theories, 55, 57, 332,
373-4
Selby-Bigge, L. A. , 158n
separation, 268, 269
sets, 220, 226-7, 355, 366,
375-6, 377, P. M. , 212n
Seuren
ship of Theseus, 17, 25-33, 40,
56, 57, 107
repeatability, 229
268-71
Rescher, N. , 140n, 217n, 225n,
2440
resemblance, 356, 362-5
resemblance classes, 355-60, 44,
resemblance nominalism,
Quine, W. V. , 5n, 58, 109,
122n, 216-19, 220, 2250,
234n, 354n, 373n
361-2
Racecourse Paradox,
355-60, 362-5, 379
rest mass, 264
rigid designators, 89-90
Robinson, D. , 243n
Rodriguez-Pereyra, G. , 360n
Rosen, G. , 126n
Rosenkrantz, G. S. , 15n, 102n,
289-300
Ramsey, F. P. , 354n
rational agents, 196, 206-8
rational beings, 11
rational choice, 204
rational explanation, 2, 203,
rotating bucket, 259-62
R-shapes, 276-8
Russell, B. , 127, 172, 363n
Russell's paradox, 364
Russell's Theory of
254n
Descriptions, 170, 172, 173
Ryle, G. , 196n
realism, 352-5, 379-82
reality and appearance,
205 Sainsbury, R. M. , 306n
Salmon, N. U. , 36n, 92n,
288-9
312-13reasons for action, 204
104n, 110n, 133n
Savitt, S. F. , 344n
scattered objects, 349, 382-4
Schilpp, P. A. , 34in
Schwartz, S. P. , 84n, 1730
Shoemaker, S. , 182n, 247-9
Sidelle, A. , 114n
similarity, 64, 81, 109, 145-6,
147-8, 150, 151, 187, 188-9
Simons, P. , 367n
simple objects, 67
simplicity, 247-8, 269
simultaneity, 268-70, 322,
325, 330, 331
simultaneous causation, 175
Slingshot Argument, 169-73,
385
Smith, B. , 17n
Smith, P. , 38n
Smith, Q. , 324n, 328n
Sober, E. , 269n
solitary hand, 274-6, 279,
280
Sorabji, R. , 289n
sortals, 62, 63, 64, 66
Sosa, E. , 17n, 156n, 190n, 2, 16, 19, 48, 50, 80, 81,
space232-3, 245, 246, 253-70,
348-50, 368-70
space-time, 49, 130, 233-4,
236, 253, 267, 304-6,
space-time coordinates, 233
space-time diagrams, 253,
333-4
341
spatial directions, 326
spatial parts, 45, 52, 53, 54
spatial relations, 264-6
special theory of relativity,
268-70, 322, 325, 332-4
336, 341
speed of light, 263, 268-9,
341333-4, 338,
236, 241, 257
203-4
Spinoza,
spontaneous actions, 201, , 318\n402 INDEX
Stalnaker, R. C. , 133n, 140n,
141n, 143
states of affairs, 20, 128-9,
156, 165, 166, 167, 379,
384-5
tenseless facts, 320
tenseless verbs, 309, 312, 370
static conception of time,
statues, 17, 60-73
St Paul, 257
truth, 3, 4-5, 9, 323, 350, 374
truth conditions, 139-40, 157,
tensed facts, 319-20
322
158, 187
tensed verbs, 309, 371-2
Strawson, G. , 158n
strict conditionals, 153
subatomic particles, 24, 52,
287
two globes, 262-3
19, 42, 48, 132, 139, 309, Tye, M. , 241tenses,
315-16
theoretical entities, 55, 57, 67
thisnesses, 102
Strawson, P. F. , 14n, 229n, 240
strengthening (STREN), 143,
Thomson, J. F. , 294n
Thomson, J. J. , 175n, 212n
Thomson's lamp paradox,
294-6
153
subjectless events, 229-30,
240-1
subjunctive conditionals,
137-8
subjunctive mood, 137
substance-ontology, 233,
235-7, 245
thought, 7-9, 11, 13, 114
thought experiments, 247,
248, 259-64, 332
thing-ontology, 233, 235-7,
245
uninstantiated universals,
351, 382
unity of space, 255, 271,
universals, 15, 20, 190, 347-65,
366, 379-84
universe, 230, 258
things, 15, 221, 232-3
time, 2, 16, 17, 19, 48, 49, 50,
80, 91, 232-3, 253, 268-70,
283, 307-24, 325-44,
368-72
substances, 15, 59, 195, 211,
214, 215, 216, 232, 244, 271,
282, 284
substantial change, 17, 59, 60
substantial individuals, 59,
60, 61, 62, 67
substantivalism, 271-87
substitutional
time travel, 19, 87-8, 332-42,
344, 349
quantification, 217
sufficient causes, 157, 165, 166 Tooley, M. , 156n, 190n, 243n,
269n, 323n, 324n, 331nsupertasks, 293-6, 298-9
supervenience, 70
Suppes, P. , 162n
topology, 278-84
transcendental idealism,
surfaces, 254
Swain, M. , 178n, 183n
system T, 117-18
Taylor, R. , 1950
temporal asymmetry, 325-31,
342-4
temporal order of events,
329-31
temporal particulars, 229,
231, 232
temporal parts, 17, 45-6, 49,
50, 51, 53, 54, 56, 57, 58, 65,
66, 68, 75, 244, 337-8, 349
temporal possibility, 79-80,
96, 113, 116
272-3, 282, 283, 287
transference analyses of
causation, 190-1
transitive relations, 111, 157
transitivity (TRANS), 142-5,
151-3, 183-4
transitivity of causation, 157,
184-5
transitivity of identity, 26,
27-8, 35, 63, 90-1, 104, 108,
110
vacuum, 256
time-dilation, 268-9, 332-3
times, 42, 44, 47, 81, 221, 223,
229, 232, 245, 311
time without change, 245-9,
307
Tippler, F. J. , 284n
vague identity, 36-7, 39
vagueness, 17, 38-40, 57
Van Cleve, J. , 360n
van Fraassen, B. C. , 374n,
381n
token-reflexive expressions,
319-20
van Inwagen, P. , 14n, 41n,
67n, 74N, 202n
velocity, 243-4, 258, 260,
300-4
verificationism, 246-7, 259
victory of particularity, 385n
Vlastos, G. , 289n
variables, 216-19, 226
vectors, 243-4, 260
void, 256-7
volitions, 204
volumes, 254
transworld identity, 18, 90-1,
100-4, 112-13, 123-4,
130-1, 181
von Wright, G. H. , 205n,
207n
Walford, D. E. , 273n
Walton, D. , 195n, 229n
waves, 235
tropes, 20, 361-3, 366-7, 369,
379, 382-4
Weyl, H. , 263n, 283n
Whitehead, A. N. , 172n, 234n
Whitman, A. , 258n
wholes, 255
Wiggins, D. , 62n, 73n
Williams, D. C. , 320n
Wittgenstein, L. , 277n
world-line, 234
',
would' counterfactuals142-4, 153
Yourgrau, P. , 341n
Zeno of Elea, 19, 289
Zimmerman, D. W. , 361n