LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY
PLUTARCH’S LIVES §
Ι
THESEUS AND ROMULUS
LYCURGUS AND NUMA
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA
a eR -
: : a ¥
eeTeaΌΠeTerΝ e, r Ρe s e
Translated by
BERNADOTTE PERRIN |
Complete list of Loeb titles can be
found at the end of each volume
pe
Pewee (iitarceus, © A.D. 45-
120, was born at Chaeronea in Boeotia
in central Greece, studied philosophy at
Athens, and, after coming to Rome as a
teacher in philosophy, was given consular
rank by the emperor Trajan and a procura-
torship in Greece by Hadrian. Married
and father of one daughter and four sons,
he appears as a man of kindly character
and independent thought. Studious and
learned, he wrote on many subjects. Most
popular have always been the 46 Parallel
Lives, biographies planned to be ethical
examples in pairs (in each pair one Greek
person and one similar Roman), though
the last four lives are single. All are in-
valuable sources of our knowledge of the
lives and characters of Greek and Roman
statesmen or soldiers or orators. Plutarch’s
many other varied extant works, about
60 in number, are known as ‘Moral
Essays’ or “Moral Works’. They are of
high literary value, besides being of great
use to people interested in philosophy,
ethics and religion.
vo TTT
NY PUBLIC LIBRARY THE BRANCH LIBRARIES
oe. Og he
THE Ἢ0 0M
Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2007 with funding from
Microsoft Corporation
https://archive.org/details/plutarchslives0O1 plut2
THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY
FOUNDED BY JAMES LOEB, LL.D,
EDITED BY
E. H. WARMINGTON, .aA., F.R.HIST.SOC.
FORMER EDITORS
+T. KE. PAGE, ¢.H., LITT.p. +E. CAPPS, PH.D., LL.D.
+ W. Η. Ὁ. ROUSE, .itT.p. LL. A. POSD, ΤΠ Ὁ:
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
I
46
oe
VAARET I roe ine
Gabi AMOS AE τὰ ἀπανσδς
¥a Gara
O02 TRIES AO OTM αἱα ς
2HOTIA AIMACT
Oat ταί πάλ Cf MEPTEE ὦπα p x ΜῈ
THe TOD .A ot 2m ΟΠΟΣ oe Wt
BAVIT SHORATUATI
i
=
PEUTARCH’s
my ks
WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
BERNADOTTE PERRIN
IN ELEVEN VOLUMES
I
THESEUS AND ROMULUS
LYCURGUS AND NUMA
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON
WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
MOMLXVII
First Printed 1914
Reprinted 1928, 1948, 1959, 1967
Printed in Great Britain
CONTENTS
PAQEK
PREEATORY NOME. cs ook 8 Bes GG ce! ee 5s ONL
ORDER OF THE PARALLEL LIVES IN THIS EDITION. . ix
TRADITIONAL ORDER OF THE PARALLEL LIVES. «. « ὁ x
INERODUCTIOND© tr) se fs) se sk eo ee es 8s Ὁ xi
THIS HU Stveseen cuit eeves Wel orneh te « 1G. Vetus Ga seater as) τ 6 ]
POMS Re ie ὉΠ. τῆι τος ἢ Gl Set os een 89
COMPARISON OF THESEUS AND ROMULUS ........ 188
TOR UCU eae eS oh eee oe ee gee Boe
MEAS eo Besos Beau sO ohne REO Cee τὰν AUD
COMPARISON OF LYCURGUS AND NUMA........ 382
SGEGNaiews 2167S «(the ovocdiernk ὟΝ se cledee
Pepiacotsto., nave. heey. accesswle.io tha .sapeerbol
COMPARISON OF SOLON AND PUBLICOLA ....... O64
DICTIONARY OF PROPER NAMES ..e--2e-+--o Off
ere ye “CAPR? anaes ree ca:
r
+}
ee ad
ae
REτGE ὺE REER
PREFATORY NOTE
AGREEMENT between the Sintenis (Teubner, 1873-
1875) and Bekker (Tauchnitz, 1855-1857) texts of
the Parallel Lives has been taken as the basis for the
text of the present edition. Any preference of one
to the other where they differ, and any departure
from both, have been indicated. All the Lives
included in this volume are contained in the Codex
Seitenstettensis (S), and occasional use has been
made of the collations of that MS. by W. Meyer
(Leipsic, 1890). Since no collations of Codex
Parisinus 1676 (F*), the excellent MS. so closely
related to S, have been accessible to the Editor, its
readings could only be inferred here and there from
the text and notes of Stephanus. No attempt has
been made, naturally, to furnish either a diplomatic
text or a full critical apparatus. The reading which
follows the colon in the critical notes is that of the
Teubner Sintenis, and also, unless otherwise stated
in the note, of the Tauchnitz Bekker.
vil
PREFATORY NOTE
The translation must speak for itself. Its author,
like Plutarch himself, prays that he may find kindly
readers, and feels reasonably confident of doing so
among those who are able to appreciate the pecu-
liarities of Plutarch’s Greek. All the standard trans-
lations of the Lives have, of course, been carefully
compared and utilized.
B. PERRIN.
New Haven, Connecticut, U.S.A.
February, 1914.
Viil
ORDER OF THE PARALLEL LIVES IN THIS
EDITION IN THE CHRONOLOGICAL SEQUENCE
OF THE GREEK LIVES.
VouvuMeE I. Voutume VI.
(1) Theseus and Romulus. (22) Dion and Brutus.
Comparison. Comparison.
(2) Lycurgus and Numa. (7) Timoleon and Aemilius
Comparison. Paulus.
(3) Solon and Publicola. Comparison.
Comparison. Votume VII.
(20) Demosthenes and Cicero.
VouumeE II. Comparison.
(4) Themistocles and (17) Alexander and Julius
Camillus. Caesar.
(9) Aristides and Cato the VotumeE VIII.
Elder.
(15) Sertorius and Kumenes.
Comparison.
Comparison.
(13) Cimon and Lucullus.
(18) Phocion and Cato the
Comparison.
Younger.
Vouume III.
VouumE IX.
(5) Pericles and Fabius Max- (21) Demetrius and Antony.
imus. Comparison.
Comparison.
(11) Pyrrhus and Caius Marius.
(14) Nicias and Crassus.
Comparison.
VouuME X.
Votume IV. (19) Agis and Cleomenes, and
(6) Alcibiades and Coriola- Tiberius and Caius
nus. Gracchus.
Comparison.
Comparison.
(12) Lysander and Sulla. (10) Philopoemen and Flam-
Comparison. ininus.
Comparison.
VoLuME V. Vouume ΧΙ.
(16) Agesilaus and Pompey. (23) Aratus.
Comparison. (24) Artaxerxes.
(8) Pelopidas and Marcellus, (25) Galba.
Comparison. (26) Otho.
THE TRADITIONAL ORDER OF THE
PARALLEL LIVES.
(1) Theseus and Romulus,
(2) Lycurgus and Numa.
(3) Solon and Publicola.
(4) Themistocles and Camillus,
(5) Pericles and Fabius Maximus.
(6) Alcibiades and Coriolanus.
(7) Timoleon and Aemilius Paulus.
(8) Pelopidas and Marcellus.
(9) Aristides and Cato the Elder.
(10) Philopoemen and Flamininus.
(11) Pyrrhus and Caius Marius.
(12) Lysander and Sulla.
(13) Cimon and Lucullus,
(14) Nicias and Crassus.
(15) Sertorius and Eumenes.
(16) Agesilaus and Pompey.
(17) Alexander and Julius Caesar.
(18) Phocion and Cato the Younger.
(19) Agis and Cleomenes, and Tiberius and Caius
Gracchus.
(20) Demosthenes and Cicero.
21) Demetrius and Antony.
(22) Dion and Brutus.
(23) nee
(24) Artaxerxes,
(25) Calba.
(26) Otho.
INTRODUCTION
Prurarcn’s Lire anp WriTINGS
PLuTarcH was born at Chaeroneia, a small-town on
the northern confines of Boeotia, about the middle
of the first century of our era, and toward the close
of the reign of the emperor Claudius. He belonged
to a family of ample means and generous culture,
and was liberally educated. He studied at Athens,
the most attractive university town in his day for
both Greeks and Romans, and was a disciple of
Ammonius of Lamptrae, a Peripatetic philosopher
deeply versed in religious lore. Returning to his
native town, he was soon called upon to represent
it as deputy to the Roman governor of the province
of Greece. That he travelled extensively over
Greece, visited Asia Minor, Egypt, and Italy, and
resided much at Rome, may be inferred from his
writings, as most that is known about him must be
inferred. At Rome, he was in charge of certain
public business, so that he had not time to learn
thoroughly the Latin language, as he himself con-
fesses in the introduction to his Demosthenes. But
Greek was the language of literary and polite
Xi
INTRODUCTION
society at Rome, and cultivated Greeks, especially
philosophers, were welcome there. As a Greek
philosopher, and a populariser of Platonism, Plutarch
read and lectured at Rome, much as he did in the
small but select circle of his intimates and friends at
home. He made and retained a large acquaintance
with the prominent Romans of his day, and was
familiar with the questions which most occupied the
minds of men at the political centre of the world,
Then, after Athenian education, generous travels,
diplomatic missions, modest literary celebrity, and
considerable residence at Rome, he seems to have
retired to his little country home, with his books,
notes, lectures, essays, and gentle philosophy, and
there, in a leisure not all too much encroached upon
by local magistracies and certain religious offices at
neighbouring Delphi, to have elaborated the sketches
of his lectures and essays, which have come down to
us under the collective name of Morals, and to have
composed the work on which his fame chiefly rests,
—the Parallel Lives of Greeks and Romans. He lived
through the reigns Nero, Domitian, and Trajan, and,
leaving the world as he did about 120 a.p., must
have rejoiced at the accession of Hadrian to the
imperial throne. His world had grown steadily
better while he lived, and was now to enjoy its
second golden age.
The Morals were composed, for the greater part,
before the Lives, and are an invaluable prelude to
and commentary on them, especially if we would
xii
INTRODUCTION
know just what manner of man the author of the
Lives was. They tell us, as the Lives do not, “ of the
points of view, moral and religious, from which he
contemplated not this man’s life or the other's, but
the whole life of men. Nor is it too much to affirm
that of the two halves of Plutarch’s writings, of
his Lives and his Morals, each constitutes a
complement of the other; the one setting forth
to us, and, so far as this was possible, from
ideal points of view, what the ancient world
had accomplished in the world of action, and the other
what, in like manner, it had aimed at and accom-
plished in the world of thought” (Trench, Plutarch,
p. 90). But even in the Lives, Plutarch is far more
moralist than historian.
Greece, after passing under Roman sway, lost
sight gradually of her great men of action, and
contented herself with the glories of her men of
thought. Here surely the dominant Romans could
not vie with her. It was to prove that the more
remote past of Greece could show its lawgivers,
commanders, statesmen, patriots, and orators, as well
as the nearer and therefore more impressive past of
Rome, that the Parallel Lives were written. With
Scipio Africanus the Elder, the greatest man of
Rome, Plutarch matched Epaminondas, the greatest
man of Greece. This pair, or “ book,’ of Lives is
unfortunately lost. With Camillus, who saved Rome
from the Gauls, he matched Themistocles, who saved
Athens from the Persians. Then followed, as nearly
xiii
INTRODUCTION
as the order can be determined—for the order of the
Lives in our collection is not the original one, the
Cimon and Lucullus, the Lycurgus and Numa, the
Demosthenes and Cicero, the Pelopidas and Marcellus,
the Lysander and Sulla, the Philopoemen and Flamininus,
the Pericles and Fabius Maximus, the Aristides and
Cato Major, and thirteen other pairs. Eighteen of
the twenty-two pairs which have come down to us,
close with a formal comparison of the two careers
and characters. This is often fanciful and forced,
abounds in contrasts rather than resemblances, and
is seldom of any special historical value, although
it often has great literary charm. There are also
four single Lives in our collection, Artaxerxes, Aratus,
Galba, and Otho, and we get traces of twelve more
that are now lost. One of the pairs is a double
one, where, to match the two Gracchi, Plutarch
selects the two reforming Spartan kings, Agis and
Cleomenes. We have in all, therefore, fifty Lives
by Plutarch.
Manuscripts, Epirions, TRANsLATIONS, Etc.
A full account of the MSS. of Plutarch must be
sought in the critical editions of the Lives by Sintenis
and Bekker. It will be sufficient to speak here of six.
The oldest and, with one exception, the most
authoritative MS., is the Codex Sangermanensis (S°),
Xiv
INTRODUCTION
in the library of the monastery of St. Germaindes-
Prés, in the French Department of the Loire. Itis a
parchment MS. of the Xth century, but unfortunately
contains only fifteen of the Lives: Antony (last part),
Pyrrhus-Marius, Aratus, Artaxerxes, Agis and Cleo-
menes, Tiberius and Caius Gracchus, Lycurgus-Numa,
Lysander-Sulla, and Agesilaiis- Pompey.
The second oldest MS., and on the whole the most
authoritative, is the Codex Seitenstettensis (S),
belonging to the monastery of Seitenstetten, near
Waidhofen, in Lower Austria. It is a parchment
MS. of the XIth century, containing sixteen Lives :
Lycurgus-Numa, Solon-Publicola, Aristides-Cato the
elder, Themistocles-Camillus, Cimon-Lucullus, Peri-
cles-Fabius Maximus, Nicias-Crassus, and Agesilaiis-
Pompey. There are large deficiencies in the Lycurgus,
Fabius, Nicias, and Crassus. It is only since 1870,
and the edition of the Aristides and Cato by Hercher,
that this MS. has been known to be not only the
second oldest, but the best extant MS. of Plutarch.
It has not been used in any special editions of Lives
included in this first volume, but its readings are
collected in the dissertation of W. Meyer, De codice
Plutarcheo Seitenstettenst eiusque asseclis, Lespsic, 1890.
Three parchment MSS. in the Sibliothéque
Nationale of Paris, No. 1671 (A), of the XIIIth
century, containing all the Morals and Lives, No. 1672
(C), also of the XIIIth century, containing all the
Lives, and No. 1674 (D), of the XVIth century
containing all the Lives, are of supreme importance,
xv
INTRODUCTION
and on these the texts of Sintenis and Bekker
mainly rest. Of these three MSS.,A and D seem to
be more closely related to 55, while C partakes of
the characters both of S* and S, and is often cor-
rective of A and D.
Another MS. in the same library, No. 1676 (F*),
of the XVth century, has only more recently been
recognized as the chief authority of Stephanus, and
as partaking of the character of S. Its readings have
not been fully published as yet, but have been used
in editing the texts of special Lives, none of which,
however, are included in this first volume.
Other MSS. will be mentioned as they come into
importance for the text of special Lives.
The editio princeps of the Parallel Lives, 1517,
“« Florentiae, in aedibus Philippi Juntae,” was based
on Florentine MSS. of relatively inferior value.
The Aldine edition of the Parallel Lives, 1519,
“ Venetiis, in aedibus Aldi et Andreae soceri,’ was
based on Venetian MSS., which were of greater
excellence than the Florentine, some of them
retaining their importance to the present day.
The first edition of the complete works of Plutarch,
1572, Paris, 13 voll. 8vo, was edited by Henri Etienne
(Stephanus), who improved the text of his pre-
decessors with readings of better MSS. unknown to
them, making special use of Codex Parisinus, No. 1676
(F*). The Paris edition of 1624, in two volumes
folio, reproduced the text of Stephanus, and became
the textus receplus. By its pages (given on the inner
Xvi
INTRODUCTION
margin of the text of the present edition) Plutarch
is cited in the Index vocum verborumque exquisitiorum
in Plutarcho, which closes Wyttenbach’s great edition
of the Morals (Oxford, 1830).
Critical and annotated editions of all the works of
Plutarch by Reiske (Leipsic, 1774-82, 12 voll. 8vo),
and of the Parallel Lives by Coraés (Paris, 1809-14,
6 voll. 8vo), were followed by the great critical
edition of the Parallel Lives by Sintenis (Leipsic,
1839-46, 4 voll. 8vo), which still remains the
standard edition (Sintenis!). A minor edition of this
work appeared in the Bibhotheca Teubneriana (Leipsic,
1852-55, 5 voll. 12mo, re-issued without much
change in 1873-75). It shows more boldness in the
correction of obvious error, and greater freedom in
the admission of conjecture, than the major edition,
but is the most generally accepted text of the Lives
(Sintenis?). The Tauchnitz text, edited by Immanuel
Bekker (Leipsic, 1855-57, 5 voll. 8vo), does not
differ very much from the first minor edition of
Sintenis, but has a convenient division of the
chapters into sections, which has been adopted in
the present text.
In 1559 appeared the French version of the Parallel
Liwes by Jacques Amyot, the earliest French classic
recognized by the French Academy. Amyot con-
sulted many MSS. unknown to the authors of the
Juntine and Aldine editions, and his work has an
independent philological value, aside from its great
literary merits.
XVii
INTRODUCTION
It was from Amyot’s version, rather than from the
original Greek, that Sir Thomas North made his
version of the Lives (1579), a translation by the
earliest master of great English prose from the
earliest master of great French prose. Shakespeare
used this version in his Coriolanus, Julius Caesar, and
Antony and Cleopatra. It was the Elizabethan
Plutarch.
In Queen Anne’s time, Dryden was “ prevailed
upon by his necessities’? to head a company of
translators of the Lives, and the version was called
by his name (1683), although he furnished merely
the Preface and the Life of Plutarch. _Notwith-
standing all the failings of this motley version, it
supplanted that of North.
The first scholar’s translation of the Lives from the
original Greek into English, by the brothers John
and William Langhorne, was published in 1770, and
was the version most current from that time down to
1850. Compared with North’s spirited version, it is
rather dull and pedantic, although much more
accurate.
Arthur Hugh Clough’s revision of the so-called
Dryden translation, a work which occupied this
gifted scholar and poet for some seven years, was
published in five volumes by Little, Brown & Co., of
Boston, in 1859, and reprinted in one large octavo
volume in 1876 and 1880. It is probably the best
extant English version of all the Lives.
The best monograph on Plutarch in English is
XVill
INTRODUCTION
that of Archbishop Trench, which was published by
the Messrs. Macmillan & Co. in 1873, and in a
second edition in 1874. Ralph Waldo Emerson had
already furnished a characteristic essay on Plutarch
as an Introduction to Goodwin’s revision of the
translation of the Morals “by several hands”
(Boston, Little, Brown & Co., 1870, reprinted, 1889).
To the edition of North’s translation of the Lives in
the “Tudor Translations’ (London, David Nutt,
1895-96), the Rt. Hon. George Wyndham furnished
an Introduction of superlative power and excellence.
Professor Mahaffy’s chapters on Plutarch in his Greek
World under Roman Sway (Macmillan & Co., 1890,
pp. 291-3=5 0Th e Silver Age of the Greek World,
Chicago and London, 1906, pp. 339-402) abound in
discriminating and suggestive appreciations. Finally,
mention may be made of Plutarch’s Themistocles and
Aristides, newly translated, with Introduction and
Notes, by Bernadotte Perrin, New York, Charles
Scribner’s Sons, 1901.
X1x
om Beta arsed Ὑ85: ae anee el a
BRL Haiahnysd OV! oOo HFw o stTRE oda)
i ἐπ adi 10 aoielesee a'ttieY 16 ποῖον 86: of
penn debit) μὴ anol χεἴδ τ ΘΟ 71]
“υδοϊαιῆ, ἀρΒΘ ΕἾΤ᾽S q:090. ΜΘ $0 5}. ΟΣ tic
wensifoaxd bid 1srOe, θυ βοδῆνα τὸ ΘΗ Dot tal nn
4 F oro att vi doxetat? ad arosqany 8 tad at ἐδαεϑου
~~
“oearsa ὦ malfitane Wt) ysis nO aks big
“shot Seon ar Aor S3,ἀ ν Ὁ = OCE-TRS ἧς
αὖ δαθοί» ‘eoeeee™ “κα «00: nobro.t bag ogaginiO
oe teil ᾿ ἀρ ββνϑτὶa s SUH yw2 Bie" δαὶ ΩΝ,‘ Gaib
“et‘ tahoee e SARA! to ἢ ἢ 6Π Ὶ sd ttt noted
Bos doiubedal "aiiw’ Botitzasy ψήνοα='
sacar “BOL WOME Πρ T SOLES” GP PSION
Ps ΑΒ ΝΣ = eee cnet iatH oaliiibe
phot a ἭΔ ‘an we. οὐκ
aes
‘ ᾿ ie Rail ‘ 4
ae j < i= ἐκ .0Ὁ ᾿
4 ta em ἐἱ f δ
ἤν ἡ ν»» ἢ eof
Meet ΒΔ: . (a ary
is A. ἂν > ze 7 eer s ὃ
‘ ᾿ hy. Pu ue a ag w ν᾽͵ ὧνa ot as 4a Hargitiats: to
zis
PLUTARGHISHBARALLEL
LIVES
THESEUS
MAOYTAPXOY BIOI TTAPAAAHAOI
OH YTEY2
I. Ὥ" σπερ ἐν ταῖaς γεωγραφίαι, ς, ὦ Σόσσιε
Parii
Σενεκίων, of ἱe στορικοὶ \ τὰX N διαφεύγοντα τὴν Editic
a 1624;
γνῶσιν αὐτῶν τοῖς ἐσχάτοις μέρεσι τῶν πινά- 1
κων πιεζοῦlνa τες, aiti/a s! παραγράφουσιν ὅτι “ Τὰ
Seἐeπέ κεινα 67θ ῖνες ἄBνSυδ ροι καὶ 16 θηριώaδsε ις 9 ἢἋ κε “πηλὸ\ς
aδid vnsN”O OSA.ἢ τ “π᾿Σ κυθθι κὸ\ν κρύο, ς 99 ἢoA κε “πέ, λαγος TeTN-
γόU ς, οὕτως ἐμοὶ περὶ ‘i TH\ Y τῶAν βίVdω ν τῶaν παραλ-
λή/λ ων γραφὴν7 , TOΝV ἐ2φ ικτὸ\ν εἰ’ κό/τ ι λό, γῳ καὶ \ βάσ4 ι-
μον ἱστορίᾳ πραγμάτων ἐχομένῃ χρόνον διελθόντι,
περὶ τῶaνl ἀνωτέ,ρ ω καλῶAς εἶχεν εἰπεῖaν " “Ta δ᾽
ἐπέκεινα τερατώδη Kal τραγικὰ \ ποιηταὶ καὶ
μυθογράφοι νέ/ μονται, καὶ οὐκέτ/ ’ ἔχει πίστιν
οὐδὲ σαφήνειαν." 3) ἐπεὶ δὲ τὸν περὶ Λυκούργου
τοῦ νομοθέτου καὶ Νομᾶ τοῦ βασιλέως λόγον
ἐ5 κδόντες, ἐ3 δοκοῦAμ εν οὐ>κ ἂA ν ἀ> λό,γ ως τῷA € Ῥωμύλ/ ῳ
προσαναβῆνfoαl ι, πλησίον τῶaν χρό/ν ων αὐτοῦa THa
ἱς στορί,ᾳ γεγονότ, ες, σκοποῦνa τι δέ/ μοι
1 αἰτίας Amyot, Stephanus, Coraés, Sintenis? with C;
Bekker and Sintenis! have ἐνίοις (explaining some by saying).
2
PLUTARCH’S PARALLEL LIVES
THESEUS
I. Just as geographers, O Socius Senecio,! crowd
on to the outer edges of their maps the parts of the
earth which elude their knowledge, with explanatory
notes that “ What lies beyond is sandy desert without
water and full of wild beasts,” or “blind marsh,” or
«Scythian cold,” or “ frozen sea,’ so in the writing
of my Parallel Lives, now that I have traversed those
periods of time which are accessible to probable
reasoning and which afford basis for a history dealing
with facts, I might well say of the earlier periods:
“What lies beyond is full of marvels and unreality,
a land of poets and fabulists, of doubt and ob-
scurity.” But after publishing my account of
Lycurgus the lawgiver and Numa the king, I thought
1 might not unreasonably go back still farther to
Romulus, now that my history had brought me near
his times. And as I asked myself,
1 One of the many friends whom Plutarch made during his
residence at Rome. He was four times consul between the
years 98 and 107 A.D. Plutarch addresses him also at the
opening of the Memosthenes and the Dion, thus dedicating to
him these ‘‘ books.”
3
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Τοιῷδε φωτί (κατ᾽ Αἰσχύλον) τίς ξυμβήσεται;"
τίν᾽ ἀντιτάξω τῴδε; τίς φερέγγυος; "
ἐφαίνετο τὸν τῶν καλῶν καὶ ἀοιδίμων οἰκιστὴν
᾿Αθηνῶν ἀντιστῆσαι καὶ παραβαλεῖν τῷ πατρὶ
τῆς ἀνικήτου καὶ μεγαλοδόξου Ρώμης, εἴη μὲν
οὖν ἡμῖν ἐκκαθαιρόμενον λόγῳ τὸ μυθῶδες ὑπα-
κοῦσαι καὶ λαβεῖν ἱστορίας ὄψιν, ὅπου δ᾽ ἂν
αὐθαδῶς τοῦ πιθανοῦ περιφρονῇ καὶ μὴ δέχηται
τὴν πρὸς τὸ εἰκὸς μῖξιν, εὐγνωμόνων ἀκροατῶν
δεησόμεθα καὶ πράως τὴν ἀρχαιολογίαν προσδε-
χομένων.
ΤΊ. ᾿Εδόκει δ᾽ οὖν ὁ Θησεὺς τῷ Ῥωμύλῳ κατὰ
πολλὰς ἐναρμόττειν ὁμοιότητας" ἄμφω μὲν γὰρ *
ἀνεγγύω καὶ σκοτίω γενόμενοι δόξαν ἔσχον ἐκ
θεῶν γεγονέναι,
“Auda δ᾽ αἰχμητά, τό γε δὴ καὶ ἴδμεν ἅπαντες,
Kal μετὰ\ TOUl e δυνατοῦa n TO\ συνετὸν ἔχοντες. πόλεων
δὲ τῶ“ν ἐπιφανεστάτων ὁ€ μὲν ἔκτισε THY Ῥώμην,
ὁ« δὲΝ συνῴκ, ισε τὰ\ς 3 ᾿Αθήν/ ας" ἁe ρπαγὴ \ δὲ\ γυναικῶνfal
ἑκατέρῳ πρόσt εστιν. οὐ2δQ/έ τερος δὲ δυστυχίαν περὶ
Ta\ οἰeκeεeῖ α Kal \ νέ,μὕ εσιν ἐ9 γγενῆ A διέ, φυγεν, ἀ᾽ λλὰ \ καὶ \
τελευτῶAν τες ἀ> μφότ/ εροι λέ/γ ονται τοῖaς ἑαυτῶaνn
προσκροῦἴσω αι πολίτ/ αις, εἴ TL τῶAν ἥκιστα τραγι-
1 Seven against Thebes, 435, τοιῷδε φωτὶ πέμπε--τ-ί ς
ξυστήσεται;
2 Ibid. 3951.
τίν᾽ ἀντιτάξεις τῷδε; τίς Προίτου πυλῶν
κλήθρων λυθέντων προστατεῖν φερέγγυος;
8 Coraés, Bekker, and Cobet, with C, after Reiske;
ἄμφω μέν.
4
THESEUS, 1. 2-11. 2
“ With such a warrior” (as Aeschylus says) “‘who will
dare to fight ?”
“Whom shall 1 set against him? Who is com-
petent ?”’
it seemed to me that I must make the founder
of lovely and famous Athens the counterpart and
parallel to the father of invincible and glorious
Rome. May I therefore succeed in purifying Fable,
making her submit to reason and take on the sem-
blance of History. But where she obstinately dis-
dains to make herself credible, and refuses to admit
any element of probability, I shall pray for kindly
readers, and such as receive with indulgence the
tales of antiquity.
II. It seemed to me, then, that many resemblances
made Theseus a fit parallel to Romulus. For both
were of uncertain and obscure parentage, and got
the reputation of descent from gods;
“ Both were also warriors, as surely the whole world
knoweth,” 2
and with their strength, combined sagacity. Of the
world’s two most illustrious cities, moreover, Rome
and Athens, Romulus founded the one, and Theseus
made a metropolis of the other, and each resorted to
the rape of women. Besides, neither escaped
domestic misfortunes and the resentful anger of kin-
dred, but even in their last days both are said to
have come into collision with their own fellow-citizens,
4 Iliad vii. 281, of Aias Telamon and Hector.
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κῶς εἰρῆσθαι δοκούντων ὄφελός ἐστι πρὸς ἀλή-
θειαν.
IIT. Θησέως τὸ μὲν πατρῷον γένος εἰς ᾿Πρεχθέα
καὶ τοὺς πρώτους αὐτόχθονας ἀνήκει, τῷ δὲ
μητρῴῳ ἸΠελοπίδης ἣν. Πέλοψ γὰρ ov χρη-
μά4τ ων πλήθ"4ε ι μᾶa λλον ἢA παί/δ ων μέ’γ ιστον ἴΜ σχυσε
τῶν ἐν Πελοποννήσῳ βασιλέων, πολλὰς μὲν
€3 KOO/M EVOS θυγατέρ/ ας τοῖAς ἀ> ρι/σ τοῖς, πολλοὺς\ δὲ\
ταῖς πόλεσιν υἱοὺς ἐγκατασπείρας ἄρχοντας" ὧν
els γενό,μ ενος Πιτθεύς,, e ὁ Θησέω/ ς πάπ, πος, πόλ, ιν
μὲ\ν ov> μεγά/λ ην τὴ\ν Τροιζηνί,ω ν ᾧνκ ισε, δόidξ αν δὲ\
μάλιστα πάντων ὡς ἀνὴρ λόγιος ἐν τοῖς τότε καὶ
σοφώτατος ἔσχεν. ἦν δὲ τῆς σοφίας ἐκείνης
τοιαύτη τις, ὡς ἔοικεν, ἰδέα καὶ δύναμις, οἵᾳ
χρησάμfeε νος € Ἡσίο, δος εὐ> δοκίμ, ει μά/λ ιστα περὶ N τὰ\ς
ἐν τοῖς Ἔργοις γνωμολογίας. καὶ μίαν γε τούτων
ἐ» κεί,ν ην λέγουσι 1Πιτθέ,ω ς εἶ3 ναι,
Μισθὸς δ᾽ ἀνδρὶ φίλῳ εἰρημένος ἄρκιος ἔστω.
τοῦτο μὲν οὗν καὶ ᾿Αριστοτέλης ὁ φιλόσοφος
εἴWwρ ηκεν, ὁ€ δ᾽>] Ἑὐρ> ιπίδy:η ς, τὸ\ν «ςἹ ππόλ/ υτον ἁἰ γνοῦ“ Ὁ
ΠΠτθέως παίδευμα προσειπών, ἐμφαίνει τὴν περὶ
toἣνv Πιτθέα, δό,ξ αν.
Αἰγεῖ δὲ παίδων δεομένῳ τὴν Πυθίαν ἀνελεῖν
λέγουσι τὸν θρυλούμενον χρησμόν, διακελευο-
μένην μηδεμιᾷ γυναικὶ συγγενέσθαι πρὶν ἐλθεῖν
εἰς ᾿Αθήνας, οὐ πάνυ δὲ τοῦτο φράζειν εὐδήλως
6
THESEUS, 1. 2-11. 3
if there is any aid to the truth in what seems to
have been told with the least poetic exaggeration.
III. The lineage of Theseus, on the father’s side,
goes back to Erechtheus and the first children of the
soil; on the mother’s side, to Pelops. For Pelops
was the strongest of the kings in Peloponnesus
quite as much on account of the number of his
children as the amount of his wealth. He gave
many daughters in marriage to men of highest rank,
and scattered many sons among the cities as their
rulers. One of these, named Pittheus, the grand-
father of Theseus, founded the little city of Troezen,
and had the highest repute as a man versed in the
lore of his times and of the greatest wisdom. Now
the wisdom of that day had some such form and
force as that for which Hesiod was famous, especially
in the sententious maxims of his “ Works and Days.”
One of these maxims is ascribed to Pittheus,
namely :—
“Payment pledged to a man who is dear must be
ample and certain.” 1
At any rate, this is what Aristotle the philosopher
says,* and Euripides,? when he has Hippolytus
addressed as “nursling of the pure and holy Pit-
theus,” shows what the world thought of Pittheus.
Now Aegeus, king of Athens, desiring to have
children, is said to have received from the Pythian
priestess the celebrated oracle in which she bade him
to have intercourse with no woman until he came to
Athens. But Aegeus thought the words of the
command somewhat obscure, and therefore turned
1 Verse 370. 2 Fragment 556. 3 Hippolytus, 11.
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δοκοῦσαν" ὅθεν εἰς Τροιζῆνα παρελθὼν ἀνεκοι-
νοῦτο Πιτθεῖ τὴν τοῦ θεοῦ φωνὴν οὕτως ἔχουσαν"
᾿Ασκοῦ τὸν προὔχοντα πόδα, μέγα φέρτατε
λαῶν,
μὴ λύσῃς πρὶν δῆμον ᾿Αθηνέων εἰσαφικέσθαι"
ἃἃ δῆa λον ὅσ τι νοήfσf ας ὁe TlutOevs΄ , ἔΜ πεισεν αὐΦτΆΡὸΟΝν ἢbal
διηπάτησε τῇ Αἴθρᾳ συγγενέσθαι. συνελθὼν δὲ
καὶ \ γνοὺς\ ἐ3 κεῖaν ος ὅ“ τι τῇa Πιτθέω/ ς θυγατρὶ συγ-
γέ/γ ονε, καὶ \ κύεdeι ν αὐ3τ ὴ\ν ὑδ πονοήσ, ας, ἀ᾽ πέλ7 ιπε ξίῪ;:φ ος
Kal Ν πέ,δ ιλα κρύ7 ψας ὑ6 πὸN X πέ/τ ραν μεγάλ/ ην, ἐ> ντὸ\ς
ἔχουσαν κοιλότητα συμμέτρως ἐμπεριλαμβάνου-
σαν τὰ κείμενα. φράσας δὲ πρὸς μόνην ἐκείνην,
καὶ \ διακελευσάμ/ ενος, ἂvnν υἱeὸ\ ς ἐ> ξ αὐ᾽τ οῦ an γέ7ν ηται,
καὶ \ λαβὼν\ ἀ3 νδρὸ\ς ἡe λικί/α ν δυνατὸἊςΝ ἦ4 τὴἉν πέτ’ ραν
ἀναστῆσαι καὶ ὑφελεῖν τὰ καταλειφθέντα, πέμ-
TEV πρὸ\ς αὐτὸ\ν ἔχοντα ταῦAτ α μηδενὸς\ εἰδό,τ ος,
ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἔνεστι μάλιστα λανθάνοντα πάντας
(ἰσχυρῶaς yap ἐδεδοίκει τοὺς Π]αλλαντίδ/ ας, ἐπι-
βουλεύοντας αὐτῷA καὶ διὰ τὴν ἀπαιδία/ ν κατα-
φρονοῦντας ἦσαν δὲ πεντήκοντα παῖδες ἐκ
Πάλ4 λαντος γεγονότ, ες), a» met, .
IV. Τεκούσης δὲ τῆaςn Αἴθρας υἱCόodν , οἱ e μὲ\ν εὐ᾽ θὺἊς
ὀνομασθῆνa αι Θησέα λέγουσι διὰ\ TH\Y τῶaν γνωρι-
σμάτων θέσιν, οἱ δὲ ὕστερον 3 ᾿Αθή7ν] ησι παῖ“δ α
θεμέ/ν ου τοῦn ΑἰἌγΡέΑ ως αὐτ᾽ όν, . τρεφόμ/ ενον δὲ\ ὑς πὸ N
8
THESEUS, im. 3-1v. 1
aside to Troezen and communicated to Pittheus the
words of the god, which ran as follows :—
“Loose not the wine-skin’s jutting neck, great
chief of the people,
Until thou shalt have come once more to the city of
Athens.” }
This dark saying Pittheus apparently understood,
and persuaded him, or beguiled him, to have inter-
course with his daughter Aethra. Aegeus did so, and
then learning that it was the daughter of Pittheus
with whom he had consorted, and suspecting that
she was with child by him, he left a sword and a
pair of sandals hidden under a great rock, which had
a hollow in it just large enough to receive these
objects. He told the princess alone about this, and
bade her, if a son should be born to her from him,
and if, when he came to man’s estate, he should be
able to lift up the rock and take away what had been
left under it, to send that son to him with the
tokens, in all secrecy, and concealing his jourhey as
much as possible from everybody; for he was
mightily in fear of the sons of Pallas,2 who were
plotting against him, and who despised him on
account of his childlessness ; and they were fifty in
number, these sons of Pallas. Then he went away.
IV. When Aethra gave birth to a son, he was at
once named Theseus, as some say, because the
tokens for his recognition had been placed? in hiding ;
but others say that it was afterwards at Athens, when
Aegeus acknowledged* him as hisson. He was reared
1 Cf. Euripides, Medea, 674, 676 (Kirchhoff).
2 His brother.
3 It is impossible to reproduce in English the play on the
Greek words.
9
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τοῦa Πιτθέω, ς ἐ? πιστάτ΄ὔη ν ἔ¥ χειν καὶ \ παιδαγωγὸν\
ὄνομα Kovvidav, ᾧ μέχρε νῦν ᾿Αθηναῖοι μιᾷ
πρότερον ἡμέρᾳ τῶν Θησείων κριὸν ἐναγίζουσι,
μεμνημένοι καὶ τιμῶντες πολὺ δικαιότερον ἢ
Σιλανίωνα τιμῶσι καὶ ἸΠαρράσιον, εἰκόνων Θη-
σέως γραφεῖς καὶ πλάστας γενομένους.
Υ. Ἔθους δὲ ὄντος ἔτι τότε τοὺς μεταβαί-
νοντας ἐκ παίδων ἐλθόντας εἰς Δελφοὺς ἀπάρχε-
σθαι τῷ θεῷ τῆς κόμης, ἦλθε μὲν εἰς Δελφοὺς
ὁ€ Θησεύς΄,ὔ καὶi c τό, πον a> m 9 αὐ>τ οῦ A τὴAν Θησεία/ ν ἔ” τι
νῦAν ὀ» νομά/ζ εσθαι λέ/γ ουσιν, ἐ3 κεί/ ρατο δὲ\ τῆaς κεφα-
λῆaς τὰ\ πρό,σ θεν μόν, ον, ὥ“ σπερ “ “Ὅμηρος ἔ” φη τοὺ\ς
ἼΑβαντας" καὶ τοῦτο τῆς κουρᾶς τὸ γένος Θησηὶς
ὠνομάσθη δι᾽ ἐκεῖνον.
Οἱ δὲ ἼΑβαντες ἐκείραντο πρῶτοι τὸν τρόπον
τοῦAτ ον οὐ᾽ χ ὑe π᾽ I 2 ᾿Αρά4 βων διδαχθέν/τ ες, ὡeς ἔΨΜν ιοι
νομίζουσιν, οὐδὲ Μυσοὺς ζηλώσαντες, ἀλλ᾽ ὄντες
πολεμικοὶ καὶ ἀγχέμαχοι, καὶ μάλιστα δὴ πάντων
εἰς χεῖρας ὠθεῖσθαι τοῖς ἐναντίοις μεμαθηκότες,
ὡς μαρτυρεῖ καὶ ᾿Αρχίλοχος ἐν τούτοις"
Οὔ τοι πόλλ᾽ ἐπὶ\ τό, ξα τανύσσεται οὐδὲ
θαμειαὶ
σφενδόναι, evt’ ἂν δὴ μῶAλ ον ν “Apns συνάγ/ ῃ
ἐ3ν πεδί’ῳ , ξιφέ4ω ν δὲ\ πολύσ(2 τονον ἔ” σσεται ἔΜ ργον"
ταύτης γὰρ κεῖνοι δαίμονές εἰσι μάχης
δεσπότ, αι Εὐ>β οίαfe ς δουρικλυτοί./
Io
THESEUS, vw. 1-v. 3
by Pittheus,as they say, and had an overseer and
tutor named Connidas. To this man, even down to
the present time, the Athenians sacrifice a ram on
the day before the festival of Theseus, remembering
him and honouring him with far greater justice than
they honour Silanio and Parrhasius, who merely
painted and moulded likenesses of Theseus.
V. Since it was still a custom at that time for
youth who were coming of age to go to Delphi and
sacrifice some of their hair to the god, Theseus went to
Delphi for this purpose, and they say there is a place
there which still to this day is called the Theseia
from him. But he sheared only the fore part of his
head, just as Homer! said the Abantes did, and this
kind of tonsure was called Theseis after him.
Now the Abantes were the first to cut their hair
in this manner, not under instruction from the
Arabians, as some suppose, nor yet in emulation of
the Mysians, but because they were war-like men
and close fighters, who had learned beyond all other
men to force their way into close quarters with their
enemies. Archilochus is witness to this in the fol-
lowing words :—
“Not many bows indeed will be stretched tight, nor
frequent slings
Be whirled, when Ares joins men in the moil of
war
Upon the plain, but swords will do their mournful
work ;
For this is the warfare wherein those men are
expert
Who lord it over Euboea and are famous with the
spear.’ 2
1 Thad, ii. 542. 2 Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Gr.‘, ii. p. 383.
II
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 ὅπως οὗν μὴ παρέχοιεν. ἐκ τῶν τριχῶν ἀντί-
ληψιν τοῖς πολεμίοις ἀπεκείραντο. τοῦτο δὲ
ἀμέλει καὶ ᾿Αλέξανδρον τὸν Μακεδόνα ἐννοή-
σαντά φασι προστάξαι τοῖς στρατηγοῖς ξυρεῖν
τὰ γένεια τῶν Μακεδόνων, ὡς λαβὴν ταύτην ἐν
ταῖς μάχαις οὖσαν προχειροτάτην.
VI. Τὸν μὲν οὖν ἄλλον χρόνον ἔκρυπτεν Αἴθρα
τὴν ἀληθινὴν τοῦ Θησέως γένεσιν: ἦν δὲ λόγος
ὑπὸ τοῦ IlitOéws διαδοθεὶς ὡς ἐκ ἸΠοσειδῶνος
τεκνωθείη. ἸΠοσειδῶνα γὰρ Τροιζήνιοι σέβονται
διαφερόντως, καὶ θεὸς οὗτός ἐστιν αὐτοῖς πολιοῦ-
χος, ᾧ καὶ καρπῶν ἀπάρχονται καὶ τρίαιναν
2 ἐπίσημον ἔχουσι τοῦ νομίσματος. ἐπεὶ δὲ μειρά-
κιον ὦν, ἅμα τῇ τοῦ σώματος ῥώμῃ διέφαινεν
ἀλκὴν καὶ φρόνημα μετὰ νοῦ καὶ συνέσεως
βέβαιον, οὕτως αὐτὸν ἡ Αἴθρα πρὸς τὴν πέτραν
προσαγαγοῦσα, καὶ φράσασα περὶ τῆς γενέσεως
τἀληθές, ἐκέλευσεν ὑφελεῖν. τὰ πατρῷα σύμβολα
8 καὶ πλεῖν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας. ὁ δὲ τὴν μὲν πέτραν
ὑπέδυ καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἀνέωσε, πλεῖν δὲ ἀπέγνω,
καίπερ οὔσης ἀσφαλείας καὶ δεομένων ‘ToD TE
πάππου καὶ τῆς μητρός. χαλεπὸν γὰρ ἣν πεζῇ
πορεύεσθαι τὴν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας. ὁδόν, οὐδὲν “μέρος
καθαρὸν οὐδὲ ἀκίνδυνον ὑπὸ λῃστῶν καὶ κα-
κούργων ἔχουσαν.
4 ΔΩ γὰρ δὴ χρόνος ἐκεῖνος ἤνεγκεν ἀνθρώπους
χειρῶν μὲν ἔργοις καὶ ποδῶν TAXETL Kal σωμάτων
ῥώμαις, ὡς ἔοικεν, ὑπερφυεῖς καὶ ἀκαμάτους,
πρὸς οὐδὲν δὲ τῇ φύσει χρωμένους ἐπιεικὲς οὐδὲ
ὠφέλιμον, ἀλλ᾽ ὕβρει τε χαίροντας ὑπερηφάνῳ,
καὶ ἀπολαύοντας τῆς δυνάμεως ὠμότητι καὶ
πικρίᾳ, καὶ τῷ κρατεῖν τε καὶ βιάζεσθαι καὶ
12
THESEUS, v. 4-v1. 4
Therefore, in order that they might not give their
enemies a hold by their hair, they cut it off. And
Alexander of Macedon doubtless understood this
when, as they say, he ordered his generals to have
the beards of their Macedonians shaved, since these
afforded the readiest hold in battle.
VI. During the rest of the time, then, Aethra
kept his true birth concealed from Theseus, and a
report was spread abroad by Pittheus that he was
begotten by Poseidon. For Poseidon is highly hon-
oured by the people of Troezen, and he is the
patron god of their city; to him they offer first fruits
in sacrifice, and they have his trident as an emblem
on their coinage. But when, in his young manhood,
Theseus displayed, along with his vigour of body,
prowess also, and a firm spirit united with intelli-
_ gence and sagacity, then Aethra brought him to the
rock, told him the truth about his birth, and bade
him take away his father’s tokens and go by sea to
Athens. Theseus put his shoulder to the rock and
easily raised it up, but he refused to make his
journey by sea, although safety lay in that course,
and his grandfather and his mother begged him to
take it. For it was difficult to make the journey to
Athens by land, since no part of it was clear nor
yet without peril from robbers and miscreants.
For verily that age produced men who, in work ot
hand and speed of foot and vigour of body, were
extraordinary and indefatigable, but they applied
their powers to nothing that was fitting or useful.
Nay rather, they exulted in monstrous insolence,
and reaped from their strength a harvest of cruelty
and bitterness, mastering and forcing and destroying
everything that came in their path. And as for
voH is 1- B I 3
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
διαφθείρειν τὸ παραπῖπτον, αἰδῶ δὲ καὶ δικαιο-
σύνην καὶ τὸ ἴσον καὶ τὸ φιλάνθρωπον, ὡς
ἀτολμίᾳ τοῦ ἀδικεῖν καὶ φόβῳ τοῦ ἀδικεῖσθαι
τοὺς πολλοὺς ἐπαινοῦντας, οὐδὲν οἰομένους προσ-
ἥκειν τοῖς πλέον ἔχειν δυναμένοις. τούτων
Ἡρακλῆς τοὺς μὲν ἐξέκοπτε καὶ ἀνήρει περιϊών,
οἱ δὲ λανθάνοντες ἐκείνου παριόντος ἔπτησσον
καὶ ἀνεδύοντο καὶ παρημελοῦντο ταπεινὰ πράτ-
τοντες. ἐπεὶ δὲ Ἡρακλῆς ἐχρήσατο συμφορᾷ,
καὶ κτείνας Ἴφιτον εἰς Λυδίαν ἀπῆρε καὶ συχνὸν
ἐκεῖ χρόνον ἐδούλευε παρ᾽ Ὀμφάλῃ, δίκην τοῦ
φόνου ταύτην ἐπιθεὶς αὑτῷ, τότε τὰ μὲν Λυδῶν
πράγματα πολλὴν ἔσχεν εἰρήνην καὶ ἄδειαν: ἐν
δὲ τοῖς περὶ τὴν Ελλάδα τόποις αὖθις ἐξήνθησαν
αἱ κακίαι καὶ ἀνερράγησαν, οὐδενὸς πιεζοῦντος
οὐδὲ κατείργοντος.
Ἦν οὖν ὀλέθριος ἡ πορεία τοῖς ᾿Αθήναζε
πεζῇ βαδίξουσιν ἐκ ἹΠελοποννήσου: καὶ τῶν
κακούργων ἕκαστον ἐξηγούμενος Πιτθεὺς ὁποῖος
εἴη καὶ ὁποῖα δρῴη περὶ τοὺς ἕένους, ἔπειθε
τὸν Θησέα κομίζεσθαι διὰ θαλάττης. τὸν δὲ
πάλαι μέν, ὡς ἔοικε, λεληθότως διέκαιεν ἡ δόξα
τῆς Ἡρακλέους ἀρετῆς, καὶ πλεῖστον ἐκείνου
λόγον εἶχε, καὶ προθυμότατος ἀκροατὴς ἐγίνετο
τῶν διηγουμένων ἐἐ κεῖνον οἷος εἴη, μάλεστα δὲ τῶν
αὐτὸν ἑωρακότων καὶ πράττοντε καὶ λέγοντι
προστετυχηκότων' τότε δὲ παντάπασιν ἣν
φανερὸς πεπονθὼς ὃὅ περ ὕστερον χρόνοις πολλοῖς
Θεμιστοκλῆς ἔπαθε, καὶ εἶπεν ὡς καθεύδειν αὐτὸν
οὐκ ἐῴη τὸ Μιλτιάδου τρύπαιον' οὕτως ἐκείνῳ
τοῦ Ἡρακλέους θαυμάζοντε τὴν ἀρετήν, καὶ
14
THESEUS, vi. 4-7
reverence and righteousness, justice and humanity,
they thought that most men praised these qualities
for lack of courage to do wrong and for fear of being
wronged, and considered them no concern of men
who were strong enough to get the upper hand.
Some of these creatures Heracles cut off and
destroyed as he went about, but some escaped his
notice as he passed by, crouching down and shrink-
ing back, and were overlooked in their abjectness.
And when Heracles met with calamity and, after the
slaying of Iphitus, removed into Lydia and for a long
time did slave’s service there in the house of Omphale,
then Lydia indeed obtained great peace and security;
but in the regions of Hellas the old villainies burst
forth and broke out anew, there being none to
rebuke and none to restrain them.
The journey was therefore a perilous one for
travellers by land from Peloponnesus to Athens, and
Pittheus, by describing each of the miscreants at
length, what sort of a monster he was, and what deeds
he wrought upon strangers, tried to persuade Theseus
to make his journey by sea. But he, as it would seem,
had long since been secretly fired by the glorious
valour of Heracles, and made the greatest account of
that hero, and was a most eager listener to those
who told what manner of man he was, and above all
to those who had seen him and been present at some
deed or speech of his. And it is altogether plain
that he then experienced what Themistocles many
generations afterwards experienced, when he said
that he could not sleep for the trophy of Miltiades.!
In like manner Theseus admired the valour of Hera-
cles, until by night his dreams were of the hero’s
1 Ci, Themistocles, iii. 3.
15
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
νύκτωρ ὄνειρος ἦσαν ai πράξεις, Kal μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν
ἐξῆγεν αὐτὸν ὁ ζῆλος καὶ ἀνηρέθιζε ταὐτὰ πράτ-
τειν διανοούμενον.
VII. ᾿Ετύγχανον δὲ καὶ γένους κοινωνοῦντες
ἐξ ἀνεψιῶν ὄντες. Αἴθρα μὲν γὰρ ἣν Πιτθέως
θυγάτηρ, ᾿Αλκμήνη δὲ Λυσιδίκης, Λυσιδίκη δὲ
καὶ Πιτθεὺς ἀδελφοὶ γεγονότες ἐξ “Ἱπποδαμείας
καὶ Πέλοπος. δεινὸν οὖν ἐποιεῖτο καὶ οὐκ ἀνεκτὸν
ἐκεῖνον μὲν ἐπὶ τοὺς πανταχοῦ πονηροὺς βαδί-
ζοντα καθαίρειν γῆν καὶ θάλατταν, αὐτὸν δὲ τοὺς
ἐμποδὼν ἄθλους ἀποδιδράσκειν, τὸν μὲν λόγῳ
καὶ δόξῃ πατέρα καταισχύνων διὰ θαλάττης
φυγῇ κομιξόμενος, τῷ δὲ ὄντι προσφέρων γνωρί-
σματα πέδιλα καὶ ξίφος ἀναίμακτον, οὐκ ἔργοις
εὐθὺς ἀγαθοῖς καὶ πράξεσι παρέχων ἐμφανῆ
χαρακτῆρα τῆς εὐγενείας. τοιούτῳ φρονήματι
καὶ τοιούτοις λογισμοῖς ἐξώρμησεν, ὡς ἀδικήσων
μὲν οὐδένα, τοὺς δὲ ὑπάρχοντας βίας ἀμυνού-
μενος.
VIII. Καὶ πρῶτον μὲν ἐν τῇ ᾿Επιδαυρίᾳ Περι-
φήτην, ὅπλῳ χρώμενον κορύνῃ καὶ διὰ τοῦτο
Κορυνήτην ἐπικαλούμενον, ἁπτόμενον αὐτοῦ καὶ
κωλύοντα “προάγειν συμβαλὼν ἀπέκτεινεν: ἡσθεὶς
δὲ τῇ κορύνῃ λαβὼν ὅπλον ἐποιήσατο καὶ διετέλει
χρώμενος, ὥσπερ, ὁ Ἡρακλῆς τῷ δέρματι τοῦ
λέοντος. ἐκείνῳ μὲν οὖν ἐπίδειξις ἣν φορούμενον
ἡλίκου τὸ μέγεθος θηρίου κρατήσειεν, οὗτος δὲ
τὴν κορύνην ἐπεδείκνυεν ἡἡ ττημένην μὲν ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ,
μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ δὲ ἀήττητον. οὗσαν.
2 Ἔν δ᾽ ᾿Ισθμῷ Σίνιν τὸν πιτυοκάμπτην ᾧ τρόπῳ
16
THESEUS, νι. 7—-vu. 2
achievements, and by day his ardour led him along
and spurred him on in his purpose to achieve the
like.
VII. And besides, they were kinsmen, being sons
of cousins-german. For Aethra was daughter of
Pittheus, as Alemene was of Lysidice, and Lysidice
and Pittheus were brother and sister, children of
Hippodameia and Pelops. Accordingly, he thought
it a dreadful and unendurable thing that his famous
cousin should go out against the wicked everywhere
and purge land and sea of them, while he himself
ran away from the struggles which lay in his path,
disgracing his reputed father! by journeying like a
fugitive over the sea, and bringing to his real father
as proofs of his birth only sandals and a sword un-
stained with blood, instead of at once offering noble
deeds and achievements as the manifest mark of his
noble birth. In sucha spirit and with such thoughts
he set out, determined to do no man any wrong, but
to punish those who offered him violence.
VIII. And so in the first place, in Epidauria, when
Periphetes, who used a club as his weapon and on
this account was called Club-bearer, laid hold of
him and tried to stop his progress, he grappled
with him and slew him. And being pleased with
the club, he took it and made it his weapon and
continued to use it, just as Heracles did with the
lion’s skin. That hero wore the skin to prove how
great a wild beast he had mastered, and so Theseus
carried the club to show that although it had
been vanquished by him, in his own hands it was
invincible.
On the Isthmus, too, he slew Sinis the Pine-bender
1 Cf. chapter vi. 1.
17
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πολλοὺς\ ἀ>ν ήρUε ι, τού4τ ῳ διέ, φθειρεν αὐ3τ ός“,4 οὐ> μεμε-
λετηκὼς᾿ OV3O50 » εἰτ θισμένΥ͂ ος, ἐ᾿ πιδεί/ξ ας δὲ\ TH\Y ἀ’ ρετὴAν
ὅτε καὶ τέχνης περίεστι καὶ μελέτης ἁπάσης.
ἣν δὲ TOa Σίνιδι καλλί/σ τη καὶ μεγίστη θυγάτηρ,
ὄ5 νομα Ilepuyovvn. ταύτην todA πατρὸς\ avnpn-
μέ/ν ου φυγοῦaσ αν ἐ3 ζήἊτΨ ει περιϊoὼ\ ν ὁς Θ Θησεύς’"ὔ i. ἡ6 δ᾽
εἰ>ς τό/π ον ἀ> πελθοῦAσ α λό/χ μην ἔ» χοντα πολλὴν\
στοιβήν τε πλείστην καὶ ἀσφάραγον, ἀκάκως
πάνυ καὶ παιδικῶς ὥσπερ αἰσθανομένων δεομένη
προσεύχετο μεθ᾽ ὅρκων, ἂν σώσωσιν αὐτὴν καὶ
ἀποκρύψωσι, μηδέποτε λυμανεῖσθαι μηδὲ καύσειν.
ἀνακαλουμένου δὲ τοῦ Θησέως καὶ πίστιν δι-
δόντος ὡς ἐπιμελήσεται καλῶrςn αὐτῆaς Kal οὐδὲ\ν
ἀδικήσ/ ει, προῆAλ θε: καὶ τῷa μὲν Θησεῖ A συγγενο-
μέ/ν η Μελάνιππον ἔτεκε, Δηϊο” νεῖ a δὲ τῷA Εὐρύτου
τοῦa Οἰχαλιέως ὕστερον συνῴκησε, Θησέως δό/ν τος.
ἐ2κ δὲ\ Μελανί,π που τοῦa Θησέω, ς γενόlμa ενος " ᾿Ιωξος
᾿Ορνύτῳ τῆaς εἰς Καρίαν ἀποικίας μετέσ/ χεν" ὅδ θεν
’ Ιωξι(δὃα ις καὶ > ᾿Ιωξί/σ ι πάτ/ ριον κατέ/σ τη μήτ/ ε
ἄA κανθαν ἀ> σφαράγ΄ ου μήτ/ ε στοιβὴ\ν καίε7 ιν, ἀ> λλὰ \
σέβεσθαι καὶ τιμᾶν.
IX.σ Ἢ δὲ Κρομμνωνία σῦaς , ἣA ν ΦαιὰνἊν προσ-
ὠνόμαζον, οὐ φαῦaλ ον ἦν θηρίον, ἀλλὰ NS μάχιμον
Kal χαλεπὸν κρατηθῆνanα ι. ταύτην ὁ€ δοῦ πάρεργον,
ὡς μὴ δοκοίη πάντα πρὸς ἀνάγκην πονεῖν, ὕπο-
στὰς ἀνεῖaλ ε, καὶ ἅμα τῶaν μὲν ἀνθρώ/ πων τοῖaς
πονηροῖςlal ἀμυνόμενον οἰό, μενος δεῖa ν τὸXNν ἀγαθὸν
προσφέρεσθαι, τῶfaνl δὲ θηρί/ω ν καὶ Ἂ προεπιχει-
ροῦceν τα τοῖaς γενναίο, ις μάχεσθαι καὶ διακινδυ-
18
THESEUS, vir. 2-1x. 1
in the very manner in which. many men had been
destroyed by himself, and he did this without practice
or even acquaintance with the monster’s device, but
showing that valour is superior to all device and
practice. Now Sinis had a very beautiful and stately
daughter, named Perigune. This daughter took to
flight when her father was killed, and ‘Theseus went
about in search of her. But she had gone off into a
place which abounded greatly in shrubs and rushes
and wild asparagus, and with exceeding innocence
and childish simplicity was supplicating these plants,
as if they understood her, and vowing that if they
would hide and save her, she would never trample
them down nor burn them. When, however, Theseus
called upon her and gave her a pledge that he would
treat her honourably and do her no wrong, she came
forth, and after consorting with Theseus, bore him
Melanippus, and afterwards lived with Deioneus, son
of Eurytus the Oechalian, to whom Theseus gave
her. From Melanippus the son of Theseus, Ioxus
was born, who took part with Ornytus in leading a
colony into Caria; whence it is ancestral usage with
the Ioxids, men and women, not to burn either the
asparagus-thorn or the rush, but to revere and
honour them.
IX. Now the Crommyonian sow, which they called
Phaea, was no insignificant creature, but fierce and
hard to master. This sow he went out of his way to
encounter and slay, that he might not be thought to
perform all his exploits under compulsion, and at the
same time because he thought that while the brave
man ought to attack villainous men only in self
defence, he should seek occasion to risk his life in
battle with the nobler beasts. However, some say
a”
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
νεύειν. ἔνιοι δέ φασι τὴν Φαιὰν λῃστρίδα
γενέσθαι γυναῖκα φονικὴν καὶ ἀκόλαστον, av-
τόθι κατοικοῦσαν ἐν ἹΚρομμυῶνι, σῦν δὲ ἐπονομα-
σθεῖσαν διὰ τὸ ἦθος καὶ τὸν βίον εἶτα ὑπὸ
Θησέως ἀποθανεῖν.
X. Σκείρωνα δὲ πρὸ τῆς Μεγαρικῆς ἀνεῖλε
ῥίψας κατὰ τῶν πετρῶν, ὡς μὲν ὁ πολὺς λόγος
λῃστεύοντα τοὺς παριόντας, ὡς δ᾽ ἔνιοι λέγουσιν
ὕβρει καὶ τρυφῇ προτείνοντα τὼ πόδε τοῖς ξένοις
καὶ κελεύοντα νίπτειν, εἶτα λακτίζοντα καὶ ἀπω-
θοῦντα νίπτοντας εἰς τὴν θάλατταν. οἱ δὲ Με-
γαρόθεν συγγραφεῖς, ὁμόσε τῇ φήμῃ βαδίζοντες
καὶ τῷ πολλῷ χρόνῳ, κατὰ ἐμωνίδην, πολε-
μοῦντες, οὔτε ὑβριστὴν οὔτε λῃστὴν γεγονέναι
τὸν Σκείρωνά φασιν, ἀλλὰ λῃστῶν μὲν κολαστήν,
ἀγαθῶν δὲ καὶ δικαίων οἰκεῖον “ἀνδρῶν καὶ φίλον.
Αἰακόν τε γὰρ ᾿Ῥλλήνων ὁσιώτατον νομίξεσθαι,
καὶ Κυχρέα “τιμὰς θεῶν ἔχειν ᾿Αθήνησι τὸν
Σαλαμίνιον, τὴν δὲ Πηλέως καὶ Τελαμῶνος ἀρε-
τὴν ὑπ᾽ οὐδενὸς ἀγνοεῖσθαι. Σικείρωνα τοίνυν
Κυχρέως μὲν γενέσθαι, γαμβρόν, Αἰακοῦ δὲ πεν-
θερὸν, Πηλέως δὲ καὶ Τελαμῶνος πάππον, ἐξ
᾿Ενδηΐδος γεγονότων τῆς Σκείρωνος καὶ Χαρι-
κλοῦς θυγατρός. οὔκουν εἰκὸς εἶναι τῷ κακίστῳ
τοὺς ἀρίστους εἰς κοινωνίαν γένους ἐλθεῖν, τὰ
μέγιστα καὶ τιμιώτατα λαμβάνοντας καὶ δι-
δόντας. ἀλλὰ Θησέα φασὶν οὐχ ὅτε τὸ πρῶτον
ἐβάδιζεν εἰς ᾿Αθήνας, ἀλλ᾽ ὕστερον ᾿Ελευσῖνά
τε λαβεῖν Μεγαρέων ἐχόντων, παρακρουσάμενον
Διοκλέα τὸν ἄρχοντα, καὶ Σκείρωνα ἀποκτεῖναι.
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἔχει τοιαύτας ἀντιλογίας.
20
THESEUS, rx. 1-x. 3
that Phaea was a female robber, a woman of mur-
derous and unbridled spirit, who dwelt in Crommyon,
was called Sow because of her life and manners,
and was afterwards slain by Theseus.
X. He also slew Sciron on the borders of Megara,
by hurling him down the cliffs. Sciron robbed
the passers by, according to the prevalent tradi-
tion; but as some say, he would insolently and
wantonly thrust out his feet to’ strangers and bid
them wash them, and then, while they were washing
them, kick them off into the sea. Megarian writers,
however, taking issue with current report, and, as
Simonides! expresses it, “waging war with an-
tiquity,” say that Sciron was neither a violent man
nor a robber, but a chastiser of robbers, and a
kinsman and friend of good and just men. For
Aeacus, they say, is regarded as the most righteous
of Hellenes, and Cychreus the Salaminian has divine
honours at Athens, and the virtues of Peleus and
Telamon are known to all men. Well, then, Sciron
was a son-in-law of Cychreus, father-in-law of
Aeacus, and grandfather of Peleus and Telamon,
who were the sons of Endeis, daughter of Sciron ©
and Chariclo. It is not likely, then, they say, that
the best of men made family alliances with the
basest, receiving and giving the greatest and most
valuable pledges. It was not, they say, when
Theseus first journeyed to Athens, but afterwards,
that he captured Eleusis from the Megarians, having
circumvented Diocles its ruler, and slew Sciron.
Such, then, are the contradictions in which these
matters are involved.
1 Fragment 193 (Bergk).
21
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
XI. Ἔν δὲ ᾿Ελευσῖνε Kepxtova τὸν ἐξ ’Ap-
καδί’α ς καταπαλαίσ’ ας ἀ3ν εῖaλn ε: Kal \ μικρὸ\ν προ-
ελθὼ\ν Δαμάσ4 την ἐ?ν 3 “Epived?Κ Ι τὸΝν Upoxpover/ npy,
ἀ᾽ ναγκάσ/ ας αὑὉτ ὸνΝ ἀ» πισοῦνlal τοῖlςal κλιντῆaρ σιν ὥfσ περ
τοὺς ξένους ἐκεῖνος. ἔπραττε δὲ ταῦτα μιμού-
μενος τὸ\ν ς Ήρακλέα, . καὶ \ γὰ\ρ ἐ> κεῖaν ος οἷ2ς ἐ3 πεβου-
λεύετο τρό’π, οις ἀμυνόμενος τοὺς προεπίχει-
ροῦντας, ἔθυσε τὸν Βούσιριν καὶ κατεπάλαισε
τὸ\ν 3 ᾿ΑνταῖAο ν καὶ τὸ\ν Κύκ"ἢ νον κατεμονομάχησε
καὶ \ toNv Té/p pepov συρρήξ/ ας τὴ\ν κεφαλὴ\ν ἀ2π έ-/
κτεινεν. ἀφ᾽ οὗ δὴ καὶ τὸ Τερμέρειον κακὸν ὀνο-
μασθῆν“ αι λέγουσι' παίων γάρ, ὡς ἔοικε, THa
κεφαλῇa τοὺ\ς ἐ3 ντυγχάν4 οντας ὁc Τέfρ μερος ἀ3 πώλ, -
λυεν. οὕτω δὴ καὶ Θησεὺς κολάζων τοὺς
πονηροὺς\ ἐ3 πεξῆaλ θεν, οἷLdς μὲ\ν ἐ3 βιάiζf οντο τοὺς\
ἄδ)λ λους, ὑeπ ’ b ἐ3 κεί/ν ου καταβιαζομέν»οἭ υς, ἐ2ν δὲΝ τοῖaςn
τρόποις τῆς ἑαυτῶν ἀδικίας τὰ δίκαια πάσχοντας.
XII. Upoidvte δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ γενομένῳ κατὰ
τὸν Κηφισόν, ἄνδρες ἐκ τοῦ Φυταλεδῶν γένους
ἀπαντήσαντες ἠσπάσαντο πρῶτοι, καὶ δεομένου
καθαρθῆναι, τοῖς νενομισμένοις ἁγνίσαντες καὶ
μειλίχια θύσαντες εἱστίif ασαν οἴκοι, μηδενὸς πρό-
τερον αὐτῷ φιλανθρώπου καθ᾽ ὁδὸνἐ ἐν τυχόντος.
Ἡμέρᾳ μὲν οὖν ὀγδόῃ λέγεται Kpoviov μηνός,
ὃν νῦν ᾿Ἑκατομβαιῶνα καλοῦσι, κατελθεῖν.
κατελθὼν δὲ εἰς τὴν πόλιν εὗρε τά τε κοινὰ
ταραχῆς μεστὰ καὶ διχοφροσύνης, καὶ τὰ περὶ
τὸν Aiyéa καὶ τὸν οἶκον ἰδίᾳ νοσοῦντα. Μήδεια
1 *Epwed with Coraés, after Pausanias, i. 38, 5: Ἕρμει, ἃ
correction by Palmerius of the MSS. ἙἭ,ρμιόνῃ.
22
THESEUS, x1. 1-xu. 2
XI. In Eleusis, moreover, he out-wrestled Cercyon
the Arcadian and killed him; and going on a little
farther, at Erineiis, he killed Damastes, surnamed
Procrustes, by compelling him to make his own body
fit his bed, as he had been wont to do with those of
strangers. And he did this in imitation of Heracles.
For that hero punished those wko offered him
violence in the manner in which they had plotted to
serve him, and therefore sacrificed Busiris, wrestled
Antaeus to death, slew Cycnus in single combat, and
killed Termerus by dashing in his skull. It is from
him, indeed, as they say, that the name “ Termerian
mischief” comes, for Termerus, as it would seem,
used to kill those who encountered him by dashing
his head against theirs. Thus Theseus also went on
his way chastising the wicked, who were visited with
the same violence from him which they were visiting
upon others, and suffered justice after the manner of
their own injustice.
XII. As he went forward on his journey and
came to the river Cephisus, he was met by men of
the race of the Phytalidae, who greeted him first,
and when he asked to be purified from bloodshed,
cleansed him with the customary rites, made pro-
pitiatory sacrifices, and feasted him at their house.
This was the first kindness which he met with on his
journey.
[Ὁ was, then, on the eighth day of the month
Cronius, now called Hecatombaeon, that he is said
to have arrived at Athens. And when he entered
the city, he found public affairs full of confusion and
dissension, and the private affairs of Aegeus and his
household in a distressing condition. For Medea,
23
-PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γὰ\ρ ἐ2κ Κορί,ν θου φυγοῦaσ α, φαρμάκ/ οις ὑe ποσχομέν, η
τῆaς ἀ᾽ τεκνία/ ς ἀ> παλλάξ7ε ιν Αἰγae έαae , συνῆaν αὐ>τ ῷ.A
προαισθομένη δὲ περὶ τοῦ Θησέως αὕτη, τοῦ
δὲ\ Αἰ?γ έω/ ς ἀ? γνοοῦlνalτ ος, ὄv ντος δὲ\ πρεσβυτέρ΄ ου καὶ \
φοβουμένου πάντα διὰ τὴν στάσιν, ἔπεισεν αὐτὸν
ὡ¢ς ἕέ/ν ον ἑe στιῶn ντα φαρμάκ/ οις ἀ>ν ελεῖνn . ἐλθὼ\ν
οὖ9ν ὁe Θησεὺς\ ἐSπEIὶN τὸ\ ἄ” ριστον οὐ5κ ἐ> δοκί, μαζε
φράζ/ ειν αὑ¢τe όνf , ὅa στις εἴ” η, πρότ/ ερος, ἐ2 κεί,ν ῳ δὲ\
βουλόμ΄ ενος ἀρχὴ\ν avevpéΨc ews παρασχεῖνa, κρεῶrnν
παρακειμένων σπασάμενος τὴν μάχαιραν, ὡς
ταύτῃ τέμνων, ἐδείκνυεν ἐκείνῳοΡ ταχὺ δὲ κατα-
μαθὼ\ν ὁL g Αἰγ2 εύς/ , τὴ\ν μὲ\ν κύ4λ ικα TODa φαρμάκ, ου
κατέ͵β7ὔ αλε, ToΝv δὲ\ υἱeὸX ν ἀ3 νακρίν/ ας ἠ> σπάζ/ε το, καὶ \
συναγαγὼν\ τοὺ\ς πολίτa ας ἐ> γνώρ, ιζεν, ἡἜ δέ/ω ς δεχο-
μέ/ν ους διὰ\ τὴ\ν ἀ» νδραγαθία£ν . λέfγA εται δὲ\ τῆaς
κύλικος πεσούσης ἐκχυθῆνa αι τὸμ ὴ φάρμακον ὅπου
νῦaνn ἐ“ν Δελφινί/ῳ τὸΟ Ὶ περί/ φρακτόν, ἐb]σ τιν, ἐ’ νταῦalθ α
ya\p ὁe Αἰγ᾽ εὺς\ ὠ”κ ει, καὶ \ ToVev te “ἙρμῆAν to\v πρὸeς e ἕω
τοῦa , ἱ3c εροῦn an καλοῦaσn ιν ἐbπe᾿e ) Αἰ2γ έ/ω ς πύλ΄ αις.
XIII. Οἱ δὲ Παλλαντίδαι πρότερον μὲν ἤλπιζον
αὐτοὶ τὴν βασιλείαν καθέξ4 ειν Αἰγέως ἀτέκνου
τελευτήσαντος" ἐπεὶ δὲ ΘησεὺςἊ ἀπεδεί’χ θη διά-
δοχος, χαλεπῶlςal φέροντες εἰ βασιλεύεUιA μὲν Αἰγεὺς\
θετὸς γενόμενος Ἰ]ανδίονι καὶ μηδὲν ᾿Βρεχθείδαις
προσήκων, βασιλεύσει δ᾽ ὁς Θησεὺς\ πάλιν ἔπηλυς
ὧnrν καὶ Eé/v os, ei>s πό,λ εμον καθί/σ ταντο. καὶ \
24
THESEUS, xn. 2—-xu1. 2
who had fled thither from Corinth, and promised by
her sorceries to relieve Aegeus of his childlessness,
was living with him. She learned about Theseus in
advance, and since Aegeus was ignorant of him, and
was well on in years and afraid of everything because
of the faction in the city, she persuaded him to
entertain Theseus as a stranger guest, and take him
off by poison. Theseus, accordingly, on coming to
the banquet, thought best not to tell in advance
who he was, but wishing to give his father a clue to
the discovery, when the meats were served, he drew
his sword, as if minded to carve with this, and
brought it to the notice of his father. Aegeus
speedily perceived it, dashed down the proffered cup
of poison, and after questioning his son, embraced
him, and formally recognized him before an assembly
of the citizens, who received him gladly because of
his manly valour. And it is said that as the cup
fell, the poison was spilled where now is the enclo-
sure in the Delphinium,! for that is where the house
of Aegeus stood, and the Hermes to the east of the
sanctuaryi s called the Hermes at Aegeus’s gate.
XIII. Now the sons of Pallas had before this
themselves hoped to gain possession of the kingdom
when Aegeus died childless. But when Theseus was
declared successor to the throne, exasperated that
Aegeus should be king although he was only an
adopted son of Pandion and in no way related to the
family of Erechtheus, and again that Theseus should
be prospective king although he was an immigrant
and a stranger, they went to war. And dividing
} The site of this sanctuary of the Delphinian Apollo is
conjectured to have been somewhere to the east of the
Olympieum,
ΞΡ
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
διελόντες ἑαυτοὺς οἱ μὲν ἐμφανῶς Σφηττόθεν 6
ἐχώρουν ἐπὶ τὸ ἄστυ μετὰ τοῦ πατρός, οἱ δὲ
Tapynttot κρύψαντες ἑαυτοὺς ἐνήδρευον, ὡς
διχόθεν ἐπιθησόμενοι τοῖς ὑπεναντίοις. ἣν δὲ
κῆρυξ μετ᾽ αὐτῶν, ἀνὴρ ᾿Αγνούσιος, ὄνομα Λεώς.
οὗτος ἐξήγγειλε τῷ Θησεῖ τὰ βεβουλευμένα τοῖς
Παλλαντίδαις. ὁ δὲ ἐξαίφνης ἐπιπεσὼν τοῖς
ἐνεδρεύουσι πάντας διέφθειρεν. οἱ δὲ μετὰ τοῦ
Πάλλαντος πυθόμενοι διεσπάρησαν. ἐκ τούτου
φασὶ τῷ Παλληνέων δήμῳ πρὸς τὸν ᾿Αγνουσίων
ἐπιγαμίαν μὴ εἶναι, μηδὲ κηρύττεσθαι τοὐ-
πιχώριον παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς “᾿᾿Ακούετε λεῷ"" μισοῦσι
γὰρ τοὔνομα διὰ τὴν προδοσίαν τοῦ ἀνδρός.
XIV. Ὁ δὲ Θησεὺς ἐνεργὸς εἶναι βουλόμενος,
ἅμα δὲ καὶ δημαγωγῶν, ἐξῆλθεν ἐπὶ τὸν Μαρα-
θώνιον ταῦρον, οὐκ ὀλίγα πράγματα τοῖς οἰκοῦσι
τὴν Τετράπολιν παρέχοντα" καὶ χειρωσάμενος
ἐπεδείξατο ζῶντα διὰ τοῦ ἄστεος ἐλάσας, εἶτα τῷ
᾿Απόλλωνε τῷ Δελφινίῳ κατέθυσεν. ἡ δὲ
Ἑκάλη καὶ τὸ περὶ αὐτὴν μυθολόγημα τοῦ
ξενισμοῦ καὶ τῆς ὑποδοχῆς ἔοικε μὴ πάσης
ἀμοιρεῖν ἀληθείας. ἔθυον γὰρ “Ἑκαλήσια οἱ
πέριξ δῆμοι συνιόντες “Εκάλῳ Διί, καὶ τὴν
᾿βκάλην ἐτίμων, Exarivny ὑποκοριζόμενοι διὰ τὸ
κἀκείνην νέον ὄντα κομιδῆ τὸν Θησέα EeviLovcav
ἀσπάσασθαι πρεσϑυτικῶς καὶ φιλοφρονεῖσθαι
1 Ἑκαλήσια the correction of Coraés: Ἑ καλήσιον.
26
THESEUS, xm. 2—x1v. 2
themselves into two bands, one of these marched
openly against the city from Sphettus with their
father; the other hid themselves at Gargettus and
lay in ambush there, intending to attack their
enemies from two sides. But there was a herald
with them, a man of Agnus, by name Leos. This
man reported to Theseus the designs of the Pallan-
tidae. Theseus then fell suddenly upon the party
lying in ambush, and slew them all. Thereupon the
party with Pallas dispersed. This is the reason, they
say, why the township of Pallene has no inter-
marriage with the township of Agnus, and why it
will not even allow heralds to make their customary
proclamation there of “ Akouete leoi’ (Hear, ye
people !). For they hate the word on account of the
treachery of the man Leos.
XIV. But Theseus, desiring to be at work, and at
the same time courting the favour of the people,
went out against the Marathonian bull, which was
doing no small mischief to the inhabitants of the
Tetrapolis.1 After he had mastered it, he made
a display of driving it alive through the city, and
then sacrificed it to the Delphinian Apollo. Now
the story of Hecale and her receiving and enter-
taining Theseus on this expedition seems not to be
devoid of all truth. For the people of the townships
round about used to assemble and sacrifice the
Hecalesia to Zeus Hecalus, and they paid honours
to Hecale, calling her by the diminutive name of
Hecaline, because she too, when entertaining
Theseus, in spite of the fact that he was quite a
youth, caressed him as elderly people do, and called
1 An early name for a district of Attica comprising
Marathon and three other adjacent townships.
27
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 τοιούfτA οις ὑ€ ποκορισμοῖςa. ἐ2 πεὶ δὲΝ εὔ” ξατο μὲ\ν
ὑe€ πὲρ\ αὐ>τ οῦL al τῷ“ Ari,τὰ Badif/ ovtos ἐ> πὶ \ τὴ\ν μάχ/ ην,
εἰ σῶAς παραγέν,ο ιτο, θύ4σ ειν, ἀπέθανε δὲ πρὶν
ἐ9 κεῖrfν ον ἐ9 πανελθεῖνA, ἔ” σχε TaAs εἰ> ρημένJ ας ἀ> μοιβὰς\
τῆaς φιλοξενίας τοῦn y Θησέω/ ς κελεύsσ αντος, ws
Φιλόχορος ἱστόρηκεν.
XV. > Ὀλί,γ ῳ δὲ\ ὕef στερον ἧkaκ ον ἐ>κ Κρήτ, ης τὸ\
τρίτον οἱ τὸν δασμὸν ἀπάξοντες. ὅτι μὲν οὖν
᾿Ανδρόγεω περὶ τὴν ᾿Αττικὴ\ν ἀποθανεῖνA δόλῳ
δόξαντος, 6 te Μίνως πολλὰ \ κακὰ \ πολεμῶaν
εἰργάζετο τοὺς ἀνθρώπους καὶ τὸ δαιμόνιον
ἔ4 φθειρε τὴnNν χώρ4 αν (ἀ> φορία, τε yaοpὗ καὶ \ νό4σ ος
ἐΡνΟ έσκηψε πολλὴ \ Kal \ a5 vé/ dvaay οἱ ς ποταμοί)΄, καὶ \
τοῦ θεοῦ προστάξαντος ἱλασαμένοις τὸν Μίνω
καὶ Ν διαλλαγεῖσa ι λωφήσ΄ ειν TOΝ μήν/ ιμα Kal \ τῶAν
κακῶν ἔσεσθαι παῦλαν, ἐπικηρυκευσάμενοι καὶ
δεηθέντες ἐποιήσαντο συνθήκας ὥστε πέμπειν δι᾽
ἐννέα ἐτῶν δασμὸν ἠϊθέους ἑπτὰ καὶ παρθένους
τοσαύτας, ὁμολογοῦσaA ιν οἱ e πλεῖaσ τοι τῶAν συγγρα-
bo
φέ/ω ν' τοὺ\ς δὲ\ παῖaδ ας εἰ>ς Κρήτ/ ην κομιζομέν/ ους ὁ€
μὲν τραγικώτατος μῦloθ) ος ἀ5)π οφαίν/ε ι τὸν Muvo-
ταυρον e»v τῷan Λαβυρίν7] θῳ διαφθείρa ειν, KἢA πλανω-
μένους αὐτοὺς\ καὶ τυχεῖnνr ἐξό‘ δου μὴ δυναμένους
ἐκεῖ καταθνήσκειν, τὸν δὲ Μινώταυρον, ὥσπερ
Εὐριπίδης φησί,
Σύzμ μικτον εἶδος κἀποφώλ/ ιον βρέ/φ ος
γεγονέναι, καὶ
Ταύρου μεμῖχθαι καὶ βροτοῦ διπλῇ φύσει.
28
THESEUS, xiv. 3-xv. 2
him affectionately by such diminutive names. And
since she vowed, when the hero was going to his
battle with the bull, that she would sacrifice to Zeus
if he came back safe, but died before his return, she
obtained the above mentioned honours as a return for
her hospitality at the command of Theseus, as Philo-
chorus has written.
XV. Not long afterwards there came from Crete
for the third time the collectors of the tribute. Now
as to this tribute, most writers agree that because
Androgeos was thought to have been treacherously
killed within the confines of Attica, not only did
Minos harass the inhabitants of that country greatly
in war,! but Heaven also laid it waste, for barrenness
and pestilence smote it sorely, and its rivers dried
up; also that when their god assured them in his
commands that if they appeased Minos and became
reconciled to him, the wrath of Heaven would abate
and there would be an end of their miseries, they
sent heralds and made their supplication and entered
into an agreement to send him every nine years a
tribute of seven youths and as many maidens. And
the most dramatic version of the story declares that
these young men and women, on being brought to
Crete, were destroyed by the Minotaur in the Laby-
rinth, or else wandered about at their own will and,
being unable to find an exit, perished there; and
that the Minotaur, as Euripides says, was
«A mingled form and hybrid birth of monstrous
shape,”
and that
“ Two different natures, man and bull, were joined
in him.” 2
1 Cf. Plato, Laws, p. 706.
2 Nauck, Trag. Graec. Frag.?, p. 680.
ao
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
XVI. Φιλό/χ ορος δέ/ φησιν οὐ> ταῦAτ α συγχωρεῖνa
Κρῆτa ας, ἀ’ λλὰ λέγειν ὅτε φρουρὰ μὲν ἦν ὁ€ Λαβύ-/
ρινθος, οὐ>δ ὲ\ν ἔy χων κακὸΝν ἀ>λ λ᾽ 7 ἢA τὸ\ μὴ\ διαφυγεῖaν
τοὺς\ φυλαττομένο, υς, ἀΒγΝῶ να δὲN ςὁ Μίν/ ως ἐ3.π 3
᾽ Ανδρόγ, εῳ γυμνικὸν\ ἐ> ποίε/ ι Kal \ τοὺς\ παῖ=δ ας ἄ> θλα
τοῖ-ς“ νικῶ-σ ιν ἐ> δίtδ ον τέ’ω ς ἐ3ν τῷA Λαβυρίν/ θῳ
φυλαττομέν/ο υς" ἐνίκα δὲ τοὺ\ς προτέρους ἀγῶoν ας
ὁ€ μέγιστον tap αὐτῷn δυνώμενος τό/τ ε Kal
στρατηγῶνA , ὄ5) νομα ΤLαAῦNρ ος, ἀνὴ\ρ οὐκ ἐπιεικὴς
Kal ἥμερος TOY τρό/π ον, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῖAς παισὶ τῶaν
᾽ Αθηναίω/ ν ὑe περηφάν4 ως Kal \ χαλεπῶςa προσ-
φερόμενος. ᾿Αριστοτέλης δὲ καὶ αὐτὸς ἐν τῇ
Bottiaiwy πολιτείᾳ/ δῆA λός/ ἐστιν οὐ νομίζων
ἀ’ ναιρεῖ~σ θαι τοὺς\ παῖaδ ας ὑe πὸ \ τοῦa Μίν΄ ω, ἀ? λλὰ \
θητεύοντας ἐν τῇ Κρήτη καταγηράσκειν' καί ποτε
ΚρῆAτ ας εὐχὴ\ν παλαιὰν ἀποδιδόν, τας ἀνθρώπων
ἀπαρχὴν εἰς Δελφοὺς ἀποστέλλειν, τοῖς δὲ
πεμπομένοις ἀναμιχθέντας ἐκγόsν ους ἐκείνων συν-
εξελθεῖνa : w€s δὲ\ οὐ>κ ἦ> σαν ἱe κανοὶ \ τρέΛφ ειν ἑe αυτοὺς\
αὐτόθι, πρῶaτ ον μὲν εἰς Ἰταλία’ ν διαπερᾶrnσ αι
“7
κἀκεῖ κατοικεῖν περὶ τὴν ᾿Ιαπυγίαν, ἐκεῖθεν δὲ
αὖiθy ις ei᾿sῚ Θράκ, ην κομισθῆνa αι καὶ \ κληθῆνrn αι
Βοττιαίους- διὸ τὰς κό,ρ ας TOοVν Βοττιαίω/ ν θυσίαν
τινὰ τελούσας ἐπᾷάδειν" ““ΜἼ ἴωμεν εἰς ᾽ ᾿Αθήνας."
” Εσοικε ya\p ὄ» ντως χαλεπὸνΝ εἶ- ναι φωνὴν\ ἐ> χού4σ ῃ
πόλει καὶ μοῦσαν ἀπεχθάνεσθαι. καὶ γὰρ ὁ
Μίνως ἀεὶ διετέλει κακῶς ἀκούων καὶ λοιδορού-
μενος ἐ3ν τοῖaς 9 ᾿Αττικοῖςa θεάτ"4 ροις, καὶ \ οὔvτ ε € ᾿Ησί/ο δος
320
THESEUS, xvi, 1-3
XVI. Philochorus, however, says that the Cretans
do not admit this, but declare that the Labyrinth
was a dungeon, with no other inconvenience than
that its prisoners could not escape; and that Minos
instituted funeral games in honour of Androgeos,
and as prizes for the victors, gave these Athenian
youth, who were in the meantime imprisoned in
the Labyrinth ; and that the victor in the first games
was the man who had the greatest power at that
time under Minos, and was his general, Taurus by
name, who was not reasonable and gentle in his
disposition, but treated the Athenian youth with
arrogance and cruelty. And Aristotle himself also,
in his “ Constitution of Bottiaea,” 1 clearly does not
think that these youths were put to death by Minos,
but that they spent the rest of their lives as slaves
in Crete. And he says that the Cretans once, in
fulfilment of an ancient vow, sent an offering of
their first-born to Delphi, and that some descendants
of those Athenians were among the victims, and
went forth with them; and that when they were
unable to support themselves there, they first crossed
over into Italy and dwelt in that country round
about Iapygia, and from there journeyed again into
Thrace and were called Bottiaeans; and that this
was the reason why the maidens of Bottiaea, in per-
forming a certain sacrifice, sing as an accompaniment :
“To Athens let us go!”’
And verily it seems to be a grievous thing for
a man to be at enmity with a city which has a
language and a literature. For Minos was always
abused and reviled in the Attic theatres, and it did
not avail him either that Hesiod ? called him “ most
1 Not extant. 2 Plato, Minos, p. 320 D; Hesiod,
Catalogues (Loeb edition), frag. 74.
21
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
αὐτὸν ὦνησε “βασιλεύτατον᾽ ovte” Opnpos “ oapt-
στὴν Διὸς " προσαγορεύσας, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπικρατήσαντες
οἱ τραγικοὶ πολλὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ λογείου καὶ τῆς σκηνῆς
ἀδοξίαν αὐτοῦ κατεσκέδασαν ὡς χαλεποῦ καὶ
βιαίου γενομένου. καΐτοι φασὶ τὸν μὲν Μίνω
βασιλέα καὶ νομοθέτην, δικαστὴν δὲ τὸν Ῥαδά-
μανθυν εἶναι καὶ φύλακα τῶν ὡρισμένων ὑπ᾽
ἐκείνου δικαίων.
XVII. "Evel δ᾽ οὖν καθῆκεν ὃ χρόνος ποῦ
τρίτου. δασμοῦ, καὶ παρέχειν ἔδει τοὺς πατέρας
ἐπὶ τὸν κλῆρον οἷς ἦσαν ἠΐθεοι παῖδες, αὖθις
ἀνεφύοντο τῷ Αὐγεῖ διαβολαὶ πρὸς τοὺς πολίτας,
ὀδυρομένους καὶ ἀγανακττ οῦντας ὅτι πάντων αἴτιος
ὧν ἐκεῖνος, οὐδὲν μέρος ἔχει τῆς κολάσεως μόνος,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ νόθῳ καὶ ξένῳ παιδὶ τὴν ἀρχὴν πεποιη-
μένος αὐτοὺς περιορᾷ γνησίων ἐρήμους καὶ
ἄπαιδας ἀπολειπομένους. ταῦτ᾽ ἡνία τὸν Θησέα,
καὶ δικαιῶν μὴ ἀμελεῖν, ἀλλὰ “κοινωνεῖν τῆς
τύχης τοῖς πολίταις, ἐπέδωκεν ἑἑ αυτὸν ἄνευ κλήρου
προσελθών. καὶ τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις τό τε φρόνημα
θαυμαστὸν ἐφάνη καὶ τὸ δημοτικὸν ἠγάπησαν,
ὁ δὲ Αἰγεύς, €ἐπ εὶ δεόμενος καὶ καθικετεύων ἀἀ μετά-
πειστον ἑώρα καὶ ἀμετάτρεπτον, ἀπεκλήρωσε
τοὺς ἄλλους παῖδας.
᾿Βλλάνικος δέ φησιν οὐ τοὺς λαχόντας ἀπὸ
κλήρου καὶ τὰς λαχούσας ἐκπέμπειν τὴν πόλιν,
αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν Μίνω παραγινόμενον ἐκλέγεσθαι
καὶ τὸν Θησέα πάντων ἑλέσθαι πρῶτον ἐπὶ τοῖς
ὁρισθεῖσιν' ὡρισμένον δ᾽ εἶναι τὴν μὲν ναῦν
᾿Αθηναίους παρέχειν, ἐμβάντας δὲ πλεῖν σὺν
αὐτῷ τοὺς ἠϊθέους μηδὲν ὅπλον ἀρήϊον ἐπιφερο-
22
THESEUS, xvi. 3-xvir. 3
royal,” or that Homer?! styled him “a confidant of
Zeus,” but the tragic poets prevailed, and from
platform and stage showered obloquy down upon
him, as a man of cruelty and violence. And yet
they say that Minos was a king and lawgiver, and
that Rhadamanthus was a judge under him, and a
guardian of the principles of justice defined by him.
XVII. Accordingly, when the time came for the
third tribute, and it was necessary for the fathers
who had youthful sons to present them for the lot,
fresh accusations against Aegeus arose among the
people, who were full of sorrow and vexation that he
who was the cause of all their trouble alone had no
share in the punishment, but devolved the kingdom
upon a bastard and foreign son, and suffered them to
be left destitute and bereft of legitimate children.
These things troubled Theseus, who, thinking it
right not to disregard but to share in the fortune of
his fellow-citizens, came forward and offered himself
independently of the lot. |The citizens admired his
noble courage and were delighted with his public
spirit, and Aegeus, when he saw that his son was not
to be won over or turned from his purpose by
prayers and entreaties, cast the lots for the rest of
the youths.
Hellanicus, however, says that the city did not
send its young men and maidens by lot, but that
Minos himself used to come and pick them out, and
that he now pitched upon Theseus first of all, follow-
ing the terms agreed upon. And he says the agree-
ment was that the Athenians should furnish the
ship, and that the youths should embark and sail
1 Odyssey, xix. 179.
33
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μένους, ἀπολομένου δὲ τοῦ Μινωταύρου πέρας
ἔχειν τὴν ποινήν.
Πρότερον μὲν οὖν οὐδεμία σωτηρίας ἐλπὶς
ὑπέκειτο: διὸ καὶ μέλαν ἱστίον ἔχουσαν, ὡς ἐπὶ
συμφορᾷ προδήλῳ, τὴν ναῦν ἔπεμπον" τότε δὲ
τοῦ Θησέως τὸν πατέρα θαρρύνοντος καὶ μεγαλη-
γοροῦντος ὡς χειρώσεται τὸν Μινώταυρον, ἔδωκεν
ἕτερον ἱστίον λευκὸν τῷ κυβερνήτῃ, κελεύσας
ὑποστρέφοντα σωζομένου τοῦ Θησέως ἐπάρασθαι
τὸ λευκόν, εἰ δὲ μή, τῷ μέλανι πλεῖν καὶ ἀποση-
μαίνειν τὸ πάθος.
‘O δὲ Σιμωνίδης οὐ λευκόν φησιν εἶναι τὸ
δοθὲν ὑπὸ τοῦ Αὐγέως, ἀλλὰ “φοινίκεον ἱστίον
ὑγρῷ πεφυρμένον πρίνου ἄνθει ἐριθώλλου"" καὶ
τοῦτο τῆς σωτηρίας αὐτῶν ποιήσασθαι σημεῖον.
ἐκυβέρνα δὲ τὴν ναῦν ᾿Αμαρσυάδας Φέρεκλος,
ὥς φησι Σεμωνίδης. Φιλόχορος δὲ παρὰ Σκίρου
φησὶν ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος τὸν Θησέα λαβεῖν κυβερ-
νήτην μὲν Ναυσίθοον, πρωρέα δὲ Φαίακα, μη-
δέπω τότε τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων προσεχόντων τῇ θα-
Ee καὶ yap εἷναι TOV ἠϊθέων ἕνα Mevéo @ny
Σκίρου θυγατριδοῦν. μαρτυρεῖ δὲ τούτοις ἡρῷα
Ναυσιθόου καὶ Φαίακος εἰσαμένου Θησέως Φα-
ληροῖ πρὸς τῷ τοῦ Σκίρου ἱερῷ, καὶ τὴν ἑορτὴν
τὰ Κυβερνήσιά φασιν ἐκείνοις τελεῖσθαι.
ΧΥΤΙ. Γενομένου δὲ τοῦ κλήρου παραλαβὼν
τοὺς λαχόντας ὁ Θησεὺς ἐκ τοῦ πρυτανείου, καὶ
παρελθὼν εἰς Δελφίνιον, ἔθηκεν ὑπὲρ αὐτῶν τῷ
᾿Απόλλωνι τὴν ἱκετηρίαν. ἦν δὲ κλάδος ἀπὸ
1 ἱερῷ bracketed by Bekker (near that of Scirus).
34
THESEUS, xvn. 3-xvit. 1
with him carrying no warlike weapon, and that if
the Minotaur was killed the penalty should cease.
On the two former occasions, then, no hope of
safety was entertained, and therefore they sent the
ship with a black sail, convinced that their youth
were going to certain destruction ; but now Theseus
encouraged his father and loudly boasted that he
would master the Minotaur, so that he gave the
pilot another sail, a white one, ordering him, if he
returned with Theseus safe, to hoist the white sail,
but otherwise to sail with the black one, and so
indicate the affliction.
Simonides, however, says! that the sail given by
Aegeus was not white, but “a scarlet sail dyed with
the tender flower of luxuriant holm-oak,” and that
he made this a token of their safety. Moreover, the
pilot of the ship was Phereclus, son of Amarsyas,
as Simonides says; but Philochorus says that The-
seus got from Scirus of Salamis Nausithoiis for his
pilot, and Phaeax for his look-out man, the
Athenians at that time not yet being addicted to
the sea, and that Scirus did him this favour because
one of the chosen youths, Menesthes, was his
daughter’s son. And there is evidence for this in
the memorial chapels for Nausithoiis and Phaeax
which Theseus built at Phalerum near the temple of
Scirus, and they say that the festival of the Cyber-
nesia, or Pilot’s Festival, is celebrated in their
honour.
XVIII. When the lot was cast, Theseus took
those upon whom it fell from the prytaneium and
went to the Delphinium, where he dedicated to
Apollo in their behalf his suppliant’s badge. This
1 Fragment 54 (Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Graeci, iii.4 p. 413).
35
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τῆς ἱερᾶς ἐλαίας, ἐρίῳ λευκῷ κατεστεμμένος.
εὐ» ξά“μ7 ενος δὲ\ κατέβ/ αινεν ἕΨ κτῃ μηνὸς\ ἐsπmὶi θά-,
λασσαν ἱσταμένου Μουνυχιῶνος, ἡ καὶ νῦν ἔτι
τὰς κόρας πέμπουσιν ἱλασομένας εἰς Δελφίνιον.
λέγεται δὲ αὐτῷ τὸν μὲν ἐν Δελφοῖς ἀνελεῖν
θεὸν ᾿Αφροδίτην καθηγεμόνα ποιεῖσθαι καὶ παρα-
καλεῖnνa συνέrμé πορον, θύ/ο ντε δὲ\ πρὸ\ς θαλάtσA σῃ τὴsiν
αἶγα θήλειαν οὖσαν αὐτομάτως τράγον γενέσθαι"
διὸ\ καὶ \ καλεῖaσ θαι τὴ\ ν θεὸSeνe S᾿h ἰ'πιτραγία, ν.
XIX. ᾿Επεὶ δὲ κατέπλευσεν εἰς Κρήτην, ὡς
μὲν οἱ πολλοὶ γράφουσι καὶ ἄδουσι, παρὰ τῆς
᾿Αριάδνης ἐρασθείσης τὸ λίνον λαβών, καὶ δι-
δαχθεὶς ὡς ἔστι τοῦ λαβυρίνθου τοὺς ἑλιγμοὺς
διεξελθεῖν, ἀπέκτεινε τὸν Μινώταυρον καὶ ἀπέ-
πλευσε τὴΝν Ἂ ᾿Αριά΄ δνην ἀ> ναλαβὼνx καὶ Ν τοὺς\ nbia-
θέους. Φερεκύδης δὲ καὶ τὰ ἐδάφη τῶν Κρη-
τικῶ“νἅμ νεῶ“ν φησιν ἐκκό/ ψαι τὸν Θησέα, τὴν
to
δί/ ωξιν ἀ> φαιρούμ/ ενον. Δήμ/ ων δὲ\ καὶ τὸΝν ΤαῦὉρ) ον
ἀναιρεθῆaν αί φησι τὸν τοῦn a Μίν’ ω στρατηγόν, ἐν
τῷ λιμένι διαναυμαχοῦντα τοῦ Θησέως ἐκ-
πλέο/ ντος. ὡeς δὲ\ ΦιλόχῬ ορος ἱe στό,ρ ηκε, τὸἊνς ἀ> γῶQνn α
τοῦa Μίν, ω συντελοῦνa τος, ἐDπITί δοξος ὧἋ ν ἅΨ παντας
πάλιν νικήσειν, ὁ Ταῦρος ἐφθονεῖτο. καὶ γὰρ ἡ
δύναμις αὐτοῦ διὰ τὸν τρόπον ἣν ἐπαχθής, καὶ
διαβολὴν εἶχεν ὡς τῇ Πασιφάῃ πλησιάζων. διὸ
καὶ τοῦ Θησέως ἀξιοῦντος ἀγωνίσασθαι συνε-
χώρ, ησεν ὁe Μίν/ ως. ἔ” θους δὲδὲ ὄν᾽ν, τος ἐaν K Κρή/ τῃ
θεᾶlalσ θαι καὶ τὰς γυναῖκa ας, Apiddvyn παροῦ“σὉ α πρός,
46
THESEUS, xvit. 1-x1x. 3
was a bough from the sacred olive-tree, wreathed
with white wool. Having made his vows and
prayers, he went down to the sea on the sixth day of
the month Munychion, on which day even now the
Athenians still send their maidens to the Delphinium
to propitiate the god. And it is reported that the
god at Delphi commanded him in an oracle to make
Aphrodite his guide, and invite her to attend him on
his journey, and that as he sacrificed the usual she-
goat to her by the sea-shore, it became a he-goat
(“tragos’’) all at once, for which reason the goddess
has the surname Epitragia.
XIX. When he reached Crete on his voyage, most
historians and poets tell us that he got from Ariadne,
who had fallen in love with him, the famous thread,
and that having been instructed by her how to make
his way through the intricacies of the Labyrinth, he
slew the Minotaur and sailed off with Ariadne and
the youths. And Pherecydes ways that Theseus also
staved in the bottoms of the Cretan ships, thus
depriving them of the power to pursue. And
Demon says also that Taurus, the general of Minos,
was killed ina naval battle in the harbour as Theseus
was sailing out. But as Philochorus tells the story,!
Minos was holding the funeral games, and Taurus
was expected to conquer all his competitors in them,
as he had done before, and was grudged his success.
For his disposition made his power hateful, and he
was accused of too great intimacy with Pasiphaé.
Therefore when Theseus asked the privilege of
entering the lists, it was granted him by Minos.
And since it was the custom in Crete for women to
view the games, Ariadne was present, and was
1 Cf. chapter xvi. 1.
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τε τὴν ὄψιν ἐξεπλάγη τοῦA Θησέως καὶ τὴΝν
ἄθλησιν ἐθαύμασε πάντων κρατήσαντος. ἡσθεὶς
δὲΝ καὶ A: ὁ Μίν4 ως μά᾽λ7ὔ ιστα τοῦa Ταύρ7 ου καταπαλαι-
σθέντος καὶ προπηλακισθέντος, ἀπέδωκε τῷ
Θησεῖ τοὺς παῖδας καὶ ἀνῆκε τῇ πόλει τὸν
δασμόν.
᾿Ιδίως δέ πως καὶ περιττῶς ὁ Κλείδημος ἀπήγ-
γεῖλε περὶ \ τούiτd ων, ἄBA νωθέν, ποθεν ἀ> ρξae άμSf ενος, ὅ-“τ ι
δό, γμα κοινὸ\ν ἦ3 ν ς “Ἑλλή͵ν ων μηδεμία, ν ἐ5 κπλεῖνa
τριήρη μηδαμόθεν ἀνδρῶν πέντε πλείονας δεχο-
μένην" τὸν δὲ ἄρχοντα τῆς ᾿Αργοῦς Ἰάσονα μόνον
mepiT@rctyὍ!ν | ἐb ξεί, ργοντα τῆaς θ θαλά/τ της τὰ\ λῃ-
στήρια. Δαιδάλου δὲ πλοίῳ φυγόντος εἰς ᾿Αθήνας,
Μίνως παρὰ τὰ δόγματα μακραῖς ναυσὶ διώκων
ὑπὸ χειμῶνος εἰς Σικελίαν ἀπηνέχθη κἀκεῖ κατέ-
στρεψε τὸν βίον. ἐπεὶ δὲ Δευκαλίων ὁ υἱὸς
or
αὐτοῦ πολεμικῶς ἔχων πρὸς τοὺς ᾿Αθηναίους
ἔπεμψεν, ἐκδιδόναν Δαίδαλον αὑτῷ κελεύων ἢ
τοὺς παῖδας ἀποκτενεῖν ἀπειλῶν ods ἔλαβεν
ὁμήρους ὁ Μίνως, τούτῳ μὲν ἀπεκρίνατο πράως
ὁ Θησεύς, παραιτούμενος ἀνεψιὸν ὄντα Δαίδαλον
κἀκείνῳ κατὰ γένος προσήκοντα, μητρὸς ὄντα
Μερόπης. τῆς ᾿Ερεχθέως, αὐτὸς δὲ ναυπηγίαν
ἐπεβάλετο, τὴν μὲν ἐν Θυμαιταδῶν αὐτόθι μα-
κρὰἊνς τῆ“ς ξενικῆ-ς ὁὃδο ῦ,A τὴ\ν δὲδὲ ὃ διὰΝ Ul Πιτθθέέ ως ἐ3ν
4} ροιζῆνA ι, βουλόμhiε νος λανθθά ν’ε ιν. γενομέiν ων δὲδὲ
ἑτοίμων ἐξέπλευσε τό,ν τε Δαίδαλον ἔχων καὶ
φυγάδας ἐκ Κρήτης καθηγεμόνας" οὐδενὸς δὲ
1 περιπλεῖν Sintenis and Bekker assume a lacuna after this
word. A Bodleian MS. (B*) has τριήρει πλήρει ἀνδρῶν ἱκανῶν
(with a trireme fully manned).
38
THESEUS, xix. 3-6
smitten with the appearance of Theseus, as well as
filled with admiration for his athletic prowess, when
he conquered all his opponents. Minos also was
delighted with him, especially because he conquered
Taurus in wrestling and disgraced him, and there-
fore gave back the youths to Theseus, besides
remitting its tribute to the city.
Cleidemus, however, gives a rather peculiar and
ambitious account of these matters, beginning a
great way back. There was, he says, a general
Hellenic decree that no trireme should sail from
any port with a larger crew than five men, and the
only exception was Jason, the commander of the
Argo, who sailed about scouring the sea of pirates.
Now when Daedalus fled from Crete in a merchant-
vessel to Athens, Minos, contrary to the decrees,
pursued him with his ships of war, and was driven
from his course by a tempest to Sicily, where he
ended his life.4 And when Deucalion, his son,
who was on hostile terms with the Athenians, sent
to them a demand that they deliver up Daedalus
to him, and threatened, if they refused, to put to
death the youth whom Minos had received from
them as hostages, Theseus made him a gentle reply,
declining to surrender Daedalus, who was his kinsman
and cousin, being the son of Merope, the daughter
of Erechtheus. But privately he set himself to
building a fleet, part of it at home in the township
of Thymoetadae, far from the public road, and part
of it under the direction of Pittheus in Troezen,
wishing his purpose to remain concealed. When
his ships were ready, he set sail, taking Daedalus
and exiles from Crete as his guides, and since none
1 Cf. Herodotus, vii. 170; Diodorus, iv. 79.
39
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
προειδότος, ἀλλὰ ναῦς φιλίας οἰομένων τῶν
Κρητῶν προσφέρεσθαι, τοῦ λιμένος κρατήσας
καὶ \ ἀ2 ποβὰς\ ἔ” φθασεν εἰ’ς τὴ\ν Κνωσσὸν\ παρελ-
θών: καὶ μάχην ἐν πύλαις τοῦ Λαβυρίνθου
συνά»ψἍἅ ας ἀ> πέκ’ὔτ εινε τὸ\ν Δευκαλίω, να καὶ x τοὺ\ς
δορυφόρους. ἐν δὲ τοῖς πράγμασι τῆς ᾿Αριάδνης
γενομένης, σπεισάμενος πρὸς αὐτὴν τούς τε
ἠϊθέους ἀνέλαβε καὶ φιλίαν ἐποίησε τοῖς ᾿Αθη-
ναίοις πρὸς τοὺς Κρῆτας, ὀμόσαντας μηδέποτε
πολέμου κατάρξειν.
XX. Πολλοὶ δὲ λόγοι καὶ περὶ τούτων ἔτι
λέγονται καὶ περὶ τῆς ᾿Αριάδνης, οὐδὲν ὁμολο-
γούμενον ἔχοντες. οἱ μὲν γὰρ ἀπάγξασθαί φασιν
αὐ3τ ὴ\ν ἀΟΣπ ολειφθεῖ“σὉ αν ὑξ πὸ Ν τοῦ“ Θf ησέω/ ς, οἱ « δὲΝ εἰ3ς
Νάξον ὑπὸ ναυτῶν κομισθεῖσαν Οἰνάρῳ τῷ ἱερεῖ
τοῦ Διονύσου συνοικεῖν, ἀπολειφθῆναι δὲ τοῦ
Θησέως ἐρῶντος ἑτέρας"
Δεινὸς γάρ μέν ἔτειρεν ἔρως Πανοπηΐδος Αἴγλης.
τοῦaτ ο yaἣνp τὸN i ἔ9ΛΧπ ος ἐ3κ τῶaν € Ησιόδ, ου Ἰ]εισί, στρατον
ἐν᾽ξ ελεῖaν) φησιν «ς Hpéa/ s ὁε ΜεγαρεύςΛ, ὥ[4 σπερ αὖ> πά-᾿ς
Aw ἐ> μβαλεῖνa εἰ2ς τὴ\ν ¢ “Ομή΄ρ ου νέ(Aκ υιαν τὸΝ
Θησέα ἹΠειρίθοόν τε θεῶν ἀριδείκετα τέκνα,
χαριζό,μ ενον 3 ᾿Αθηναίοbiι ς" ἔΝΜν ιοι δὲ\ καὶ \ τεκεῖaν ἐἊνκ
Θησέως ᾿Αριάδνην Οἰνοπίωνα καὶ Στάφυλον: ὧν
καὶ \ ὁς Ni7ao s ” ἴων ἐ2 στὶ Ν περὶ \ τῆaς ἑἙ αυτοῦ an πατρίδ/ ος
λέγων"
Τήν ποτε Θησείδης ἔκτισεν Οἰνοπίω’ ν.
40
THESEUS, xrx. 6—xx. 2
of the Cretans knew of his design, but thought the
approaching ships to be friendly, Theseus made
himself master of the harbour, disembarked his men, .
and got to Gnossus before his enemies were aware
of his approach. Then joining battle with them at
the gate of the Labyrinth, he slew Deucalion and his
body-guard. And since Ariadne was now at the
head of affairs, he made a truce with her, received
back the youthful hostages, and established friend-
ship between the Athenians and the Cretans, who
took oath never to begin hostilities.
XX. There are many other stories about these
matters, and also about Ariadne, but they do not
agree at all. Some say that she hung herself because
she was abandoned by Theseus; others that she was
conveyed to Naxos by sailors and there lived with
Oenarus the priest of Dionysus, and that she was
abandoned by Theseus because he loved another
woman :—
“ Dreadful indeed was his passion for Aigle child of
Panopeus.”’!
This verse Peisistratus expunged from the poems of
Hesiod, according to Hereas the Megarian, just as,
on the other hand, he inserted into the Inferno of
Homer the verse :—
“Theseus, Peirithous, illustrious children of
Heaven,” 2
and all to gratify the Athenians. Moreover, some
say that Ariadne actually had sons by Theseus,
Oenopion and Staphylus, and among these is Ion of
Chios, who says of his own native city :—
«“« This, once, Theseus’s son founded, Oenopion.” 3
1 Cf. Athenaeus, p. 557 a. 2 Odyssey, xi. 631.
8 Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Gr. ii.* p. 254.
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
a A δ᾽, ἐστὶ\ν εὐ4 φημό/τ, ατα τῶAν μυθολογουμένων,
πάντες ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν διὰ στόματος ἔχουσιν.
»ἴΜδ ιον δέ/ τινα περὶ \ τούfτi ων λό/γ ον ἐ’ κδέ/ δωκε Παίω͵ ν
ὁC r ᾿Αμαθούσ/ ιος. τὸἊν yaXpN Θησέα/ φησὶν\ ὑCsπ ὸ \ ye-
μῶAν ος εἰΨς Κύπ7 ρον ἐ2 ξενεχθέ/ν τα καὶ \ τὴ\ν ᾽ ᾿Αριά/ δνην
ἔγκυον ἔχοντα, φαύλως δὲ διακειμένην ὑπὸ τοῦ
σά/λ ου καὶ \ δυσφοροῦlσalα ν, ἐ> κβιβάσΨ αι μόν/ ην, αὐ᾽τ ὸν\
δὲἪ τῷa πλοί,ῳ βοηθοῦAν τα πάλ΄ ιν εἰ᾽ς τὸ\ πέ,λ αγος
ἀπὸN i τῆAς γῆaς φέ,ρ εσθαι. τὰ\ς οὖν ἐγχωρίους γυ-
ναῖκας τὴν ᾿Αριάδνην ἀναλαβεῖν καὶ περιέπειν
ἀθυμοῦσαν ἐπὶ τῇ μονώσει, καὶ γράμματα πλα-
στὰ προσφέρειν, w¢s τοῦA Θησέω/ ς γράφοντος αὐτῇ,lo)
καὶ περὶ τὴν ὠδῖνα συμπονεῖν καὶ βοηθεῖν: ἀπο-
θανοῦA σαν δὲ\ θά4ψ αι μὴA τεκοῦAσ αν. ἐπελθόντα
δὲ τὸν Θησέα καὶ περί,λ υπον γενόμενον τοῖaς μὲν
ἐγχωρίο, ις ἀπολιπεῖνa χρήματα, συντάξαντα θύειν
τῇa ? ᾿Αριά/δ νῃ, δύ΄ο δὲΝ μικροὺς\ ἀ» νδριαντί/σ κους ἱe δρύ-΄
σασθαι, τὸν μὲν ἀργυροῦν, τὸν δὲ χαλκοῦν. ἐν
δὲ\ τῇa θυσί7ᾳ τοῦA Τορπιαίο/ υ μηνὸς\ ἱe σταμέν/ ου
δευτέρᾳ κατακλινόμενόν τινα τῶν νεανίσκων
φθέγγεσθαι καὶ ποιεῖaνn ἅπερ ὠδί/ν ουσαι γυναῖκa ες"
καλεῖGνG δὲ τὸ ἄλσος ᾿Αμαθουσίο/υ ς, ἐν ᾧ τὸν τάφον
δεικνύ/ο υσιν, ? ᾿Αριά,δ νης > ᾿Αφροδίτ/ ης.
KiaA l Ναξίων δέ τινες ἰδί,ὔω ς ἱστοροῦAσ ι δύο
Miv, was γενέΖσ θθα ι καὶ \ δύδύ ο #.% Ἀριά(δὃν ας, ὧ4ν τὴ\ν μὲ\ν
Διονύσῳ γαμηθῆνa αί U7 φασιν ἐν Νάξῳ καὶ τοὺς
περὶ Στάφυλον τεκεῖὉν“ , τὴν δὲ νεωτέραν ἁ[ ρπα-
σθεῖσαν ὑπὸ τοῦ Θησέως καὶ ἀπολειφθεῖσαν εἰς
Νάξον ἐλθεῖaνn, καὶ τροφὸSνS pet > αὐτῆaς ὄνομα
42
THESEUS, xx. 2-5
Now the most auspicious of these legendary tales
are in the mouths of all men, as I may say; but a
very peculiar account of these matters is published
by Paeon the Amathusian. He says that Theseus,
driven out of his course by a storm to Cyprus, and
having with him Ariadne, who was big with child
and in sore sickness and distress from the tossing of
the sea, set her on shore alone, but that he himself,
while trying to succour the ship, was borne out to
sea again. The women of the island, accordingly,
took Ariadne into their care, and tried to comfort
her in the discouragement caused by her loneliness,
brought her forged letters purporting to have been
written to her by Theseus, ministered to her aid
during the pangs of travail, and gave her burial
when she died before her child was born. Paeon
says further that Theseus came back, and was greatly
afflicted, and left a sum of money with the people of
the island, enjoining them to sacrifice to Ariadne,
and caused two little statuettes to be set up in her
honour, one of silver, and one of bronze. He says
also that at the sacrifice in her honour on the second
day of the month Gorpiaeus, one of their young men
lies down and imitates the cries and gestures of
women in travail; and that they call the grove in
which they show her tomb, the grove of Ariadne
Aphrodite.
Some of the Naxians also have a story of their
own, that there were two Minoses and two Ariadnes,
one of whom, they say, was married to Dionysus in
Naxos and bore him Staphylus and his brother,
and the other, of a later time, having been carried
off by Theseus and then abandoned by him, came
to Naxos, accompanied by a nurse named Corcyne,
43
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Κορκύνην, ἧς δείκνυσθαι τάφον. ἀποθανεῖν δὲ
καὶ τὴν ᾿Αριάδνην αὐτόθι καὶ τιμὰς ἔχειν οὐχ
ὁμοίας τῇ προτέρᾳ. τῇ μὲν γὰρ ἡδομένους καὶ
παίζοντας ἑορτάζειν, τὰς δὲ ταύτῃ δρωμένας
θυσίας εἶναι πένθει tit καὶ στυγνότητε με
μυγμένας.
ΧΧΙ, Ἐκ δὲ τῆς Κρήτης ἀποπλέων εἰς Δῆλοι
κατέσχε' καὶ τῷ θεῷ θύσας καὶ ἀναθεὶς τὸ
ἀφροδίσιον ὃ παρὰ τῆς ᾿Αριάδνης ἔλαβεν, ἐχό-
ρευσε μετὰ τῶν ἠϊθέων χορείαν ἣν ἔτι νῦν ἐπι-
τελεῖν Δηλίους λέγουσι, μίμημα τῶν ἐν τῷ
Λαβυρίνθῳ περιόδων καὶ διεξόδων, ἔν τινι ῥυθμῷ
παραλλάξεις καὶ ἀνελίξεις ἔχοντι γιγνομένην.
καλεῖται δὲ τὸ γένος τοῦτο τῆς χορείας ὑπὸ
Δηλίων γέρανος, ὡς ἱστορεῖ Δικαίαρχος. ἐχό-
ρευσε δὲ περὶ τὸν Κερατῶνα βωμόν, ἐκ κεράτων
συνηρμοσμένον εὐωνύμων ἁπάντων. ποιῆσαι δὲ
καὶ ἀγῶνά φασιν. αὐτὸν ἐν Δήλῳ, καὶ τοῖς νικῶσι
τότε πρῶτον UT ἐκείνου φοίνικα δοθῆναι.
XXII. TH δὲ ᾿Αττικῇ προσφερομένων ἐκλα-
θέσθαι μὲν αὐτόν, ἐκλαθέσθαι δὲ τὸν “κυβερνήτην
ὑπὸ χαρᾶς ἐπώρασθαι τὸ ἱστίον ᾧ τὴν σωτηρίαν
αὐτῶν ἔδει γνώριμον τῷ Αἰγεῖ. γενέσθαι" τὸν
δὲ ἀπογνόντα ῥῖψαι κατὰ τῆς πέτρας ἑαυτὸν
καὶ διαφθαρῆναι. καταπλεύσας δὲ ὁ Θησεὺς
ἔθυε μὲν αὐτὸς ἃς ἐκπλέων θυσίας εὔξατο τοῖς
θεοῖς Φαληροῖ, κήρυκα δὲ ἀπέστειλε τῆς σωτη-
ρίας ἄγγελον εἰς ἄστυ. οὗτος ἐνέτυχεν ὀδυρομέ-
vous TE πολλοῖς τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως τελευτὴν καὶ
χαίρουσιν, ὡς εἰκός, ἑτέροις καὶ φιλοφρονεῖσθαι
44
THESEUS, xx. 5-xx11. 2
whose tomb they show; and that this Ariadne also
died there, and has honours paid her unlike those
of the former, for the festival of the first Ariadne is
celebrated with mirth and revels, but the sacrifices
performed in honour of the second are attended
with sorrow and mourning.
XXI. On his voyage from Crete, Theseus put in
at Delos, and having sacrificed to the god and dedi-
cated in his temple the image of Aphrodite which he
had received from Ariadne, he danced with his
youths a dance which they say is still performed by
the Delians, being an imitation of the circling
passages in the Labyrinth, and consisting of certain
rhythmic involutions and evolutions. This kind of
dance, as Dicaearchus tells us, is called by the
Delians The Crane, and Theseus danced it round the
altar called Keraton, which is constructed of horns
(“kerata’’) taken entirely from the left side of the
head. They say that he also instituted athletic
contests in Delos, and that the custom was then
begun by him of giving a palm to the victors.
XXII. It is said, moreover, that as they drew nigh
the coast of Attica, ‘Theseus himself forgot, and his
pilot forgot, such was their joy and exultation, to
hoist the sail which was to have been the token of
their safety to Aegeus, who therefore, in despair, threw
himself down from the rock and was dashed in pieces.
But Theseus, putting in to shore, sacrificed in person
the sacrifices which he had vowed to the gods at
Phalerum when he set sail, and then dispatched a
herald to the city to announce his safe return. The
messenger found many of the people bewailing the
death of their king, and others full of joy at his
tidings, as was natural, and eager to welcome him
VOL. I. ς 45
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ \ στεφανοῦlνal αὐ>τ ὸνΝ ἐ> πὶ \ τῇA σωτηρίᾳ/ προθύμlA οις
οὖσι. τοὺς μὲν οὖν στεφάνους δεχόμενος τὸ
κηρύκ, ειον ἀ> νέ/σ τεφεν, ἐ’ πανελθὼνΝ δὲ\ ἐ>π ὶ \ θά-/
λασσαν οὔπω πεποιημένου σπονδὰς τοῦA Θησέω/ ς
ἔ»Μ ξω περιέfμe εινε, μὴ\ βουλόμ΄ ενος τὴ\ν θυσί/α ν ταρά-,
Eat. γενομένων δὲ τῶν σπονδῶν ἀπήγγειλε τὴν
τοῦ Αἰγέως τελευτήν. οἱ δὲ σὺν κλαυθμῷ καὶ 10
θορύtAβ ῳ σπεύδfaο ντες ἀ3 νέ7β αινον εἰ?ς τὴ\ν πόλιν.
ὅ“ θεν Kal \ νῦlaν ἐ3ν τοῖ»ς-“ ὠ᾽ σχοφορίο‘ι6 ς στεφανοῦAσ θαι
μὲ\ν οὐ> TO\V κή/ρ υκα λέ/γ ουσιν, A᾽ NNA Ν TON κηρύκlA ειον,
ἐπιφωνεῖlνal δὲ ἐν ταῖaς σπονδαῖςa , ᾿Ελελεῦ,la) ? ‘lov,
"lov, τοὺς παρόντας" ὧν τὸ μὲν σπεύδοντες ἀνα-
φωνεῖνA καὶ \ παιωνίζ[4ο ντες εἰ>7ώ θασι, τὸ\ δὲA ἐ3 κπλή-/
ξεως καὶ ταραχῆς ἐστι.
Θάψας δὲ τὸΝν πατέρVa α, τῷ ᾿Απόλλωνι τὴν
εὐχὴAν ἀπεδίδου τῇ ἑβδόμῃ τοῦA IIvaveriafval os
μηνὸς ἱσταμένου" ταύτῃ γὰρ ἀνέβησαν εἰς ἄστυ
σωθέν/τ ες. ἡe μὲ\ν οὖSν ἕὉ“ ψησις τῶlaν ὀ2 σπρίω/ ν λέ,γ ε-
ται γί’ νεσθαι διὰ τὸ\ σωθέν/ τας αὐbτy οὺς\ εἰ>ς] ταὐbτ] ὸ Ἂ,
συμμῖξa αι τὰ περιόντα τῶfaν) σιτίieω ν καὶ μίαν
χύτραν κοινὴν ἑψήσαντας συνεστιαθῆναι καὶ
συγκαταφαγεῖνa ἀ>|λ λήλ/ο ις. τὴ\ν δὲ\ εἰ3 ρεσιώ΄ν ην
ἐ5 κφέ/ρ ουσι κλάδ/ ον ἐ> λαία/ ς ἐ“ρεὐί ῳ μὲ\ν ἀ> νεστεμμέν/ο ν,
ὥσπερ τότε τὴ\ν ἱκετηρία, ν, παντοδαπῶνa δὲ ἀνά-
πλεων καταργμάτ/ ων διὰ\ τὸΝ λῆ“ξὉ αι τὴ\ν ἀ᾽ φορίαν,
ἐπάδοντες"
46
THESEUS, xxu. 2-5
and crown him with garlands for his good news.
The garlands, then, he accepted, and twined them
about his herald’s staff, and on returning to the sea-
shore, finding that Theseus had not yet made his
libations to the gods, remained outside the sacred
precincts, not wishing to disturb the sacrifice. But
when the libations were made, he announced the
death of Aegeus. Thereupon, with tumultuous
lamentation, they went up in haste to the city.
Whence it is, they say, that to this day, at the
festival of the Oschophoria,! it is not the herald that
is crowned, but his herald’s staff, and those who are
present at the libations cry out: “Eleleu! Iou!
Iou!” the first of which cries is the exclamation of
eager haste and triumph, the second of consternation
and confusion.
After burying his father, Theseus paid his vows
to Apollo on the seventh day of the month Pyanep-
sion; for on that day they had come back to the
city in safety. Now the custom of boiling all sorts
of pulse on that day is said to have arisen from the
fact that the youths who were brought safely back
by Theseus put what was left of their provisions
into one mess, boiled it in one common pot, feasted
upon it, and ate it all up together. At that feast
they also carry the so-called “eiresione,’ which is a
bough of olive wreathed with wool, such as Theseus
used at the time of his supplication, and laden with
all sorts of fruit-offerings, to signify that scarcity was
at an end, and as they go they sing :—
1 A vintage festival, during which branches of the vine
with grapes upon them (ὄσχοι) were borne in procession from
Athens to Phalerum. See chapter xxiii. 2,
47
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Εἰρεσιώνη σῦκα φέρει καὶ πίονας ἄρτους
καὶ μέλι ἐν κοτύλῃ καὶ ἔλαιον ἀποψήσασθαι
καὶ κύλικ᾽ εὔξζωρον, ὡς ἂν μεθύουσα καθεύδῃ.
καίτ/ οι ταῦaτ ά , τινες ἐ32π7 ὶ N τοῖaς Ἥ Ηρακλεί(δὃα ις γί/ν εσθθα ι
λέγουσιν, οὕτως διατρεφομένοις ὑπὸ τῶnν > ᾿Αθη-
ναί/ω ν" ot e δὲ\ πλείο, νες ὡτς προείρ/ ηται.
XXIII. Τὸ δὲ πλοῖον ἐν ᾧ μετὰ τῶν ἠϊθέων
ἔ»Μπ λευσε Kal Ν πάλ, ιν ἐ? σώθ, η, TH\Y τριακόν, τορον, ἄx χρι
τῶnν Δημητρίο’,υ tova Φαληρέως χρόνων διεφύ-
λαττον οἱ > ᾿Αθηναῖο-“ι , τὰΝ μὲν παλαιὰ τῶἴων ξύλων
ὑφαιροῦντες, ἄλλα δὲ ἐμβάλλοντες ἰσχυρὰ καὶ
συμπηγνύν,τ ες οὕef τως ὥ“ στε καὶἣ ν τοῖaς φιλοσόφs οις
εἰ2ς τὸΝν αὐ?ξ όfμf ενον λόἡγ ον ἀ5 μφιδοξούμ7 ενον παρά-4
δειγμα τὸ πλοῖον εἶναι, τῶν μὲν ὡς τὸ αὐτό, τῶν
δὲἈΝ ὡς οὐ> TO\ αὐbτ) ὸ \ διαμέν, οι λεγόν/ των.
wv Ayovat δὲὃὲ καὶ \ τὴ\ν τῶlaνl ὠ3,σ χοφορίω, ν ἑe ορτὴ\ν
Θησέω, ς καταστήσαντος. οὐ γὰδρ ἁπάσας αὐτὸν
ἐξαγαγεῖνa τὰἊς λαχούσας τότε παρθένους, ἀλλὰ
τῶ“ν συνή,θ ων νεανί, σκων δύ,οὔ θηλυφανεῖςa μὲ\ν
ὀ3 φθῆnν αι καὶ veapovs, ἀνδρώδεις δὲ τὰς ψυχὰς καὶ
προθύμωνο υς, λουτροῖς“- τε θερμοῖςa καὶ σκιατραφίαις
καὶ ταῖtςad περὶ κόμην καὶ λειό4 τητα Kal χροιὰν
ἀλοιφαῖς καὶ κοσμήσεσιν ὡς ἔστιν ἐξαλλάξαντα
κομιδoῇn, καὶ \ ὃ δὃι δ/ά ξαντα φωνὴἊνν, Kal \ σχῆnμ α καὶ ‘
48
THESEUS, xxi. 5—xxm. 2
‘‘ Kiresione for us brings figs and bread of the richest,
Brings us honey in pots and oil to rub off from the
body,
Strong wine too in a beaker, that one may go to
bed mellow.”
Some writers, however, say that these rites are in
memory of the Heracleidae,! who were maintained
in this manner by the Athenians; but most put the
matter as I have done.
XXIII. The ship on which Theseus sailed with
the youths and returned in safety, the thirty-oared
galley, was preserved by the Athenians down to the
time of Demetrius Phalereus.2, They took away the
old timbers from time to time, and put new and
sound ones in their places, so that the vessel became
a standing illustration for the philosophers in the
mooted question of growth, some declaring that it
remained the same, others that it was not the same
vessel.
It was Theseus who instituted also the Athenian
festival of the Oschophoria. For it is said that he did
not take away with him all the maidens on whom the
lot fell at that time, but picked out two young men
of his acquaintance who had fresh and girlish faces,
but eager and manly spirits, and changed their out-
ward appearance almost entirely by giving them warm
baths and keeping them out of the sun, by arranging
their hair, and by smoothing their skin and beauti-
1 On the death of Heracles, his children, to escape the
wrath of the tyrant Eurystheus, came as suppliants to
Athens, bearing branches in their hands. See the Heracleidae
of Euripides.
3 Regent of Athens for Cassander of Macedon, 317-307 B.c.
Cf. Plato, Phaedo, p. 58.
49
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
βάδ/ ισιν ὡeς ἔWwν ι μά/λ ιστα παρθέν/ο ις ὁ«.μ οιοῦA σθαι καὶ εἶ
μηδὲν φαίνεσθαι διαφέρ/ οντας, ἐμβαλεῖνa εἰς τὸν
τῶν παρθένων ἀριθμὸν καὶ διαλαθεῖν ἅπαντας"
ἐ᾽π εὶ \ δὲw eἐ πανῆλa θεν, αὐbτ όνLé τε πομπεῦσa αι καὶ \ TOU\S
νεανίσκους οὕe τως ἀμπεχομέν4 ους ὡς νῦAν ἀμπέ-
yovtat τοὺ\ς ὀ3 σχοὺς\ φέρ/ οντες. φέ4ρ ουσι δὲ\ Διο-
νύσῳ καὶ ? ᾿Αριάδνῃ χαριζόμ4 ενοι διὰ τὸ\ν μῦfθa ον, ἢ
μᾶa λλον ὅὉτ ι συγκομιζομέν/ ης ὀ2 πώρ, ας ἐ> πανῆaλ θον'
αἱ δὲ δειπνοφόροι παραλαμβάνονται καὶ κοινω-
νοῦtaσl ι τῆaς θυσία, ς ἀπομιμούμεναι τὰς μητέρας
ἐκείνων TOlaVl λαχόν/ των: ἐπεφοίτων γὰρ αὐτοῖaς
ὄ3 ψα καὶ σιτία κομί/ζ ουσαι: καὶ μῦaθ οι λέγονται
διὰ τὸ κἀκείνας εὐθυμία/ ς ἕνεκα καὶ παρηγορίας
μύ4θ ους διεξιέ/ν αι τοῖaς παισί., ταῦAτ α μὲ\ν οὖ=ν Kal \
Δήμων ἱστό,ρ ηκεν. ἐξηρέ/θ η δὲ καὶ τέfeμ ενος αὐτῷ,A
καὶ τοὺς ἀπὸ τῶaν Tapacyov, Twy τὸν δασμὸν
οἴκων ἔταξεν els θυσί,α ν αὑτῷa τελεῖaν ἀποφοράς"
καὶ τῆaςA θυσία’ ς ἐπεμελοῦAν το Φυταλίδαι, Θησέως
ἀποδόντος αὐτοῖς ἀμοιβὴν τῆς φιλοξενίας.
XXIV. Mera δὲ τὴ\ν Αἰγέως τελευτὴν μέγα Kal
θαυμαστὸν ἔργον εἰς νοῦν βαλόμενος συνῴκισε
τοὺς τὴν ᾿Αττικὴν κατοικοῦντας εἰς ἕν ἄστυ, καὶ
μιᾶ“ς πό,λ εως Ea va δῆa“μ ον ἀ᾽ πέφ/ ηνε, τέ/ω ς σποράδ4 ας
ὄντας καὶ δυσανακλήτους πρὸς τὸ κοινὸν πάντων
5ο
THESEUS, xxi. 2-xxiv. 1
fying their complexions with unguents; he also
taught them to imitate maidens as closely as possible
in their speech, their dress, and their gait, and to
leave no difference that could be observed, and then
enrolled them among the maidens who were going
to Crete, and was undiscovered by any. And when
he was come back, he himself and these two young
men headed a procession, arrayed as those are now
arrayed who carry the vine-branches. They carry
these in honour of Dionysus and Ariadne, and
because of their part in the story; or rather, because
they came back home at the time of the vintage. And
the women called Deipnophoroi, or supper-carviers,
take part in the procession and share in the sacrifice,
in imitation of the mothers of the young men and
maidens on whom the lot fell, for these kept coming
with bread and meat for their children. And tales
are told at this festival, because these mothers, for
the sake of comforting and encouraging their chil-
dren, spun out tales for them. At any rate, these
details are to be found in the history of Demon.
Furthermore, a sacred precinct was also set apart for
Theseus, and he ordered the members of the fami-
lies which had furnished the tribute to the Minotaur
to make contributions towards a sacrifice to himself.
This sacrifice was superintended by the Phytalidae,
and Theseus thus repaid them for their hospitality.!
XXIV. After the death of Aegeus, Theseus
conceived a wonderful design, and settled all the
residents of Attica in one city, thus making one
people of one city out of those who up to that time
had been scattered about and were not easily called
together for the common interests of all, nay, they
1 Cf. chapter xii. 1.
51
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
συμφέρον, ἔστι δ᾽ STE καὶ διαφερομένους ἀλλήλοις
2 καὶ πολεμοῦντας. ἐπιὼν οὖν ἀνέπειθε κατὰ 11
δήμους καὶ γένη, τῶν μὲν ἰδιωτῶν καὶ πενήτων
ἐνδεχομένων ταχὺ τὴν παράκλησιν αὐτοῦ, τοῖς
δὲ δυνατοῖς ἀβασίλευτον πολιτείαν προτείνων
Kal δημοκρατίαψ ν αὐτῷfe l μό/ν ον ἄ4ρ χοντι πολέμου
Kal \ νόf μων φύ(λ4 ακι χρησομένlη4 ν, τῶaν δὲ\ ἄv λλων
3 παρέξουσαν ἅπασιν ἰ> σομοιρία/ ν. τοὺς μὲν ἢ
ταῦaτ α ἔ” πειθεν, οἱ e δὲ\ τὴ\ν δύ/ν αμιν αὐ>τ οῦ a δεδιό,τ ες
μεγά΄λ ην οὖs σαν ἤ"δὃη καὶ \ τὴ\ν τόΙ͂λ μαν, ἐ5 βού΄λ οντο
πειθόμ, ενοι μᾶnλ λον ἢ3 βιαζόμ, ενοι ταῦAτ α συγχωρεῖνA.
καταλύσας οὖν τὰ\ Tap ἑκάστοις πρυτανεῖαa Kal
βουλευτήρια καὶ ἀ3 ρχάς4, ἕa ν δὲ\ ποιή/σ ας ἅ¢ πασι
κοινὸν ἐνταῦa θα πρυτανεῖο“aν καὶ Ν βουλευτήριον
ὅ«“π ου νῦAν Ὁἵ“ δρυται TOΝ ἄ” στυ, TH/Y Te πόλ4 ιν > ᾿Αθή/ν ας
προσηγόρ, ευσε καὶ Παναθήν/ αια θυσίαf ν ἐποί,η σε
4 κοινήν4 . ἔ», θυσε δὲ\ καὶ \ Μετοίκ, ια τῇa ἕ“ κτῃ ἐ> πὶ
δέκα τοῦa ¢ Ἑκατομβαιῶνaο ς, ἣe ν ἔ4 τι viAv θύουσι.
καὶ τὴἉν βασιλεία, ν ἀ3 φείς/ , ὥeeσ περ ὡe μολόγ, ησε,
διεκόσμει τὴν πολιτεία’ ν ἀπὸ\ θεῶaν ἀ> ρχόμ, ενος"
ἧκε yap αὐτῷa χρησμὸςΝ ἐκ ΔελφῶνA μαντευομένῳ
περὶ τῆaς πό/λ εως"
565 Αἰὐγείδη Θησεῦ, 1Πιτθηΐδος ἔκγονε κούρης,
πολλαῖς τοι πολίεσσι πατὴρ ἐμὸς ἐγκατέθηκ ε
τέρματα καὶ κλωστῆρας ἐν ὑμετέρῳ πτολιέθρῳ.
ἀλλὰ σὺ μή τι λίην πεπονημένος ἔνδοθι θυμὸν
βουλεύειν: ἀσκὸς γὰρ ἐν οἴδματι ποντοπορεύσει.
1 ἰσομοιρίαν. τοὺς μὲν with Coraés and Bekker: ἰσομοιρίαν,
τοὺς μέν.
52
THESEUS, xxiv. 1-5
sometimes actually quarrelled and fought with each
other. He visited them, then, and tried to win
them over to his project township by township and
clan by clan. The common folk and the poor
quickly answered to his summons; to the powerful
he promised government without a king and a
democracy, in which he should only be commander
in war and guardian of the laws, while in all else
everyone should be on an equal footing. Some he
readily persuaded to this course, and others, fearing
his power, which was already great, and his boldness,
chose to be persuaded rather than forced to agree to
it. Accordingly, after doing away with the town-
halls and council-chambers and magistracies in the
several communities, and after building a common
town-hall and council-chamber for all on the ground
where the upper town of the present day stands, he
named the city Athens, and instituted a Panathenaic
festival. He instituted also the Metoecia, or Festival
of Settlement, on the sixteenth day of the month
Hecatombaeon, and this is still celebrated. Then,
laying aside the royal power, as he had agreed, he
proceeded to arrange the government, and that too
with the sanction of the gods. For an oracle came
to him from Delphi, in answer to his enquiries about
the city, as follows :—
“Theseus, offspring of Aegeus, son of the daughter
of Pittheus,
Many indeed the cities to which my father has given
Bounds and future fates within your citadel’s
confines.
Therefore be not dismayed, but with firm and
confident spirit
Counsel only; the bladder will traverse the sea and
its surges.”
53
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τοῦτο δὲ καὶ \ Σί/ βυλλαν ὕστερον ἀποστοματίσαι
πρὸς τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν ἱστοροῦσa ιν, ἀναφθεγξαμένην'
᾿Ασκὸς βαπτίζῃ" δῦναι δέ τοι οὐ θέμις ἐστίν.
XXV. Ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον αὐξῆσαι τὴν πόλιν βου-
λόμενος ἐκάλει πάντας ἐπὶ τοῖς ἴσοις, καὶ τὸ
“Δεῦρa᾽? ite πάν4 τες λεῴ᾽ ? κή/ρ υγμα Θησέως γενέ-
σθαι φασὶ πανδημίαν τινὰ καθιστάντος. οὐ μὴν
ἄτακτον οὐδὲ μεμιγμένην περιεῖδεν ὑπὸ πλήθους
ἐπιχυθέντος ἀκρίτου γενομένην τὴν δημοκρατίαν,
ἀλλὰ πρῶτος ἀποκρίνας χωρὶς εὐπατρίδας καὶ
γεωμόρους καὶ δημιουργούς, εὐπατρίδαις δὲ γινώ-
σκειν τὰ θεῖa α καὶ παρέχ΄ ειν ἄρχοντας ἀποδοὺς
καὶ νόμων διδασκάλους εἶναι καὶ ὁσίων καὶ ἱερῶν
ἐ9 ξηγητάς΄, τοῖaςl aeἀ λλοις πολίτ, αις ὥΨ σπερ εἰ5ς. Ἐν ἴοἱ σον
κατέστησε, δόξῃ μὲν εὐπατριδῶν, χρείᾳ δὲ γεω-
μόρων, πλήθει δὲ δημιουργῶν ὑπερέχειν δοκούν-
των. ὅτι δὲ πρῶτος ἀπέκλινε πρὸς τὸν ὄχλον, ὡς
"A ριστοτέλὅλη,ς φησί,, ὔ καὶ } ἀ> φῆaκn ε TOΝ μοναρχεῖνa, ἔPiοnιs κε
μαρτυρεῖνA καὶ “Ὅμηρος ἐν νεῶlaνl καταλό/γ ῳ μόνους
᾿Αθηναίους δῆa μον προσαγορεύσ/ ας.
"Exowe δὲ καὶ νόμισμα, βοῦν ἐγχαράξας, ἢ διὰ
os
τὸQν Μαραθών7ι ον ταῦAρ ον, 1N)e διὰ\ τὸ\ν Μίν, ω otpatn-
γόν, ἢ πρὸς γεωργίαν τοὺς πολίτας παρακαλῶν.
ἀ5π. ᾽ὃ “951ἐ9 κεί/ν ου δέ» φασι τὸ\ ἑne κατό,μ βοιον καὶ \ τὸ\ δεκά-»
βοιον ὀνομασθῆνa αι. προσκτησάμενος δὲ\ τῇa ? ᾿Ατ-
τικῇa τὴν Μεγαρικὴν\ βεβαίωleς , τὴ\ν θρυλουμέν, ην
94
THESEUS, xxiv. 5—xxv. 3
And this oracle they say the Sibyl afterwards repeated
to the city, when she cried :—
“Bladder may be submerged; but its sinking will
not be permitted.”
XXV. Desiring still further to enlarge the city,
he invited all men thither on equal terms, and the
phrase “Come hither all ye people,” they say was
a proclamation of Theseus when he established a
people, as it were, of all sorts and conditions. How-
ever, he did not suffer his democracy to become
disordered or confused from an indiscriminate mul-
titude streaming into it, but was the first to separate
the people into noblemen and husbandmen and
handicraftsmen. To the noblemen he committed
the care of religious rites, the supply of magistrates,
the teaching of the laws, and the interpretation of
the will of Heaven, and for the rest of the citizens
he established a balance of privilege, the noblemen
being thought to excel in dignity, the husbandmen
in usefulness, and the handicraftsmen in numbers.
And that he was the first to show a leaning towards
the multitude, as Aristotle says, and gave up his
absolute rule, seems to be the testimony of Homer
also, in the Catalogue of Ships,! where he speaks of
the Athenians alone as a “ people.”
He also coined money, and stamped it with the
effigy of an ox, either in remembrance of the Mara-
thonian bull, or of Taurus, the general of Minos, or
because he would invite the citizens to agriculture.
From this coinage, they say, “ten oxen” and “a
hundred oxen” came to be used as terms of valuation.
Having attached the territory of Megara securely to
1 Iliad, ii. 547.
55
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐν ᾿Ισθμῷ στήλην ἔστησεν, ἐπυγράψας τὸ διορίζον
ἐπίγραμμα τὴν χώραν δυσὶ τριμέτροις, ὧν ἔφραζε
τὸ μὲν πρὸς ἕω
Τάδ᾽ οὐχὶ Πελοπόννησος, ἀλλ᾽ ᾿Ιωνία:
701 δὲ πρὸς ἑσπέραν
Tad ἐστὶ Πελοπόννησος, οὐκ Ἰωνία.
καὶ τὸν ἀγῶνα πρῶτος ἔθηκε κατὰ ζῆλον “Hpa-
κλέους, ὡς δι᾽ ἐκεῖνον ᾿Ολύμπια τῷ Διί, καὶ dv
αὐτὸν Ἴσθμια τῷ Ποσειδῶνι φιλοτιμηθεὶς ἄγειν
τοὺς “EAAnvas. ὁ γὰρ ἐπὶ Μελικέρτῃ τεθεὶς αὐ-
τόθι νυκτὸς ἐδρᾶτο, τελετῆς ἔχων μᾶλλον ἢ θέας
καὶ \ πανηγυρισμοῦ A τά/ξ ιν. ἔΨ νιοι δέ, φασιν ἐDπEὶN
Σκείρωνι τὰ Ἴσθμια τεθῆναι, τοῦ Θησέως ἀφο-
σιουμέν/ ου τὸ\ν φό,ν ον διὰ\ τὴ\ν συγγέν,ε ιαν: Σκεί,ρ ωνα
γὰρ υἱὸν εἶναι Ἰζανήθου καὶ “Ηνιόχης τῆς Πιτθέως,.
οἱ e δὲἊΝ , Σίν/ ιν, οὐ> Σκεί’ρ ωνα, καὶ \ τὸ\ν ἀ> γῶaν α τεθῆAν αι
διὰ\ τοῦleτ) ον ὑ¢ πὸ A Θησέω/ ς, ov᾽ δι᾽ 5 ἐκεῖnνr ον. ἔ” ταξεν οὖ=ν
καὶ διωρίσατο πρὸς τοὺς Κορινθίους ᾿Αθηναίων 13
τοῖaς ἀb φικνουμέν,ο ις ἐ3,π =ὶ | τὰ\ Ἴσθμια παρέχ/ ειν προ-
εδρίδα ν ὅ“ σον ἂx ν τό,π ον ἐ2 πί’ σχῃ καταπετασθὲν\ τὸX N
τῆς θεωρίδος νεὼς ἱστίον, ὡς Ἑλλάνικος καὶ
"Avdpav ὁ ᾿Αλικαρνασεὺς ἱστορήκασιν.
1 +d μὲν, τὸ δὲ with Coraés, after Reiske: τὰ μὲν, τὰ δέ.
56
THESEUS, xxv. 3-5
Attica, he set up that famous pillar on the Isthmus,
and carved upon it the inscription giving the terri-
torial boundaries. It consisted of two trimeters, of
which the one towards the east declared :—
‘Here is not Peloponnesus, but Ionia ;”
and the one towards the west :—
“ Here is the Peloponnesus, not Ionia.”
He also instituted the games here, in emulation of
Heracles, being ambitious that as the Hellenes, by
that hero’s appointment, celebrated Olympian games
in honour of Zeus,so by his own appointment they
should celebrate Isthmian games in honour of
Poseidon. For the games already instituted there
in honour of Melicertes were celebrated in the night,
and had the form of a religious rite rather than of a
spectacle and public assembly. But some say that
the Isthmian games were instituted in memory of
Sciron, and that Theseus thus made expiation for his
murder, because of the relationship between them ;
for Sciron was a son of Canethus and Henioche, who
was the daughter of Pittheus. And others have it
that Sinis, not Sciron, was their son, and that it was
in his honour rather that the games were instituted
by Theseus. However that may be, Theseus made
a formal agreement with the Corinthians that they
should furnish Athenian visitors to the Isthmian
games with a place of honour as large as could be
covered by the sail of the state galley which brought
them thither, when it was stretched to its full
extent. So Hellanicus and Andron of Halicarnassus
tell us.
57
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
XXVI. Eis δὲ τὸν πόντον ἔπλευσε τὸν ἘΕὔξει-
νον, ὡς μὲν Φιλόχορος Kal τινες ἄλλοι λέγουσι,
μεθ᾽ Ἡρακλέους ἐπὶ τὰς ᾿Αμαζόνας -«συστρατεύ-
σας, καὶ γέρας 1 ᾿Αντιόπην ἔλαβεν" οἱ δὲ πλείους,
ὧZCν ἐστMὶe καὶ\ Φερεκύδ, ης καὶ ν ᾿Εἰλάν΄,ι κος καὶ ν ἐ ‘Hpo,-
δωρος, ὕστερόν φασιν “Ἡρακλέους ἰδιόστολον
πλεῦσαι τὸν Θησέα καὶ τὴν ᾿Αμαζόνα λαβεῖν
αἰχμάλωτον, πιθανώτερα λέγοντες. οὐδεὶς yap
ἄλλος ἱστόρηται τῶν μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ στρατευσάντων
᾿Αμαζόνα λαβεῖν αἰχμάλωτον. Βίων δὲ καὶ ταύ-
την παρακρουσάμενον οἴχεσθαι λαβόντα: φύσει
γὰρ οὔσας τὰς ᾿Αμαζόνας φιλάνδρους οὔτε φυγεῖν
τὸν Θησέα προσβάλλοντα τῇ χώρᾳ, ἀλλὰ καὶ
ξένια πέμπειν" τὸν δὲ τὴν κομίξουσαν ἐμβῆναι
παρακαλεῖν εἰς τὸ πλοῖον: ἐμβάσης δὲ ἀνα-
χθῆναι.
Μενεκράτης δέ τις, ἱστορίαν περὶ Νικαίας τῆς
ἐν Βιθυνίᾳ πόλεως ἐκδεδωκώς, Θησέα φησὶ τὴν
᾿Αντιόπην ἔχοντα διατρῖψαι περὶ τούτους τοὺς
τόπους" τυγχάνειν € συστρατεύοντας αὐτῷ τρεῖς
νεανίσκους ἐξ ᾿Αθηνῶν ἀδελφοὺς ἀχλήλων, υὖ-
νεων καὶ Θόαντα καὶ Σολόεντα. τοῦτον οὖν ἐρῶν-
τα τῆς ᾿Αντιόπης καὶ λανθάνοντα τοὺς ἄλλους
ἐξειπεῖν πρὸς ἕνα τῶν συνήθων: ἐκείνου δὲ περὶ
τούτων ἐντυχόντος τῇ ᾿Αντιόπῃ, τὴν μὲν πεῖραν
ἰσχυρῶς ἀποτρίψασθαι, τὸ δὲ πρᾶγμα σωφρόνως
ἅμα καὶ πράως ἐνεγκεῖν καὶ πρὸς τὸν “Θησέα μὴ
κατηγορῆσαι. τοῦ δὲ Σολόεντος ὡς ἀπέγνω ῥί-
ψαντος ἑαυτὸν εἰς ποταμόν τινα καὶ διαφθαρέντος,
dag τότε τὴν αἰτίαν καὶ τὸ πάθος τοῦ
* γέρας with Cobet ; γέρας ἀριστεῖον MSS., Coraés, Bekker :
γέρας ἀριστειῶν.
58
THESEUS, xxvi. 1-4
XXVI. He also made a voyage into the Euxine
Sea, as Philochorus and sundry others say, on a
campaign with Heracles against the Amazons, and
received Antiope as a reward of his valour; but the
majority of writers, including Pherecydes, Hellanicus,
and Herodorus, say that Theseus made this voyage
on his own account, after the time of Heracles, and
took the Amazon captive; and this is the more
probable story. For it is not recorded that any one
else among those who shared his expedition took an
Amazon captive. And Bion says that even this
Amazon he took and carried off by means of a strata-
gem. The Amazons, he says, were naturally friendly
to men, and did not fly from Theseus when he
touched upon their coasts, but actually sent him
presents, and he invited the one who brought them
to come on board his ship; she came on board, and
he put out to sea.
And a certain Menecrates, who published a history
of the Bithynian city of Nicaea, says that Theseus,
with Antiope on board his ship, spent some time in
those parts, and that there chanced to be with him
on this expedition three young men of Athens who
were brothers, Euneos, Thoas, and Solois. This last,
he says, fell in love with Antiope unbeknown to the
rest, and revealed his secret to one of his intimate
friends. That friend made overtures to Antiope,
who positively repulsed the attempt upon her, but
treated the matter with discretion and gentleness,
and made no denunciation to Theseus. Then Solois,
in despair, threw himself into a river and drowned
himself, and Theseus, when he learned the fate of
59
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
νεανίσκου τὸ\ν Θησέα βαρέω, ς ἐνεγκεῖνa , καὶ δυσφο-
ροῦa ντα λόγιόν, Te πυθό,χ ρηστον ἀνενεγκεῖν-Ὁ πρὸς
ἑαυτόν" εἶναι yap αὐτῷa προστεταγμέν/ο ν ἐν Aed-
gotas ὑ¢ πὸΝ ᾽, τῆnς Πυθία, ς, ὅ«“τ αν ἐπ πὶ ὧδ ξέ/ν ης ἀ> νιαθῇa pa-7
λιστα καὶ περί,λ υπος γέ7ν] ηται, πόλ, ιν ἐκεῖn an κτί’σὔ αι
καὶ τῶfaν) ἀμφ᾽ > αὐτόν τινας ἡγεμόν/ ας καταλιπεῖνn.a
ἐκ δὲ τούτου τὴν μὲν πόλιν, ἣν ἔκτισεν, ἀπὸ τοῦ
nr
θεοῦa ΠΠυθθόό πολιν προσαγορεῦσrnα ι, > Σολό/ εντα δOὲN τὸ\ν
πλησίον ποταμὸν ἐπὶ τιμῇa τοῦa νεανί,σ κου. κατα-
λιπεῖνan δὲ\ Kal \ τοὺς\ ἀ’ δελφοὺς\ αὐ>τ οῦ,a οἷ© ον ἐ2 πιστά-4
τας καὶ νομοθέτας, καὶ σὺν αὐτοῖς "Epuov ἄνδρα
τῶaν ’ ᾿Αθή/ν ησιν εὐ> πατριδῶνa : a>d ’ 4? ov+ καὶ τό4π ον
‘EBρ μοῦn καλεῖν“ οἰ"Ὁκ ίἢα. ν τοὺς\ Il υθθο πολίτ, ας, οὐ»κ
ὀ3 ρθῶοςν τὴiNν δευτέ,ρ αν συλλαβὴν\ περισπῶaνn τας Kal \
τὴ\ν δό/ ξαν ἐAπNὶ θεὸ\ν ἀ> πὸ ΟΣἥ ρωος μετατιθένLd τας.
XXVII. Πρόφ, ασιν μὲν οὗiν ταύτην ὁ τῶrnν
᾿Αμαζόνων πό/λ εμος ἔ7 σχε" φαίν, εται δὲ μὴ φαῦaλ ον
αὐτοῦ μηδὲ γυναικεῖον γενέσθαι τὸ ἔργον. οὐ “γὰρ
ἂν ἐν ἄστει κατεστρατοπέδευσαν οὐδὲ τὴν μάχην
συνῆψαν ἐν χρῷ περὶ τὴν Πνύκα καὶ τὸ Μου-
σεῖον, εἰ μὴ\ κρατοῦσαι τῆς χώρας ἀδεῶς τῇ πόλει
προσέμιξαν. εἰ μὲν οὖν, ὡς ᾿Βλλάνικος ἱἱ στόρηκε,
τῷ Κιμμερικῷ Βοσπόρῳ παγέντι διαβᾶσαι περι-
ἤλθον, ἢἔ ργον ἐστὶ πιστεῦσαι" τὸ δὲ ἐν τῇ πόλει
σχεδὸν αὐτὰς ἐνστρατοπεδεῦσαι μαρτυρεῖται καὶ
τοῖς ὀνόμασι τῶν τόπων καὶ ταῖς θήκαις τῶν
πεσόντων.
Πολὺν δὲ χρόνον ὄκνος ἣν καὶ μέλλησις ἀμ-
φοτέροις τῆς ἐπιχειρήσεως" τέλος δὲ Θησεὺς κατά
60
THESEUS, xxvi. 4—xxvil. 2
the young man, and what had caused it, was grievously
disturbed, and in his distress called to mind a certain
oracle which he had once received at Delphi. For
it had there been enjoined upon him by the Pythian
priestess that when, in a strange land, he should be
sorest vexed and full of sorrow, he should found a
city there, and leave some of his followers to govern
it. For this cause he founded a city there, and
called it, from the Pythian god, Pythopolis, and the
adjacent river, Solois, in honour of the young man.
And he left there the brothers of Solois, to be the
city’s presidents and law-givers, and with them
Hermus, one of the noblemen of Athens. From him
also the Pythopolitans call a place in the city the
House of Hermes, incorrectly changing! the second
syllable, and transferring the honour from a hero to
a god.
XXVII. Well, then, such were the grounds for the
war of the Amazons, which seems to have been no
trivial nor womanish enterprise for Theseus. For
they would not have pitched their camp within the
city, nor fought hand to hand battles in the neigh-
bourhood of the Pynx and the Museum, had they
not mastered the surrounding country and approached
the city with impunity. Whether, now, as Hellanicus
writes, they came round by the Cimmerian Bosporus,
which they crossed on the ice, may be doubted ; but
the fact that they encamped almost in the heart
of the city is attested both by the names of the
localities there and by the graves of those who fell
in battle.
Now for a long time there was hesitation and
delay on both sides in making the attack, but finally
1 Literally, giving it the circumflex accent.
61
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Te λόγιον τῷA Φόsβ ῳ σφαγιασάμενος συνῆa ψεν
αὐταῖς. ἡ μὲν οὖν μάχη Βοηδρομιῶνος ἐγένετο
μηνὸς\ ἐϑγφῳ ᾽ δὴ ἢἣ. τὰ\ B Bonὃd pUo4 ma μέfχ ρι νῦaν 2 ᾿Αθηναῖοn ι
θύουσιν. ἱστορεῖ δὲ Kreidnpos, ἐξακριβοῦν τὰ
καθ᾽ ἕκαστα βουλόμενος, τὸ μὲν εὐώνυμον τῶν
3 Αμαζόν, ων κέ/ρ ας ἐ2 πιστρέφ/ ειν πρὸἋςς TOἊ ν νῦaν καλού-4
μενον aN ᾿Αμαζόἕ νειον, τῷa δὲδὲ ὃ δεξιῷA πρὸXςx τὴ\ν Tl Πνtύs κα
κατὰ τὴν Χρύσαν ἥκειν. μάχεσθαι δὲ πρὸς τοῦτο
τοὺ\ς 9 ᾿Αθηναίο, υς ἀ5.π ὸ “rN τοῦa Μουσείο4 υ ταῖςad it ᾿Αμα-
ζόσι συμπεσόντας, καὶ τάφους τῶν πεσόντων
περὶ THἣY πλατεῖαa ν εἶναι τὴν φέ,ρ ουσαν ἐπὶ τὰς 13
πύ7λ,α ς παρὰ \ τὸ\ Χ7α λκώδ,ο ντος ἡ€ ρῷaοn ν, ἃa ς νῦAν
ΠΕειραϊκὰς ὀνομάζουσι. καὶ ταύτῃ μὲν ἐκβιασθῆ-
ναι μέχρι τῶaν Εὐμενί/δ ων καὶ ὑποχωρῆσn αι ταῖςn
γυναιξίν, ἀπὸ δὲ Παλλαδίουν καὶ ᾿Αρδηττοῦ καὶ
Λυκείο/ υ προσβαλόνf τας ὥ» σασθαι τὸ\ δεξιὸ\ ν αὐ>τ ῶaν
ἄYAχ ρι τοῦa στρατοπέδΥ ου καὶ \ πολλὰς\ καταβαλεῖνa.
τετάρτῳ δὲ μηνὶ συνθήκας γενέσθαι διὰ τῆς
a |π πολύrAτVη ς" Ἔ Ἵ ᾿Ἱπποrλvύ την yaxp οὗ- τος ὀ> νομάζiεCι τὴ\ ν
τῷn r Θησεῖ a συνοικοῦaσ αν, οὐ»κ ᾽ ᾿Αντιόπην.
wvἔ νιοι δέδὲ φασι μετὰ \ τοῦa Θησέω, ς μαχομένf ην
πεσεῖnνa τὴ\ν ἄ+ νθρωπον ὑe πὸδ ὴ Μολπαδία/ ς ἀ? κοντι-
σθεῖaσn αν, καὶ \ τὴ\ν στή/λ ην τὴ\ν παρὰ \ τὸ\ τῆnςa 3 Ολυμ-
πίας ἱερὸν ἐπὶ ταύτῃ κεῖσθαι. καὶ θαυμαστὸν οὐκ
ἔστιν ἐπὶ πράγμασιν οὕτω παλαιοῖς πλανᾶσθαι
τὴν ἱστορίαν, ἐπεὶ καὶ τὰς τετρωμένας φασὶ τῶν
᾿Αμαζόνων ὑπ᾽ ᾿Αντιόπης εἰς Χαλκίδα λάθρα
διαπεμφθείσας τυγχάνειν ἐπιμελείας, καὶ ταφῆ-
val τινας ἐκεῖὉ περὶ τὸ νῦ“ν 2 Apalov, erov καλούμενον.
62
THESEUS, xxvit. 2-5
Theseus, after sacrificing to Fear, in obedience to an
oracle, joined battle with the women. This battle,
then, was fought on the day of the month Boédromion
on which, down to the present time, the Athenians
celebrate the Boédromia. Cleidemus, who wishes to
be minute, writes that the left wing of the Amazons
extended to what is now called the Amazoneum,
and that with their right they touched the Pnyx at
Chrysa; that with this left wing the Athenians
fought, engaging the Amazons from the Museum,
and that the graves of those who fell are on either
side of the street which leads to the gate by the
chapel of Chalcodon, which is now called the Peiraic
gate. Here, he says, the Athenians were routed and
driven back by the women as far as the shrine of the
Eumenides, but those who attacked the invaders
from the Palladium and Ardettus and the Lyceum,
drove their right wing back as far as to their camp,
and slew many of them. And after three months,
he says, a treaty of peace was made through the
agency of Hippolyta; for Hippolyta is the name
which Cleidemus gives to the Amazon whom Theseus
married, not Antiope.
But some say that the woman was slain with a
javelin by Molpadia, while fighting at Theseus’s side,
and that the pillar which stands by the sanctuary of
Olympian Earth was set up in her memory. And it
is not astonishing that history, when dealing with
events of such great antiquity, should wander in
uncertainty, indeed, we are also told that the
wounded Amazons were secretly sent away to
Chalcis by Antiope, and were nursed there, and
some were buried there, near what is now called
the Amazoneum. But that the war ended in a
63
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀλλὰ τοῦa γε TOY πόΙλ͂ εμον εἰς σπονδὰς τελευτῆaσ αι
μαρτύριόν ἐστιν ἧ τε TOD“ τόπου κλῆaσA ις τοῦa παρὰ
τὸQ A Θησεῖοnrν , ὅae νπερ «ςΟ ρκωμόσ/ ιον καλοῦσ΄-“ι ν, ἥὉ τε
γινομέν/ η πάλ4 αι θυσία, ταῖςa > ᾿Αμαζόσ, ι πρὸ\ τῶanν
Θησείων. δεικνύουσι δὲ καὶ Μεγαρεῖς ᾿Αμαξζό-
νων θή,κ ην παρ᾽ 3 αὑετ οῖςn , ἐOtπ ὶ ND τὸaNν καλούμ΄ ενον ς ‘Poda v
βαδίζουσιν ἐξ ἀγορᾶς“ , ὅty που τὸ € Ῥομβοειδές.
λέγεται δὲ Kal περὶ Χαιρώνειαν ἑτέῬ ρας ἀποθανεῖνa ,
καὶ A ταφῆνa αι παρὰ \ τὸἌ Γ.ῥ ευμάτ/ ιον ὃa πάiλf αι μέν/ , ὡ«ςς
ἔοικε, Θερμώδων, Αἵμων δὲ νῦν καλεῖται" περὶ ὧν
ἐ>ν τῷa Δημοσθέν, ους βί,ῳ γέ, γραπται. φαίν/ ονται δὲ\
μηδὲ Θεσσαλίαν ἀπραγμόνως αἱ Apalov/e s διελ-
θοῦaσ αι: τάφοι yap αὐτῶaν ἔτι καὶ νῦaν δεί/ κνυνται
περὶ τὴν Σκοτουσαίαν καὶ τὰς ἸζυνὸΝς κεφαλάς.
XXVIII. ΤαῦAτ α μὲν οὖν ἄYξU ια μνήμ, ης περὶ
τῶaν ᾿Αμαζόνων. ἣν γὰ‘ρ| ὁς τῆaς Θησηΐδ5 ος ποιητὴς
At μαζό,ν ων ἐ>)π ανάiσe τασιν γέ/γ ραφε, Θ Θησεῖa γαμοῦνrn-
τι Φαίδ/ ραν τῆ“ςὉ 3 ᾿Αντιό, πης ἐ> πιτιθεμέν/ ης καὶ Ν τῶnν
μετ᾽ αὐτῆς ᾿Αμαζόνων ἀμυνομένων καὶ κτείνοντος
αὐτὰς ἩἫἩ ρακλέους, περιφανῶς ἔοικε μύθῳ καὶ
πλάσ/ ματι. τῆaς δὲ, 3 ᾿Αντιόf πης ἀ2 ποθανούσ4 ης ἔ»᾿ γημε
Φαίδραν, ἔχων υἱὸν Ἱππόλυτον €& Ἀντιόπ, ης, ὡς δὲ
Πίνδαρός φησι, Δημοφῶντα. τὰς δὲ περὶ ταύτην
καὶ \ τὸΝν υἱὸΝ ν αὐ>τ οῦL al δυστυχία/ ς, ἐ5 πεὶ \ μηδδὲὲν ἀ>ν τι-
64
THESEUS, xxvii. 5—xxviit. 2
solemn treaty is attested not only by the naming of
the place adjoining the Theseum, which is called
Horecomosium,! but also by the sacrifice which, in
ancient times, was offered to the Amazons before
the festival of Theseus. And the Megarians, too,
show a place in their country where Amazons were
buried, on the way from the market-place to the
place called Rhus,? where the Rhomboid? stands.
And it is said, likewise, that others of them died
near Chaeroneia, and were buried on the banks of
the little stream which, in ancient times, as it seems,
was called Thermodon, but nowadays, Haemon;
concerning which names I have written in my Life
of Demosthenes.2 It appears also that not even
Thessaly was traversed by the Amazons without
opposition, for Amazonian graves are to this day
shown in the vicinity of Scotussa and Cynoscephalae.
XXVIII. So much, then, is worthy of mention
regarding the Amazons. For the “ Insurrection of
the Amazons,” written by the author of the Theseid,
telling how, when Theseus married Phaedra, Antiope
and the Amazons who fought to avenge her attacked
him, and were slain by Heracles, has every appear-
ance of fable and invention. Theseus did, indeed,
marry Phaedra, but this was after the death of
Antiope, and he had a son by Antiope, Hippolytus,
or, as Pindar says, Demophoén. As for the calami-
ties which befell Phaedra and the son of Theseus by
Antiope, since there is no conflict here between
1 From the oaths of ratification.
2 ἐς Stream,” because water from the mountains above the
city once flowed this way. Pausanias, i. xli. 2, The
‘*Rhomboid” may have been an irregular mound.
3 Chapter xix. 4 In a passage not extant,
65
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πίπτει παρὰ τῶν ἱστορικῶν τοῖς τραγικοῖς, οὕτως
ἔχειν θετέον ὡς ἐκεῖνοι πεποιήκασιν ἅπαντες.
XXIX. Εἰσὶ μέντοι λόγοι περὶ γάμων Θησέω/ ς
καὶ ἕτεροι, τὴν σκηνὴν διαπεφευγότ,ε ς, οὔτε ἀρχὰ\ς
εὐγνώμονας οὔτε εὐτυχεῖς τελευτὰς ἔχοντες. καὶ
yaΝp > ᾿Αναξώ , twa Τροιζηνία, ν ἁe ρπάσ/ αι λέ/γ εται,
καὶ Σίνιν ἀποκτείνας καὶ Κερκύονα συγγενέσθαι
Bi/a tatsa θυγατράσ, ιν αὐτ᾽ ῶνla'l γῆAμ αι δὲ\ καὶ \ ἸΤερί-/
βοιαν τὴ\ν Αἴ”α ντος μητέρ/ α καὶ \ Φερέβ/ οιαν αὖ5θ ις
καὶ ᾿Ιόπην τὴν ᾿Ιφικλέους: καὶ διὰ τὸν Αἴγλης
ἔρωτα τῆς ἸΠανοπέως, ὥσπερ εἴρηται, τὴν ᾿Αριάδ-
UNS ἀb πόλ, ειψιν αἰ2τ ιῶaeν ται μὴ\ καλὴδνὰ γενέ,σ θαι μηδὲx
πρέπουσαν: ἐπὶ πᾶaσ ι δὲ τὴν “EXévns ἁρπαγὴν
πολέUμs ου μὲ\ν ἐb νπλῆAσ αι TH\Y 2 Αττικήν/, αὐ>τ ῷa δὲ\ εἰ3ς
φυγὴAν καὶ \ ὄ» λεθρον τελευτῆaσn αι' περὶX N ὧeν ὀ3 λί,γ ον
ὕστερον εἰρήσεται.
Πολλῶν δὲ τότε τοῖς ἀρίστοις ἄθλων γενομένων
« Hpod/ wpos μὲΝν οὐ>δ ενὸ\ς οἴyyε ται τὸΝν Θησέα/ peta-
σχεῖνa , ἀλλὰ μόν/ οις Λαπίθαις τῆ“ς κενταυρομα-
χί/α ς" ἕ“ τεροι δὲ\ καὶ \ μετὰ> We J᾿) Ιeάla σονος ἐ5ν Κ᾿όςλ χοις
γενέ/σ θαι καὶ \ Μελεάγ/ ρῳ συνεξελεῖlνal τὸxν κά»π ρον"
καὶ διὰ τοῦτο παροιμίαν εἶναι τὴν “Οὐκ ἄνευ
Θησέωδ ς" Ὁ» αὐτὸν μέντοι μηδενὸς συμμάχου δεη- 14
θέ€ VTa πολλοὺς\ καὶ \ καλοὺς\ ἄ” θλους κατεργάσ, α-
σθαι, καὶ τὸν “Αλλος οὗτος Ἡρακλῆς " λόγον ἐπ᾽
ἐ> κεί/ν ου κρατῆσa αι. συνέ/π ραξε δὲ\ καὶ x3) ᾿Αδρά/ στῳ
τὴδὴν ἀναίρ/ εσιν τῶlaνl ὑπὸ THia l Καδμείᾳ πεσόντων,
66
THESEUS, xxvin. 2--ΧΧΙΧ. 4
historians and tragic poets, we must suppose that they
happened as represented by the poets uniformly.
XXIX. There are, however, other stories also about
marriages of Theseus which were neither honourable
in their beginnings nor fortunate in their endings,
but these have not been dramatised. For instance,
he is said to have carried off Anaxo, a maiden of
Troezen, and after slaying Sinis and Cercyon to have
ravished their daughters; also to have married
Periboea, the mother of Aias, and Phereboea after-
wards, and Iope, the daughter of Iphicles; and
because of his passion for Aegle, the daughter of
Panopeus, as I have already said,! he is accused of
the desertion of Ariadne, which was not honourable
nor even decent; and finally, his rape of Helen is
said to have filled Attica with war, and to have
brought about at last his banishment and death, of
which things I shall speak a little later.
Of the many exploits performed in those days by
the bravest men, Herodorus thinks that Theseus took
part in none, except that he aided the Lapithae in
their war with the Centaurs; but others say that he
was not only with Jason at Colchis,? but helped
Meleager to slay the Calydonian boar, and that hence
arose the proverb “ Not without Theseus’”’; that he
himself, however, without asking for any ally, per-
fermed many glorious exploits, and that the phrase
“Lo! another Heracles” became current with refer-
ence to him. He also aided Adrastus in recovering
for burial the bodies of those who had fallen before
the walls of the Cadmeia,? not by mastering the
1 Chapter xx. 1. 2 In quest of the golden fleece.
Ὁ The citadel of Thebes.
67
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
οὐ> χ ὡeς Εὐ>ρ ιπίδ/ ης ἐ5 ποί“η σεν ἐ>ν τραγῳδίᾳ/ , μά4χ ῃ
τῶν Θηβαίων κρατήσας, ἀλλὰ πείσας καὶ σπει-
σάμ4 ενος: οὕefτ ω YaἈΝp οἱ[ πλεῖAσ τοι λέfγA ουσι" Φιλο-if,
χορος δὲ καὶ σπονδὰς περὶ νεκρῶν ἀναιρέσεως
γενέ/σ θαι πρώτ, ας ἐ> κεί’ν ας. ὅ[ττὰ ι δὲxy ie Ηρακλῆςwn πρῶ-lal
τος ἀπέδωκε νεκροὺς τοῖς πολεμίοις, ἐν τοῖς περὶ
Ἡρακλέους γέγραπται. ταφαὶ δὲ τῶν μὲν πολ-
λῶν ἐν ᾿Ελευθεραῖς δείκνυνται, τῶν δὲ ἡγεμόνων
περὶ ᾿Ελευσῖνα, καὶ τοῦτο Θησέως ᾿Αδράστῳ
χαρισαμένου. καταμαρτυροῦσι δὲ τῶν Εὐριπίδου
Ἱκετίδων οἱ Αἰσχύλου ᾿Ελευσίνιοι, ἐν οἷς καὶ
ταῦτα λέγων ὁ Θησεὺς πεποίηται.
XXX. Τὴν δὲ πρὸς Πειρίθουν φιλίαν τοῦτον
τὸν τρόπον αὐτῷ γενέσθαι λέγουσι. δόξαν εἶχεν
ἐὅνπ ὶ ἦν ῥεἴς ώ7μ ῃ καὶ Taἀνsδ ρείOᾳe μεγί,σ την" βουλόμ’ ενος οὖ6ν
ὁ Πειρίθους ἐξελέγξαι καὶ λαβεῖν διάπειραν,
ἠ> λάtσe ατο βοῦAς ἐ3κ ΜαραθῶνA ος αὐ3τ οῦ,lal καὶ \ πυθό-f
μενος διώκειν μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων ἐκεῖνον οὐκ ἔφυγεν,
ἀλλ᾽ ἀναστρέψας ἀπήντησεν. ὡ«ς δὲ\ εἶ3 δεν ἅefτ ε-
pos Tov ἕτερον καὶ τὸ κάλλος ,ἐθαύμασε καὶ τὴν
τόλμαν ἠγάσθη, μάχης μὲν ἔσχοντο, Πειρίθους
δὲ πρότερος τὴν δεξιὰν προτείνας ἐκέλευσεν αὐτὸν
γενέσθαι δικαστὴν τὸν Θησέα τῆς Bondacias:
ἑκὼν γὰρ ὑφέξειν ἣν ἂν ὁρίσῃ δίκην ἐκεῖνος"
Θησεὺς δὲ καὶ τὴν δίκην ἀφῆκεν αὐτῷ καὶ Tpod-
καλεῖτο φίλον. εἶναι καὶ σύμμαχον" ἐποιήσαντο
δὲ τὴν φιλίαν ἔνορκον.
"Ex δὲ τούτου γαμῶν ὁ Πειρίθους Δηϊδάμειαν,
ἐδεήθη τοῦ Θησέως ἐλθεῖν καὶ τὴν χώραν iato-
-
68
THESEUS, xxrx. 4-xxx. 3
Thebans in battle, as Euripides has it in his tragedy,}
but by persuading them to a truce; for so most
writers say, and Philochorus adds that this was the
first truce ever made for recovering the bodies of
those slain in battle, although in the accounts of
Heracles it is written that Heracles was the first to
give back their dead to his enemies. And the graves
of the greater part of those who fell before Thebes
are shown at Eleutherae, and those of the com-
manders near Eleusis, and this last burial was a
favour which Theseus showed to Adrastus. The
account of Euripides in his “Suppliants’’? is disproved
by that of Aeschylus in his “ Eleusinians,’ 3 where
Theseus is made to relate the matter as above.
XXX. The friendship of Peirithotis and Theseus
is said to have come about in the following manner.
Theseus had a very great reputation for strength
and bravery, and Peirithoiis was desirous of making
test and proof of it. Accordingly, he drove Theseus's
cattle away from Marathon, and when he learned
that their owner was pursuing him in arms, he did
not fly, but turned back and met him. When, how-
ever, each beheld the other with astonishment at his
beauty and admiration of his daring, they refrained
from battle, and Peirithoiis, stretching out his hand
the first, bade Theseus himself be judge of his
robbery, for he would willingly submit to any penalty
which the other might assign. Then Theseus not
only remitted his penalty, but invited him to be a
friend and brother in arms; whereupon they ratified
their friendship with oaths.
After this, when Peirithoiis was about to marry
Deidameia, he asked Theseus to come to the wedding,
1 Suppliants, 653 ff 2. Verses 1213 ff. 3 Not extant.
69
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ρῆfoσ) αι καὶ συγγενέ/σ θαι τοῖAς Λαπίθαις. ἐτύγχανε
δὲ καὶ τοὺς Κενταύρους κεκληκὼς ἐπὶ τὸ δεῖπνον.
ὡς δὲΝ ἠ> σέ/λ γαινον ὕ“ βρει καὶ \ μεθύοBi ντες οὐ᾽κ ἀ»π εί-/
χοντο τῶν γυναικῶν, ἐτράποντο πρὸς ἄμυναν
οἱ Λαπίθαι: καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἔκτειναν αὐτῶν, τοὺς
δὲ\ πολέ/μ ῳ κρατήσ/ αντες ὕ“ στερον ἐIeξe/έ βαλον ἐ>κ? τῆnς
χώρας, τοῦa Θησέω/ ς αὐτοῖςn συμμαχομένου καὶ
συμπολεμοῦνAτ ος. “ἩΓ ρό/δ ωρος δὲ ταῦnτm α πραχθῆνA αί
φησιν οὐχ οὕτως, ἀλλὰ τοῦ πολέμου συνεστῶτος
ἤδη τὸν Θησέα βοηθοῦντα τοῖς Λαπίθαις παρα-
γενέσθαι, καὶ τότε πρῶτον ὄψει γνωρίσαι τὸν
Ἡρακλέα, ποιησάμενον ἔργον ἐντυχεῖν αὐτῷ περὶ
Τραχῖνa α πεπαυμέν/ ῳ πλάν/ ης ἤ"δὃη καὶα ὐ ἀ1θ0λ ων'"
γενέ/σ θαι δὲ\ μετὰ\ τιμῆaς καὶ \ φιλοφροσύν΄ ης καὶ \
πολλῶν ἐπαίνων ἀμφοτέροις τὴν ἔντευξιν. οὐ
μὴν ἀλλὰ μᾶTaλl λον ἄ,ν τις πρό/σ χοι τοῖ“ς-“ πολλάκις
ἐντυχεῖν αὐτοὺς ἀλλήλοις ἱστοροῦσι: καὶ τὴν
μύ/η σιν ς Ἡρακλεῖ a γενέ/σ θαι Θησέω/ ς σπουδάσ/ αντος
καὶ τὸν πρὸ τῆnς μυήσεως καθαρμὸνΝ ὡς δεομένῳ
διά τινας πράξ΄ εις ἀβουλήτ/ο υς.
XXXI. ἬYj δη δὲ πεντή/κ οντα ἔΝΜ τη γεγονώς,, ὥνς
φησιν “Ἑλλάνικος, ἔπραξε τὰ\ περὶ τὴ\ν ᾿λέν,η ν,
οὐ καθ᾽ ὥραν. ὅθεν ὡς δὴ μέγιστον ἐπανορθού-
μενοι τοῦaτ ο τῶaν ἐγκλημάτων, ἔΜ νιοι λέγουσιν
οὐκ αὐτὸν ἁρπάσαι τὴν “Ἑλένην, ἀλλὰ Ἴδα
καὶ Λυγκέως ἁρπασάντων παρακαταθήκην λα-
βόντα τηρεῖ-ν“ καὶ μὴ προΐAεf σθαι τοῖaς“ Διοσκούρ/ οις
ἀπαιτοῦσa ιν: ἢ νὴ At/a Τυνδάρ4 εω παραδόν/ τος
70
THESEUS; χχχ. 3-ΧΧΧΙΟ 4
and see the country, and become acquainted with the
Lapithae. Now he had invited the Centaurs also to
the wedding feast. And when these were flown with
insolence and wine, and laid hands upon the women,
the Lapithae took vengeance upon them. Some of
them they slew upon the spot, the rest they after-
wards overcame in war and expelled from the
country, Theseus fighting with them at the banquet
and in the war. Herodorus, however, says that this
was not how it happened, but that the war was
already in progress when Theseus came to the aid of
the Lapithae ; and that on his way thither he had
his first sight of Heracles, having made it his business
to seek him out at Trachis, where the hero was already
resting from his wandering and labours; and he
says the interview passed with mutual expressions of
honour, friendliness, and generous praise. Notwith-
standing, one might better side with those historians
who say that the heroes had frequent interviews with
one another, and that it was at the instigation of
Theseus that Heracles was initiated into the mysteries
at Eleusis, and purified before his initiation, when he
requested it on account of sundry rash acts.
XXXI. Theseus was already fifty years old, accord-
ing to Hellanicus, when he took part in the rape of
Helen, who was not of marriageable age. Wherefore
some writers, thinking to correct this heaviest
accusation against him, say that he did not carry off
Helen himself, but that when Idas and Lynceus had
carried her off, he received her in charge and
watched over her and would not surrender her to
the Dioscuri! when they demanded her; or, if you
will believe it, that her own father, Tyndareiis,
1 Castor and Pollux, her brothers.
71
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
αὐτοῦ,A φοβηθέντος ᾿Εναρσφόρδ ον τὸ\ν « ᾿Ἱπποκόων-
τος ἔ” τι νηπία/ ν οὖi σαν βιαζόμ, ενον τὴssν « ᾿λέν/ ην
λαβεῖν. τὰ δὲ εἰκότα καὶ πλείστους ἔχοντα
μάρτυρας τοιαῦτά ἐστιν.
Ἦλθον μὲν εἰς Σπάρτην ἀμφότεροι καὶ τὴν
κό,ρ ην ἐ>ν ἱe ερῷA ᾽ ᾿Αρτέ᾿μ ιδος > ᾿Ορθί/α ς χορεύ1ο4 υσαν
ἁρπάσαντες ἔφυγον: τῶν δὲ πεμφθέντων ἐπὶ τὴν
δίωξιν οὐ πορρωτέρω Τεγέας ἐπακολουθησάντων,
ἐΣν ἀb δεί/ᾳ γενό,μ ενοι καὶ \ διελθόν/ τες τὴ\ν Πελοπόν/- 15
νῆσον ἐποιήσαντο συνθήκας, τὸν μὲν λαχόντα
κλήρῳ τὴν Ἑλένην ἔχειν γυναῖκα, συμπράττειν
δὲ\ θατέ,ρ ῳ γά΄μ,ο ν ἄ" λλον. ἐ5π.5.ὶ,ἅ ταύτ΄ αις δὲ\ κληρου-
μένων ταῖAς ὁμολογία, ις ἔλαχε Θησεύς" καὶ παρα-
λαβὼν τὴν παρθένον οὔπω γάμων ὥραν ἔχουσαν
εἰς ᾿Αφίδνας ἐκόμισε: καὶ τὴν μητέρα καταστήσας
μετ᾽ αὐτῆς ᾿Αφίδνῳ παρέδωκεν ὄντι φίλῳ, δια-
κελευσάμενος φυλάττειν καὶ λανθάνειν τοὺς ἄλ-
λους. αὐτὸς δὲ Πειρίθῳ τὴν ὑπουργίαν ἀποδιδούς,
εἰς Ἤπειρον συναπεδήμησεν ἐπὶ τὴν ᾿Αἰδωνέως
θυγατέρα τοῦ Μολοσσῶν βασιλέως, ὃς τῇ γυναικὶ
Φερσεφόνην ὄνομα θέμενος, Ἱζόρην δὲ τῇ θυγατρί,
τῷ δὲ κυνὶ Κέρβερον, ἐκέλευε τούτῳ διαμάχεσθαι
τοὺς μνωμένους τὴν παῖδα καὶ λαβεῖν τὸν κρατή-
σαντα. τοὺς μέντοι περὶ τὸν Πειρίθουν οὐ μνη-
στῆρας ἥκειν, ἀλλ᾽ ἁρπασομένους πυνθανόμενος
συνέVλE αβε: καὶ \ to\v μὲ\ν [Πειρί, θουν εὐ> θὺ\ς ἠ> φάν/ ισε
διὰ\ τοῦr n κυνός/ , τὸsνh δὲ\ ΘησέαUA καθείiρd ξας ἐ3 φύ΄λ αττεν.
XXXII. Ἔν δὲ τῷA χρό/ν ῳ τούτῳ Μενεσθεὺς ὁ
Πετεὼ tod“ Ὁ Ὀρνέως τοῦ“ ? “EpeyOéws πρῶτa ος, ὥς
φασιν, ἀνθρώπων ἐπιθέfμ ενος τῷa δημαγωγεῖνa καὶ
72
THESEUS, ΧΧΧΙ. 2-xxxu. τ
entrusted her to Theseus, for fear of Enarsphorus,
the son of Hippocoén, who sought to take Helen by
force while she was yet a child. But the most
probable account, and that which has the most
witnesses in its favour, is as follows.
Theseus and Peirithoiis went to Sparta in company,
seized the girl as she was dancing in the temple of
Artemis Orthia, and fled away with her. Their
pursuers followed them no farther than Tegea, and
so the two friends, when they had passed through
Peloponnesus and were out of danger, made a com-
pact with one another that the one on whom the
lot fell should have Helen to wife, but should assist
the other in getting another wife. With this mutual
understanding they cast lots, and Theseus won, and
taking the maiden, who was not yet ripe for marriage,
conveyed her to Aphidnae. Here he made his
mother a companion of the girl, and committed both
to Aphidnus, a friend of his, with strict orders to
guard them in complete secrecy. Then he himself,
to return the service of Peirithoiis, journeyed with
him to Epirus, in quest of the daughter of Aidoneus
the king of the Molossians. This man called his wife
Phersephone, his daughter Cora, and his dog Cerberus,
with which beast he ordered that all suitors of his
daughter should fight, promising her to him that
should overcome it. However, when he learned that
Peirithoiis and his friend were come not to woo, but
to steal away his daughter, he seized them both.
Peirithoiis he put out of the way at once by means of
the dog, but Theseus he kept in close confinement.
XXXII. Meanwhile Menestheus, the son of Peteos,
grandson of Orneus, and great-grandson of Erech-
theus, the first of men, as they say, to affect popularity
73
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πρὸΝς χάρ9 ιν ὄ” χλῳ διαλέ΄γ εσθαι, τούς/ τε δυνατοὺς\
συνί/σ τη καὶ παρώξ, υνε, πάλ/ αι βαρυνομένFeο υς τὸNν
Θησέα καὶ νομί/ζ οντας ἀρχὴν καὶ βασιλείαν ἀφῃ-
ρημένον ἑκάστου τῶν κατὰ δῆμον εὐπατριδῶν, εἰς
ἕν ἄστυ συνείρξαντα πάν΄ τας ὑπηκόο, ις χρῆaσ θαι Kal
δούλοις, τούς τε πολλοὺς διετάραττε καὶ διέ7 βαλ-
λεν, ν, ὡς ὡς ὄνὄνααρ ρ ἐλεἐλυεθυθεερρίίαας ς ὁρὁῶρνῶτνα ς, ἔἔρργγῳῳ δὲ ἀπεστε-
ρημένους πατρίῬδ ων καὶ ἱερῶa ν, ὅ« πως ἀντὶ πολλῶνlal
καὶ 3.5ἀ γαθῶAν καὶ \ γνησίω, ν βασιλέω, ν πρὸΝς ἕisdν α δε-
σπότ’ ην ἔ» πηλυν καὶ \ ἕέ’ν ον ἀb ποβλέπ4 ωσι. ταῦLeτ] α
δὲ αὐτοῦA πραγματευομένου μεγάλην ῥοπὴν ὁ€ πό-,
λεμος TOa νεωτερισμῷ A προσέθ/ ηκε, τῶAν Τυνδαριδῶaν
ἐπελθόντων" of δὲ καὶ ὅλως φασὶν ὑπὸΝ τούlτA ου
πεισθέντας ἐλθεῖν.
Τὸ μὲν οὖν πρῶAτ ον οὐδὲν ἠδί,κ ουν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀπήτουν
τὴAν ἀ> δελφήν/. ἀ> ποκριναμέν/ ων δὲ\ τῶnν ἐ3ν ἄbaσ τει
μήτε ἔχειν μήτε γινώσκειν ὅδ που καταλέλ/ ειπται,
πρὸς\ πό,λ εμον ἐ» τρά(π4 οντο. φράζ4 ει δὲ\ αὐ>τ οῖςin ter) ᾿Ακά-/
ὃ μος ἠ5 σθθη μέν/ ος ᾧa ὃ δή7 τινι τρό, πῷ τὴἉν ἐ3ν 2 ᾿Αφιὃόν αις
κρύMψe ιν αὐ᾽τ ῆςan. ὅ“ θεν ἐ> κεί’ νῳ τε τιμαὶ \ ζῶLaν) τι Tapa \
τῶcaνl Τυνδαριδῶlνa) ἐ9.γ έ7ν2 οντο, καὶ \ πολλάκ4 ις ὕec στερον
εἰς τὴ\ν ᾿Αττικὴν ἐμβαλόνf τες Λακεδαιμόνsι οι καὶ
πᾶaσ αν ὁ¢€μ οῦa τὴν χώραν τέμνοντες, τῆaς ᾿Ακαδημείας
ἀ> πεί/χ οντο διὰng τὸ\ν 2 ᾿Ακά/δ ημον. ὁ« ς δὲ\ Δικαί4α ρχος
3 ᾿χεδήμουϊ φησὶ καὶ Μαράθου συστρατευσάντων
1 "Εχεδήμου with Coraés, Sintenis!, and Bekker, after
Xylander : ᾿Εχέμου.
74
THESEUS, xxxn. 1-4
and ingratiate himself with the multitude, stirred up
and embittered the chief men in Athens. These had
long been hostile to Theseus, and thought that he
had robbed each one of the country nobles of his
royal office,! and then shut them all up in a single
city, where he treated them as subjects and slaves.
The common people also he threw into commotion
by his reproaches. They thought they had a vision
of liberty, he said, but in reality they had been
robbed of their native homes and religions in order
that, in the place of many good kings of their own
blood, they might look obediently to one master
who was an immigrant and an alien. While he was
thus busying himself, the Tyndaridae® came up
against the city, and the war greatly furthered his
seditious schemes ; indeed, some writers say outright
that he persuaded the invaders to come.
At first, then, they did no harm, but simply
demanded back their sister. When, however, the
people of the city replied that they neither had the
girl nor knew where she had been left, they resorted
to war. But Academus, who had learned in some
way or other of her concealment at Aphidnae, told
them about it. For this reason he was honoured
during his life by the Tyndaridae, and often after-
wards when the Lacedaemonians invaded Attica and
laid waste all the country round about, they spared
the Academy,? for the sake of Academus. But
Dicaearchus says that Echedemus and Marathus of
1 Cf. chapter xxiv. 1-3.
2 Or Dioscuri, Castor and Pollux.
3 A shady precinct near the river Cephissus, about a mile
N.W. of Athens. Here Plato and his disciples taught, See
Plutarch’s Cimon, xiii. 8.
75
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τότε τοῖς Τυνδαρίδαις ἐξ ᾿Αρκαδίας, ἀφ᾽ οὗ μὲν
᾽ Eyednpla(A v προσαγορευθῆνA αι τὴAν viavl b]᾿ Ακαδή-,
μειαν, ἀ>φ ᾽ >’ οὗὉ δὲδὲ Μαραθθῶῶν α τὸAν onδ ῆμον, ἐ3 πιδδοόν τος
ἑαυτὸν ἑκουσίως κατά τι λόγιον σφαγιάσασθαι
πρὸQ A τῆaς παρατάξ, εως. ult Shots?
Ελθόντες οὖν ἐπὶ tas ᾿Αφίδνας καὶ μάχῃ
κρατήσαντες ἐξεῖλον τὸ χωρίον. ἐνταῦθά φασι
καὶ WwΓ Αλυκον πεσεῖνan τὸν Σκείρωνος υἱόν, συστρα-
τευόμενον τότε τοῖ“ς Διοσκούροις, ἀφ᾽ οὗ καὶ τόπον
τῆnς Μεγαρικῆςn Vv “AXvKov καλεῖnσ θαι τοῦA σώZμz ατος
ἐ> νταφέν7 τος. idH péald s δ᾽> ὑς πὸ \ Θησέω‘é ς αὐ>τ οῦ lal περὶ
᾿Αφίδνας ἀποθανεῖν tov “AXvKov ἱστόρηκε, καὶ
μαρτύρια ταυτὶ τὰA ἔπη παρέχεται περὶ τοῦA
> Αλύκ, ου"
τὸν ἐν εὐρυχύρῳ ποτ᾽ ᾿Αφίδνῃ
μαρνάμἔεμνενοονν ΘηΘσησεεὺὺςς ᾿ξ λέἕννηηςς ἕνεκἕν᾽εκ᾽ ἠἠυῦκκόό μοιο
κτεῖνεν.
Οὐ μὴν εἰκὸς αὐτοῦ Θησέως παρόντος ἁλῶναι τήν
τε μητέρ/ α καὶ \ τὰ\ς 3 Adio/ vas.
ΧΧΧΊΙΠΙ. ᾿Εἰχομένων δ᾽ οὖν τῶν ᾿Αφιδνῶν καὶ
τῶ“ν ἐ3ν ἄ2 στει δεδιό,τ ων, ἔ» πεισε TOΝV δῆanμ ον ὁe Meve-
σθεὺς δέχεσθαι τῇ πόλει καὶ φιλοφρονεῖσθαι
τοὺς Τυνδαρίρδίαδςας,, ὡὡς ςμ όμνόῳν ῳ ΘησOnε ῖ βίας ὑπάρρξ αντι
πολεμοῦνlalτ ας, τῶaν δὲ ἄ” λλων εὐ> εργέ/τ ας ὄ5, ντας
ἀνθρώπων καὶ σωτῆρας. ἐμαρτύρει δὲ αὐτῷ καὶ
τὰ παρ᾽ ἐκείνων" οὐδὲν γὰρ ἠξίωσαν ἁπάντων 16
κρατοῦνa τες G3 AN ᾽ ἢ> μυηθῆν[9]α ι, μηδὲν\ ἧmeτ τον ς ρα-
κλέους τῇ πόλει προσήκοντες. καὶ τοῦτο οὖν
76
THESEUS, xxxil. 4-ΧΧΧΙΠ. 2
Arcadia were in the army of the Tyndaridae at that
time, from the first of whom the present Academy
was named Echedemia, and from the other, the
township of Marathon, since in accordance with
some oracle he voluntarily gave himself to be sacri-
ficed in front of the line of battle.
To Aphidnae, then, they came, won a pitched
battle, and stormed the town. Here they say that
among others Alycus, the son of Sciron, who was at
that time in the army of the Dioscuri, was slain,
and that from him a place in Megara where he was
buried is called Alycus. But Hereas writes that
Alycus was slain at Aphidnae by Theseus himself,
and cites in proof these verses about Alycus :—
“whom once in the plain of Aphidnae,
Where he was fighting, Theseus, ravisher of fair-
haired Helen,
Slew.”
However, it is not likely that Theseus himself was
present when both his mother and Aphidnae were
captured.
XXXIII. At any rate, Aphidnae was taken and
the city of Athens was full of fear, but Menestheus
persuaded its people to receive the Tyndaridae into
the city and show them all manner of kindness,
since they were waging war upon Theseus alone, who
had committed the first act of violence, but were
benefactors and saviours of the rest of mankind.
And their behaviour confirmed his assurances, for
although they were masters of everything, they
demanded only an initiation into the mysteries,
since they were no less closely allied to the city than
Heracles. This privilege was accordingly granted
VOL. I. D 77
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὑe πῆfρo} ξεν αὐτ> οῖςa , 3 ᾿Αφί/δ νου ποιησαμέν/ ου παῖaδ ας,
ὡς ᾿3 Πύλιος “Hpaxréa: καὶ τιμὰ\ς ἰσοθέους ἔσχον,
“Avakes προσαγορευθέντες, ἢ διὰ τὰ\ς γενομένας
ἀνοχὰς ἢ διὰ τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν καὶ κηδεμονίαν τοῦ
μηδένα κακῶς παθεῖν στρατιᾶς τοσαύτης ἔνδον
οὔσης" ἀνακῶς γὰρ ἔχειν ποὺς ἐπιμελομένους ἢ
φυλάττοντας ὁτιοῦν: καὶ τοὺς βασιλεῖς ἴσως
ἄ” νακτας διὰ\ τοῦAτ ο καλοῦσa ιν. εἰ2°σ ὶ EN δὲ\ οἱ ς λέ/γ οντες
διὰ τὴν τῶν ἀστέρων ἐπιφάνειαν ἔλνακας ὀνομά-
ζεσθαι" τὸ γὰρ ἄνω τοὺς ᾿Αττικοὺς ἀνεκὰς ὀνο-
μάζ, ειν, καὶ ἀ> νέ/κ αθεν τὸN ἄSf,ν ωθεν.
XXXIV. Αἴθραν δὲ τὴν Θησέως μητέρα yevo-
μένην αἰχμάλωτον ἀπαχθῆναι λέγουσιν εἰς Λακε-
δαί,μ ονα, κἀ>κ εῖAθ εν ei᾽s Τροί’α, ν μετὰΝ Gi“nnE Xé7v ns: καὶ \
μαρτυρεῖνAL. ΠΣ “Ὅμηρον, ἕ“ πεσθαι τῇLo w ks Edév/y n φάμ/ ενον"
Αἴθρην ]Πυτθῆος θύγατρα Κλυμένην te βοῶπιν.
Οἱ δὲ καὶ τοῦτο τὸ ἔπος διαβάλλουσι καὶ τὴν
περὶ Μουνύχου μυθολογίαν, ὃν ἐκ Δημοφῶντος
Λαοδίκης κρύφα τεκούσης ἐν ᾿Ιλίῳ συνεκθρέψαι
τὴν Αἴθραν λέγουσιν. ἴδιον δέ τινα καὶ παρηλ-
λαγμένον ὅλως λόγον ὁ Ἴστρος ἐν τῇ τρισκαι-
δεκάτῃ τῶν ᾿Αττικῶν ἀναφέρει περὶ Αἴθρας, ὡς
ἐνίων λεγόντων ᾿Αλέξανδρον μὲν τὸν Πάριν ἐν
Θεσσαλίᾳ"/ {τςὑ π᾽ 3, ᾿Αχίλλέ/ω ς καὶ \ προ / νοι μά4χ ῃ
κρατηθῆν“ αι παρὰ τὸ\ν Σπερχειόν/, ¢ “Extopa δὲ
τὴ\ν Τροιζηνί,ω ν πόλ/ ιν λαβόνf τα διαρπάσ/ αι Kal \
1 τὸν Πάριν ἐν Θεσσαλίᾳ, with Bekker: τὸν ἐν Θεσσαλίᾳ
Πάριν.
78
THESEUS, xxxt. 2—xxxIv. 2
them, after they had been adopted by Aphidnus, as
Pylius had adopted Heracles. They also obtained
honours like those paid to gods, and were addressed
as “Anakes,” either on account of their stopping
hostilities, or because of their diligent care that no
one should be injured, although there was such a
large army within the city; for the phrase “anakos
echein” is used of such as care for, or guard any-
thing, and perhaps it is for this reason that kings are
called “ Anaktes.’”’ There are also those who say
that the Tyndaridae were called “ Anakes” because
of the appearance of their twin stars in the heavens,
since the Athenians use “ anekas”’ and “‘anekathen”
for “ano” and “anothen,” signifying above or on
high.
XXXIV. They say that Aethra, the mother of
Theseus, who was taken captive at Aphidnae, was
carried away to Lacedaemon, and from thence to
Troy with Helen, and that Homer! bears witness to
this when he mentions as followers of Helen :—
“ Aethra of Pittheus born, and Clymene large-eyed
and lovely.”
But some reject this verse of Homer’s, as well as
the legend of Munychus, who was born in secret to
Laodice from Demophoon, and whom Aethra helped
to rear in Ilium. But a very peculiar and wholly
divergent story about Aethra is given by Ister in the
thirteenth book of his “ Attic History.” Some
write, he says, that Alexander (Paris) was overcome
in battle by Achilles and Patroclus in Thessaly,
along the banks of the Spercheius, but that Hector
took and plundered the city of Troezen, and carried
1 Iliad, iii. 144.
79
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τὴν Αἴθραν ἀπάγειν ἐκεῖ καταλειφθεῖσαν. ἀλλὰ
τοῦτο μὲν ἔχει πολλὴν ἀλογίαν.
ΧΧΧΥ, ᾿Αἰδωνέως δὲ τοῦ Μολοσσοῦ ἕενί-
ζοντος Ἡρακλέα καὶ τῶν περὶ τὸν Θησέα καὶ
Πειρίθουν κατὰ τύχην μνησθέντος, ἅ τε πρά-
ἕοντες ἦλθον καὶ ἃ φωραθέντες ἔπαθον, βαρέας
ἤνεγκεν ὁ Ἡρακλῆς, τοῦ μὲν ἀπολωλότος ἀδόξως,
τοῦ δὲ ἀπολλυμένου. καὶ περὶ Πειρίθου μὲν
οὐδὲν ῴετο ποιήσειν πλέον ἐγκαλῶν, τὸν δὲ
Θησέα παρῃτεῖτο καὶ χάριν ἠξίου ταύτην αὐτῷ
δοθῆναι. συγχωρήσαντος δὲ τοῦ Aidwvéws, λυ-
θεὶς ὁ Θησεὺς ἐπανῆλθε μὲν εἰς τὰς ᾿Αθήνας,
οὐδέπω παντάπασι τῶν φίλων αὐτοῦ κεκρατη-
μένων, καὶ ὅσα ὑπῆρχε τεμένη πρότερον αὐτῷ
τῆς πόλεως ἐξελούσης ἅπαντα καθιέρωσε τῷ
Ἡρακλεῖ καὶ προσηγόρευσεν ἀντὶ Θησείων Ἡρά-
κλεια, πλὴν τεσσάρων, ὡς Φιλόχορος ἱστόρηκεν.
αὖθις 1 δὲ βουλόμενος ὡς πρότερον ἄρχειν καὶ
καθηγεῖσθαι τοῦ πολιτεύματος εἰς στάσεις ἐνέ-
πεσε καὶ "ταραχάς, οὗς μὲν ἀπέλιπε μισοῦντας
αὐτὸν εὑρίσκων τὸ μὴ φοβεῖσθαι τῷ μισεῖν προσ-
εἰληφότας, ἐν δὲ τῷ δήμῳ πολὺ τὸ διεφθαρ-
μένον ὁρῶν καὶ θεραπεύεσθαι βουλόμενον ἀντὶ
τοῦ ποιεῖν σιωπῇ τὸ προσταττόμενον. ἐπιχειρῶν
οὖν βιάζεσθαι κατεδημαγωγεῖτο καὶ κατεστα-
σιάζετο. καὶ τέλος ἀπογνοὺς τὰ πράγματα τοὺς
μὲν παῖδας εἰς Εὔβοιαν ὑπεξέπεμψε πρὸς Ἔλε-
φήνορα τὸν Χαλκώδοντος, αὐτὸς δὲ Παργηττοῖ
κατὰ τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων ἀρὰς θέμενος, οὗ νῦν ἔστι
τὸ ον ae αι ᾿Αρατήριον, εἰς Σκῦρον ἐξέπλευσεν,
1 αὖθις Coraés, after Reiske: εὐθύς (at once).
80
THESEUS, xxxiv. 2—-xxxv. 3
away Aethra, who had been left there. This, how-
ever, is very doubtful.
XXXV. Now while Heracles was the guest of
Aidoneus the Molossian, the king incidentally spoke
of the adventure of Theseus and Peirithoiis, telling
what they had come there to do, and what they had
suffered when they were found out. Heracles was
greatly distressed by the inglorious death of the one,
and by the impending death of the other. As for
Peirithoiis, he thought it useless to complain, but he
begged for the release of Theseus, and demanded
that this favour be granted him. Aidoneus yielded
to his prayers, Theseus was set free, and returned to
Athens, where his friends were not yet altogether
overwhelmed. All the sacred precincts which the
city had previously set apart for himself, he now
dedicated to Heracles, and called them Heracleia
instead of Theseia, four only excepted, as Philo-
chorus writes. But when he desired to rule again as
before, and to direct the state, he became involved
in factions and disturbances; he found that those
who hated him when he went away, had now added
to their hatred contempt, and he saw that a large
part of the people were corrupted, and wished to be
cajoled into service instead of doing silently what
they were told to do. Attempting, then, to force
his wishes upon them, he was overpowered by
demagogues and factions, and finaliy, despairing of
his cause, he sent his children away privately into
Euboea, to Elephenor, the son of Chalcodon, while
he himself, after invoking curses upon the Athenians
at Gargettus, where there is to this day the place
called Araterion,! sailed away to the island of Scyros,
1 That is, the place of prayer, or cursing.
81
PLUTARCR’S LIVES
οὔw σης αὐ3τ ῷA πρὸ\ς τοὺ\ς ἐ5κ εῖ a φιλία/ ς, ὡ«ς @”e To, καὶ
χωρίων ἐν τῇ νήσῳ πατρῴων. ἐβασίλευε δὲ
Λυκομήδης τότε τῶaν Σκυρίω, ν. πρὸς τοῦrnτ ον οὖ9ν
ἀ> φικόlμf ενος ἐ3 ζήτ/ ει τοὺ\ς ἀ> γροὺς\ ἀ3 πολαβεῖνa, ὡςς
αὐτόθι κατοικήσων: ἔνιοι δέ φασι παρακαλεῖν
αὐτὸν βοηθεῖνA ἐπὶ τοὺς ? ᾿Αθηναίους. ὁ δὲ Λυκο-
μῆήὃδ ης, εἴ” τε ὃ δε,ί σας τὴ\ν 60δ οξαν τοῦA ry?ἀ νὸὃρ ος,, εἴΜ τε τῷ“
Μενεσθεῖ a χαριζόμενος, ἐπὶ τὰA ἄκρα τῆnς χώρ, ας
ἀναγαγὼν αὐτόν, ὡς ἐκεῖθεν ἐπιδείξων τοὺς
ἀγρούς, @oe κατὰ τῶν πετρῶν καὶ διέφθειρεν.
ἔ» νιοι δ᾽> ἀ>φ ᾽ 99 ἑε αυτοῦ a πεσεῖνa φασι σφαλέν,τ α, μετὰἪ
δεῖπνον, ὥσπερ εἰώθει, περιπατοῦντα. καὶ παραυ-
τίἐςκ α μὲ\ν οὐ>δ εὶ\ς ἔ4 σχεν αὐ>τ οῦA n λό4γ ον οὐ> δέ/ν α τεθνη-
κότος, ἀλλὰ τῶν μὲν ᾿Αθηναίων ἐβασίλευσε
Μενεσθεύς, οἱ δὲ παῖδες ἰδιωτεύοντες ᾿Ιὑλεφήνορι
συνεστράlτA ευσαν εἰ3ς ἡ ἤϊλιον. ἐ᾽κ εῖ a δὲ Μενεσθέω,ὕ ς
ἀ> ποθανόν, τος ἐ5 πανελθόνῇ τες αὐ»τ οὶ τὴ\ν βασιλεία/ ν
ἀνεκομίσαντος χρόνοις δ᾽ ὕστερον ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίους
ἄλλα τε παρέστησεν ὡς ἥρωα τιμᾶν Θησέα, καὶ
τῶν ἐν Μαραθῶνι πρὸς Μήδους μαχομένων ἔδοξαν
οὐ᾽κ ὀδὰλ ί»γἍ οι φάMσh μα Θησέω/ ς ἐ>ν ὅ[χὰπ λοις καθορῶaνA πρὸ\
αὐτῶν ἐπὶ τοὺς βαρβάρους φερόμενον.
XXXVI. Μετὰ δὲ τὰ Μηδικὰ Φαίδωνος ἄρ-
YovTos μαντευομένοις τοῖ-ς ᾿Αθηναίο7ι ς ἀνεῖanλ εν ἡ
Πυθία τὰ Θησέως ἀναλαβεῖν ὀστᾶ καὶ θεμένους
ἐ> ντί/ μως tap ’ αὑ(τ¢ οῖςa φυλάτigτ ειν. ἦ> ν δὲ\ Kal \ λα-
βεῖν ἀπορία καὶ γνῶναι τὸν τάφον ἀμιξίᾳ καὶ
χαλεπότητι τῶν ἐνοικούντων Δολόπων. οὐ μὴν
82
THESEUS, xxxv. 3-xxxvi. 1
where the people were friendly to him, as he thought,
and where he had ancestral estates. Now Lycomedes
was at that time king of Scyros. To him therefore
Theseus applied with the request that his lands
should be restored to him, since he was going to
dwell there, though some say that he asked his aid
against the Athenians. But Lycomedes, either
because he feared a man of such fame, or as a favour
to Menestheus, led him up to the high places of the
land, on pretence of showing him from thence his
lands, threw him down the cliffs, and killed him.
Some, however, say that he slipped and fell down
of himself while walking there after supper, as was
his custom. At the time no one made any account
of his death, but Menestheus reigned as k.ng at
Athens, while the sons of Theseus, as men of private
station, accompanied Elephenor on the expedition to
Ilium ; but after Menestheus died there, they came
back by themselves and recovered their kingdom.
In after times, however, the Athenians were moved
to honour Theseus as a demigod, especially by the
fact that many of those who fought at Marathon
against the Medes thought they saw an apparition of
Theseus in arms rushing on in front of them against
the Barbarians.
XXXVI. And after the Median wars, in the
archonship of Phaedo,? when the Athenians were
consulting the oracle at Delphi, they were told by
the Pythian priestess to take up the bones of
Theseus, give them honourable burial at Athens,
and guard them there. But it was difficult to find
the grave and take up the bones, because of the
inhospitable and savage nature of the Dolopians,
1 Cf. Pausanias, i. 15, 4. 2 476-475 Β.6.
83
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀλλὰ Κί,μ ων ἑλὼἊνν τὴ\ν νῆσον, ws ἐν τοῖaς περὶ
ἐ5 κεί/ν ου γέ/γ ραπται, καὶ \ φιλοτιμούμ, ενος ἐΟῚ ξανευ-
ρεῖaνl, ἀετοῦa τινα τό,π ον βουνοειδῆn a KO,T TOVTOS, ὥς
φασι, τῷ“ στό,μ ατι καὶ \ διαστέ,λ λοντος τοῖὉς ὄ"»,ν υξι
θ εἰ/ᾳ τινὶ \ τύ7χ ῃ συμφρονήσἊΨ ας ἀ᾽ νέἫ σκαψεν. εὑξ ρέ4θη
δὲ\ θή/κ η τε μεγάλ/ ου σώ/μ ατος αἰ᾽ χμή / τε παρακει-
μέ/ν η χαλκῆn καὶ \ ξί/ φος. κομισθέ/ν των δὲ\ τούv4τ ων
ὑς«π ὸ \ ΚΣίΝ μωνος ἐaπpsὶ: τῆaς τριή/ρ ους, ἡ€ σθέν/ τες οἱ e
’ Αθηναῖοa ι πομπαῖςa τε λαμπραῖςal ἐδέξαντο καὶ
θυσίαις ὥσπερ αὐτὸν ἐπανερχόμενον εἰς τὸ ἄστυ.
Kal κεῖaτ αι μὲν ἐν μέσῃ THa n πόλ/ ει παρὰ TO νῦν
γυμνάσ/ ιον, ἔμήσ τι δὲ\ φύ’ξ ιμον οἰΒκΓΑέ ταις Kal Ν πᾶAσ ι
τοῖaς ταπεινοτέροις Kal δεδιόσι κρεί/τ τονας, ὡς καὶ
τοῦ Θησέως προστατικοῦ τινος καὶ βοηθητικοῦ
γενομένΨ ου καὶ \ προσδεχομέν, ου φιλανθρώ,π ως τὰ\ς
τῶν ταπεινοτέρων δεήσεις. θυσίαν δὲ ποιοῦσιν
αὐ3τ ῷὉ τὴ\ν μεγί’σ την ὀ> γδ5ό0η II Πυανεψιῶnν ος, ἐ3ν ἡἘξ
μετὰ τῶν ἠϊθέων ἐκ Κρήτης ἐπανῆλθεν. οὐ μὴν
ἀλλὰ καὶ ταῖaςn ἄλλαις ὀγδόα, ις τιμῶaσ ιν αὐτόν, , ἢ
διὰ τὸ πρῶaτ ον ἐκ Τροιζῆnν ος ἀφικέ/σ θαι τῇay ὀ3 γδό/ῃ
τοῦn Ὁ Ἑκατομβαιῶν“ο ς, ὡςς ἱe στόiρ ηκε Διό/δ ωρος ὁ«
περιηγητής/, ἢx νομί/ζ οντες ἑἢτ έρου μᾶa λλον ἐ3 κεί,ν ῳ
προσήκ/ε ιν τὸΝν ἀ> ριθμὸ\ν τοῦleτ ον ἐ>κ Ilocedavan os
γεγονέναι λεγομέν/ ῳ. καὶ ἃ yap Ποσειδῶaν α ταῖaς
84
THESEUS, xxxvi. 1-4
who then inhabited the island. However, Cimon
took the island, as I have related in his Life,! and
being ambitious to discover the grave of Theseus,
saw an eagle in a place where there was the semblance
of a mound, pecking, as they say, and tearing up the
ground with his talons. By some divine ordering he
comprehended the meaning of this and dug there,
and there was found a coffin of a man of extraordinary
size, a bronze spear lying by its side, and a sword.
When these relics were brought home on_ his
trireme by Cimon, the Athenians were delighted,
and received them with splendid processions and
sacrifices, as though Theseus himself were returning
to his city. And now he lies buried in the heart of
the city, near the present gymnasium,” and his tomb
is a sanctuary and place of refuge for runaway slaves
and all men of low estate who are afraid of men in
power, since Theseus was a champion and helper of
such during his life, and graciously received the
supplications of the poor and needy. The chief
sacrifice which the Athenians make in his honour
comes on the eighth day of the month Pyanepsion,
the day on which he came back from Crete with the
youths. But they honour him also on the eighth
day of the other months, either because he came to
Athens in the first place, from Troezen, on the
eighth day of the month Hecatombaeon, as Diodorus
the Topographer states, or because they consider
this number more appropriate for him than any
other since he was said to be a son of Poseidon.®
For they pay honours to Poseidon on the eighth day
1 Chapter viii. 3-6.
2. The gymnasium of Ptolemy. Pausanias, i. 17, 2,
5 Cf. chapter vi. 1.
85
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὀγδόαις τιμῶσιν. ἡ yap ὀγδοὰς κύβος ἀπ᾽ ἀρτίου
πρῶτος οὖσα καὶ τοῦ πρώτου τετραγώνου δι-
πλασία, τὸ μόνιμον καὶ δυσκίνητον οἰκεῖον ἔχει
τῆς τοῦ θεοῦ δυνάμεως, ὃν ἀσφάλειον καὶ γαιήοχον
προσονομάζομεν.
86
THESEUS, xxxvi. 4
of every month. The number eight, as the first cube
of an even number and the double of the first square,
fitly represents the steadfast and immovable power
of this god, to whom we give the epithets of
Securer and Earth-stayer.
δ]
iat)
ey
Ea a uit) ; wie
ν᾽i Νi th Ἢ
th, att SULAL ES, DP Goan
ΝΣ ρ7 AT οA ΠῚ νδὰ ἡ ow ant ᾿ ᾿ Β ky
ΟῚ ἱ ἣν L@&ἐ ν ὶ " ~ ἝΩ ͵ i ἢ } ᾽ 2 fM as 2ὟZ , ΡAbe ῃ Σ as
᾿ ἈΝ ΣΝ ᾿
ἱ ΤΌΝ iP
πὰ Ὁ
ΙΝ ἮἐΝὰν ὰ
yy ve λα
ὑ
ROMULUS
POMYAOZ
I. To μέγα τῆς Ῥώμης ὄνομα καὶ δόξῃ διὰ
πάντων ἀνθρώπων κεχωρηκὸς ἀφ᾽ ὅτου καὶ ov
ἣν αἰτίαν τῇ πόλει γέγονεν, οὐχ ὡμολόγηται
παρὰ τοῖς συγγραφεῦσιν, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν Πελασγοὺς
ἐπὶ πλεῖστα τῆς οἰκουμένης πλανηθέντας ἀν-
θρώπων τε πλείστων κρατήσαντας, αὐτόθι, κατ-
οικῆσαι, καὶ διὰ τὴν ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις ῥώμην
οὕτως ὀνομάσαι τὴν πόλιν, οἱ δὲ Τροίας ἁλι-
σκομένης διαφυγόντας ἐνίους καὶ πλοίων ἐπιτυ-
χόντας ὑπὸ πνευμάτων τῇ Τυρρηνίᾳ προσπεσεῖν
φερομένους, καὶ περὶ τὸν Θύμβριν ποταμὸν ὁρμί-
σασθαι: ταῖς δὲ γυναιξὶν αὐτῶν ἀπορουμέναις 18
ἤδη καὶ δυσανασχετούσαις πρὸς τὴν θάλασσαν
ὑποθέσθαι μίαν, ἣ καὶ γένει προὔχειν καὶ “Φρονεῖν
ἐδόκει μάλιστα, Ῥώμην ὄνομα, καταπρῆσαι τὰ
8 πλοῖα' πραχθέντος δὲ τούτου πρῶτον μὲν ἀγα-
νακτεῖν τοὺς ἄνδρας, ἔπειτα δι᾽ ἀνάγκην ἱδρυν-
θέντας περὶ τὸ Παλλάντιον, ὡς ὀλίγῳ χρόνῳ
κρεῖττον ἐλπίδος ἐἔ πραττον, ἀγαθῆς τε πειρώμενοι
χώρας καὶ δεχομένων αὐτοὺς τῶν προσοίκων,
ἄλλην τε τιμὴν ἀπονέμειν τῇ Ῥώμῃ καὶ τὴν
πόλιν ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς, ὡς αἰτίας, προσαγορεύειν. ἐξ
ἐκείνου τε παραμένειν λέγουσι τὸ τοὺς συγγενεῖς
go
ROMULUS
1. From whom, and for what reason the great
name of Rome, so famous among mankind, was
given to that city, writers are not agreed. Some
say that the Pelasgians, after wandering over
most of the habitable earth and subduing most of
mankind, settled down on that site, and that from
their strength in war they called their city Rome.
Others say that at the taking of Troy some of its
people escaped, found sailing vessels, were driven
by storms upon the coast of Tuscany, and came to
anchor in the river Tiber; that here, while their
women were perplexed and distressed at thought of
the sea, one of them, who was held to be of superior
birth and the greatest understanding, and whose
name was Roma, proposed that they should burn the
ships! ; that when this was done, the men were
angry at first, but afterwards, when they bad settled
of necessity on the Palatine, seeing themselves in a
little while more prosperous than they had hoped,
since they found the country good and the neigh-
bours made them welcome, they paid high honours
to Roma, and actually named the city after her,
since she had been the occasion of their founding
it. And from that time on, they say, it has been
1 Cf. Aeneid, v. 604-699.
ΟΙ
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τὰ\ς γυναῖΞκ- ας καὶ \ οἰeκeε:ί ους ἄ” νδὃρ ας ἀ’ σπάζ, εσθαι
τοῖaς στό/μ ασι; Kal \ yaXpi ἐκεί’ν ας, O“ TE τὰ\ πλοῖnαa
κατέ/π ρησαν, οὕefτ ως ἀ> σπάζ4 εσθαι καὶ \ dirodpo-
νεῖσθαι τοὺς ἄνδρας, δεομένας αὐτῶν καὶ παραι-
τουμέν/ ας τὴ\ ν ὀργήν/ .
IT. ἼΑλλοι δὲ Ῥώμην, ᾿Ιταλοῦ θυγατέρα καὶ
Aeveapias, ot δέ, Τηλέφ/ ου τοῦa ‘Hpaknréous,
Αἰνείᾳ γαμηθεῖ-σ“ αν, οἱ δ᾽ ᾿Ασκανίο7 υ todf al Αἰνείου,
λέγουσι τοὔ» νομα θέUAσ θαι THa πόλ/ ει: οἱ δὲ Ῥω-
μανόν/ , >]O dὃv océw7 s παῖLδOα καὶ \ KiΚ ίρκης, οἰκίedσ αι τὴ\ν
πόλιν: οἱ δὲ Ῥῶμον ἐκ Τροίας ὑπὸ Διομήδους
ἀ᾽ ποσταλέν/ τα τὸΝν 3 ᾿Ημαθίω’ νος, ot € δὲ\\ «ς“ Pfal am
Λατίνων τύραννον, ἐκβαλόν/ τα Τυρρηνοὺς τοὺς
εἰς Λυδίfαe ν μὲν ἐκ Θετταλία/ς , ἐκ δὲΝ Λυδία’, ς εἰς
>)Ἰ ταλία/ ν παραγενομέν/ο υς. οὐ» μὴAν οὐδ50᾽» οἱ εἰ if Ῥω-
μύλον TO“ Ὁ δικαιοτάτῳ TOLaVl λό/γ ων ἀποφαίνοντες
ἐπώνυμον τῆfoςl πόλεως ὁς μολογοῦfσa) ι περὶ τοῦ“
γένους αὐτοῦ.a οἱ μὲν yap Αἰνεί/ο υ καὶ Δεξιθέα/ ς
τῆnς Φόρβαντος υἱὸν ὄντα νήπιον εἰς > ᾿Ιταλί/α ν
κομισθῆνa αι, καὶ \ τὸ\ν ἀ> δελφὸν\ αὐ>τ οῦ A «gt ‘Paa mov: ἐ?ν
δὲ\ τῷl al ποταμῷ a πλημμύρ/α ντι τῶlaν) ἄBA λλων σκαφῶνἴω
διαφθὉ αρέν/ τωμνᾷ, ἐ>ν 1ᾧ7 δὲp ἦ9 σαν οἱ e παῖδa ες εἰ>ς φμ α-
λακὴν ἀποκλινθέντος ὄ5 χθην ἀτρέμ/ α, σωθέν/ τας"
ἀπροσδοκήτως, ὀνομασθῆνn αι Ῥώμ, ην. οἱ e δὲ
€ Ῥώμ, ην θυγατέ,ρ α τῆnς Τρωάδος ἐκεί"4ν ης Aativ, e
τῷ Ῥηλεμάχου γαμηθεῖσαν τεκεῖν τὸν Ῥωμύλον"
οἱ € δὲ\ Αἰ>μ υλίαid ν τὴNν ΑἰνείοPi υ καὶ \ Λαβινία/ ς ” Αρει
συγγενομένην: ote δὲ μυθώδ, η παντάπασι περὶ τῆanς
1 σωθέντας MSS., Coraés, Sintenis!, and Bekker: σωθέντος.
2 ἀπροσδοκήτως after this word, Bekker assumes a lacuna
in the text,
92
ROMULUS, τ. 4-1. 3
customary for the women to salute their kinsmen
and husbands with a kiss; for those women, after
they had burned the ships, made use of such tender
salutations as they supplicated their husbands and
sought to appease their wrath.
11. Others again say that the Roma who gave her
name to the city was a daughter of Italus and
Leucaria, or, in another account, of Telephus the
son of Heracles; and that she was married to Aeneas,
or, in another version, to Ascanius the son of Aeneas.
Some tell us that it was Romanus, a son of Odysseus
and Circe, who colonized the city ; others that it was
Romus, who was sent from Troy by Diomedes the
son of Emathion ; and others still that it was Romis,
tyrant of the Latins, after he had driven out the
Tuscans, who passed from Thessaly into Lydia, and
from Lydia into Italy. Moreover, even those writers
who declare, in accordance with the most authentic
tradition, that it was Romulus who gave his name to
the city, do not agree about his lineage. For some
say that he was a son of Aeneas and Dexithea the
daughter of Phorbas, and was brought to Italy in his
infancy, along with his brother Romus ; that the rest
of the vessels were destroyed in the swollen river,
but the one in which the boys were was gently
directed to a grassy bank, where they were unex-
pectedly saved, and the place was called Roma from
them. Others say it was Roma, a daughter of the
Trojan woman I have mentioned, who was wedded to
Latinus the son of Telemachus and bore him
Romulus; others that Aemilia, the daughter of Aeneas
and Lavinia, bore him to Mars; and others still
rehearse what is altogether fabulous concerning his
93
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γενέσεως διεξί/α σι. Ταρχετίῳ yap ᾿Αλβανῶaν
βασιλεῖ παρανομωτάτῳ καὶ ὠμοτάτῳ φάσμα
δαιμόν4 ιον οἴ” κοι γενέ΄σ θαι" φαλλὸν\ ya\p ἐ2κ τῆaς
ἑστίας ἀνασχεῖν καὶ διαμένειν ἐπὶ πολλὰς ἡμέρας"
εἶναι δὲ Τηθύος ἐν Τυρρηνίᾳ χρηστήριον, ἀφ᾽ οὗ
κομισθῆνa αι τῷA Ταρχετίῳ/ χῃ ρησμὸν\ ὥ[4σ τε3 συμ-
μῖaξ αι τῷA φάσ4 ματι παρθέν/ο ν: ἔδ σεσθαι γὰρ ἐξ
αὐτῆaς παῖaδ α κλεινό/τ ατον ἀρετῇa A Kal τύχη καὶ
ῥώμῃ διαφέροντα. φράσαντος οὖν τὸ μάντευμα
τοῦa Tapyetio/ v μιᾷL al τῶaν θυγατέρ/ ων καὶ \ συγ-
γενέ, σθαι τῷA φαλλῷa A προστάξ7 αντος, αὐ>τ ὴ\ν μὲ\ν
ἀ’ παξιῶσA αι, θερά/π αιναν δὲ\ εἰ5 σπέμμ ψαι. τὸ\ν δὲ\
Ταρχέτιον, ὡς ἔγνω, χαλεπῶς φέροντα συλλαβεῖν
μὲ\ν ἀb μφοτέρ/ ας ἐb]π ὶ θανάτ/ ῳ, τὴ\ν δ᾽3. ¢ “Ἑστί/α ν ἰO0δ7ό ντα
κατὰ τοὺς ὕπνους ἀπαγορεύUοA υσαν αὐτῴa τὸν
φόνον, ἱστόν τινα παρεγγυῆσαι ταῖς κόραις
ὑς φαίνΤὰε ιν δεδεμέν/ αις, ὡ.ς ὅivτa αν ἐ>’ξ υφήν/ ωσι, τό/τ ε
δοθησομένας πρὸΝς γάμον. ἐκεί, νας μὲν οὖ5ν Ov
ἡμέρας ὑφαίνειν, ἑτέρας δὲ νύκτωρ τοῦ Ταρ-
χετίου κελεύοντος ἀναλύειν τὸν ἱστόν. ἐκ δὲ τοῦ
φαλλοῦ τῆς θεραπαινίδος τεκούσης δίδυμα, δοῦναί
τίνι Τερατίῳ τὸν Ταρχέτιον. ἀνελεῖν κελεύσαντα.
τὸν δὲ θεῖναι φέροντα τοῦ ποταμοῦ πλησίον"
εἶτα λύκαιναν μὲν ἐπιφοιτᾶν μαστὸν ἐνδιδοῦσαν,
ὄ> ρνιθας δὲ παντοδαποὺς ψωμίσ/ ματα κομίζοντας
ἐ2 ντιθέν/ αι τοῖaς βρέpφe εσιν, ἄ" χρι οὗi e βουκόλ/ ον ἰγῸ δόΚ ντα
καὶ θαυμάσαντα τολμῆσαι προσελθεῖν καὶ ἀνε-
λέσθαι τὰ παιδία. τοιαύτης δὲ τῆς σωτηρίας
αὐτοῖς γενομένης, ἐκτραφέντας ἐπιθέσθαι τῷ
Ταρχετίῳ καὶ κρατῆσαι. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν Προ- 19
94
ROMULUS, nu. 3-6
origin. For instance, they say that Tarchetius, king
of the Albans, who was most lawless and cruel,
was visited with a strange phantom in his house,
namely, a phallus rising out of the hearth and remain-
ing there many days. Now there was an oracle of
Tethys in Tuscany, from which there was brought to
Tarchetius a response that a virgin must have inter-
course with this phantom, and she should bear a son
most illustrious for his valour, and of surpassing good
fortune and strength. Tarchetius, accordingly, told
the prophecy to one of his daughters, and bade her
consort with the phantom ; but she disdained to do
so, and sent a handmaid in to it. When Tarchetius
learned of this, he was wroth, and seized both the
maidens, purposing to put them to death. But the
goddess Hestia appeared to him in his sleep and for-
bade him the murder. He therefore imposed upon
the maidens the weaving of a certain web in their
imprisonment, assuring them that when they had
finished the weaving of it, they should then be given
in marriage. By day, then, these maidens wove, but
by night other maidens, at the command of Tarche-
tius, unravelled their web. And when the handmaid
became the mother of twin children by the phantom,
Tarchetius gave them to a certain Teratius with
orders to destroy them. This man, however, carried
them to the river-side and laid them down there.
Then a she-wolf visited the babes and gave them
suck, while all sorts of birds brought morsels of food
and put them into their mouths, until a cow-herd
spied them, conquered his amazement, ventured to
come to them, and took the children home with him.
Thus they were saved, and when they were grown
up, they set upon Tarchetius and overcame him.
95
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μαθί,ω ν τις ἱ« στορία͵ ν » ᾿Ιταλικὴ\ν συντεταγμέν/ο ς
εἴρηκε.
TI. Τοῦ δὲ πίστιν ἔχοντος λόγου μάλιστα καὶ
πλείστους μάρτυρας τὰ μὲν κυριώτατα πρῶτος εἰς
τοὺς “Ελληνας ἐξέδωκε Διοκλῆς Πεπαρήθιος, ©
καὶ Φάβιος ὁ Uixtwp ἐν τοῖς πλείστοις ἐπήκο-
λούθηκε. γεγόνασι δὲ καὶ περὶ τούτων ἕτεραι
διαφοραί: τύπῳ δὲ εἰπεῖν τοιοῦτός ἐστι. τῶν ἀπ᾽
Αἰνείου γεγονότων ἐν "Αλβῃ βασιλέων εἰς ἀδελ-
φοὺς δύο, Νομήτορα καὶ ᾿Αμούλιον, ἡ διαδοχὴ
καθῆκεν. ᾿Αμουλίου δὲ νείμαντος τὰ πάντα δίχα,
τῇ δὲ βασιλείᾳ τὰ χρήματα καὶ τὸν ἐκ Τροίας
κομισθέντα χρυσὸν ἀντιθέντος, εἵλετο τὴν βασι-
λείαν ὁ Νομήτωρ. ἔχων οὖν ὁ ᾿Αμούλιος τὰ
χρήματα καὶ πλέον ἀπ᾽ αὐτῶν δυνάμενος τοῦ
Νομήτορος, τήν τε βασιλείαν ἀφείλετο ῥᾳδίως,
καὶ φοβούμενος ἐκ τῆς θυγατρὸς αὐτοῦ γενέσθαι
παῖδας ἱέρειαν τῆς ᾿Εἰστίας ἀπέδειξεν, ἄγαμον καὶ
3 παρθένον ἀεὶ βιωσομένην. ταύτην οἱ μὲν ᾿Ιλίαν,
οἱ δὲ Peay, οἱ δὲ Σιλουΐαν ὀνομάζουσι. φωρᾶται
δὲ μετ᾽ οὐ πολὺν χρόνον κυοῦσα παρὰ τὸν καθε-
στῶτα ταῖς Ἑστιάσι νόμον. καὶ τὸ μὲν ἀνήκεστα
μὴ παθεῖν αὐτὴν ἡ τοῦ βασιλέως θυγάτηρ ᾿Ανθὼ
παρῃτήσατο, δεηθεῖσα τοῦ πατρός" elpxOn δὲ καὶ
δίαιταν εἶχεν ἀνεπίμικτον, ὅπως μὴ λάθοι τεκοῦσα
τὸν ᾿Αμούλιον. ἔτεκε δὲ δύο παῖδας ὑπερφυεῖς
μεγέθει καὶ κάλλει. δι᾿ὃ καὶ μᾶλλον ὁ ᾿Αμούλιος
φοβηθεὶς ἐκέλευσεν αὐτοὺς ὑπηρέτην λαβόντα
ῥῖψαι. τοῦτον ἔνιοι Φαυστύλον ὀνομάζεσθαι
96
ROMULUS, nm. 6-11. 4
At any rate, this is what a certain Promathion says,
who compiled a history of Italy.
III. But the story which has the widest credence
and the greatest number of vouchers was_ first
published among the Greeks, in its principal details,
by Diocles of Peparethus, and Fabius Pictor follows
him in most points. Here again there are variations
in the story, but its general outline is as follows.
The descendants of Aeneas reigned as kings in Alba,
and the succession devolved at length upon two
brothers, Numitor and Amulius.!. Amulius divided
the whole inheritance into two parts, setting the
treasures and the gold which had been brought from
Troy over against the kingdom, and Numitor chose
the kingdom. Amulius, then, in possession of the
treasure, and made more powerful by it than Nu-
mitor, easily took the kingdom away from his brother,
and fearing lest that brother’s daughter should have
children, made her a priestess of Vesta, bound to
live unwedded and a virgin all her days. Her name
is variously given as Ilia, or Rhea, or Silvia. Not
long after this, she was discovered to be with child,
contrary to the established law for the Vestals.?
She did not, however, suffer the capital punishment
which was her due, because the king’s daughter,
Antho, interceded successfully in her behalf, but she
was kept in solitary confinement, that she might not
be delivered without the knowledge of Amulius.
Delivered she was of two boys, and their size and
beauty were more than human. Wherefore Amulius
was all the more afraid, and ordered a servant to
take the boys and cast them away. This servant’s
name was Faustulus, according to some, but others
Ch. Livy; 19: 5. ΟἿ, ivy, i. 4, 1-6.
97
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
λέ’γ ουσιν, οἱ δ᾽ ov τοῦAτ ον, ἀλλὰ τὸν ἀνελόμενον.
ἐ3 νθέ/μ ενος οὖ3ν εἰ2ς σκά΄φ ην τὰ\ βρέφ΄ η, κατέ/β η μὲ\ν ἐ2!π ὶ \
τὸδνὴ ποταμὸνN wes ῥC7ί ψων, ἰIOδNὼ ν δὲ\ κατιό/ν τα πολλῷl al
ῥεύματι καὶ τραχυνόμενον ἔδεισε προσελθεῖν, ἐγ-
yd\s δὲ\ τῆnςa ὄ” χθης καταθεὶς\ ἀ39π ηλλάσ᾽ὔσ ετο. τοῦ“ δὲΝ
ποταμοῦ κατακλύζοντος ἡ πλήμμυρα τὴν σκάφην
ὑπολαβοῦσα καὶ μετεωρίσασα πράως κατήνεγκεν
εἰς χωρίον ἐπιεικῶς μαλθακόν, ὃ νῦν Κερμαλὸν
καλοῦσA ι, πάλ7,α ι δὲ\ Τερμανόν’, ὡeς ἔ” οικεν, ὅerτ ι Kal \
τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς γερμανοὺς ὀνομάζουσιν.
IV. Ἦν δὲ πλησίον ἐρινεός, ὃν “Ρωμινάλιον
ἐκάλουν, ἢ διὰ τὸν Ρωμύλον, ὡς οἱ πολλοὶ νομί-
ζουσιν, ἢ διὰ τὸ τὰ μηρυκώμενα τῶν θρεμμάτων
ἐ>κ εῖ a ὃ διὰ\ τὴδὰν σκιὰ\ν ἐ2 νδὃι άξ/ ειν, Aἢ μά/λ ιστα ὃ δι\ὰ τὸἉν
τῶaν βρεφῶlνal θηλασμόν,, O“ Te τὴν/ τε θηλὴ\ν ῥi οῦκέ μαν
ὠνόμαζον οἱ παλαιοῖ, καὶ θεόν τινα τῆς ἐκτροφῆς
τῶν νηπίων ἐπιμελεῖσθαι δοκοῦσαν ὀνομάζουσι
“Ῥουμιλίαν, καὶ θύουσιν αὐτῇ νηφάλια, καὶ γάλα
τοῖς ἱεροῖς ἐπισπένδουσιν. ἐνταῦθα δὴ τοῖς
βρέφεσι κειμένοις τήν τε λύκαιναν ἱστοροῦσι
θηχαξζομένην, καὶ δρυοκολάπτην τινὰ παρεῖναι
συνεκτρέφοντα καὶ φυλάττοντα. νομίζεται δ᾽
"A pews ἱἱ ερὰ τὰ ζῷα: τὸν δὲ δρυοκολάπτην καὶ
διαφερόντως Λατῖνοι σέβονται καὶ τιμῶσιν"
ὅθεν οὐχ ἥκιστα πίστιν ἔσχεν ἡ τεκοῦσα τὰ
βρέφη τεκεῖν é& "A pews φάσκουσα. καίτοι τοῦτο
παθεῖν αὐτὴν ἐξαπατηθεῖσαν λέγουσιν, ὑπὸ τοῦ
᾿Αμουλίου διαπαρθενευθεῖσαν ἐν ὅπλοις ἐπιφανέν-
τος αὐτῇ καὶ συναρπάσαντος.
οϑ
ROMULUS, 1. 4-1v. 2
give this name to the man who took the boys up.
Obeying the king’s orders, the servant put the babes
into a trough and went down towards the river,
purposing to cast them in; but when he saw that
the stream was much swollen and violent, he was
afraid to go close up to it, and setting his burden
down near the bank, went his way. Then the over-
flow of the swollen river took and bore up the trough,
floating it gently along, and carried it down to a
fairly smooth spot which is now called Kermalus,
but formerly Germanus, perhaps because brothers
are called “ germani.”
IV. Now there was a wild fig-tree hard by, which
they called Ruminalis, either from Romulus, as is
generally thought, or because cud-chewing, or rumi-
nating, animals spent the noon-tide there for the
sake of the shade, or best of all, from the suckling of
the babes there; for the ancient Romans called the
teat “ruma,” and a certain goddess, who is thought
to preside over the rearing of young children, is still
called Rumilia, in sacrificing to whom no wine is
used, and libations of milk are poured over her
victims. Here, then, the babes lay, and the she-wolt
of story here gave them suck,! and a woodpecker
came to help in feeding them and to watch over
them. Now these creatures are considered sacred to
Mars, and the woodpecker is held in especial
veneration and honour by the Latins, and this was
the chief reason why the mother was believed when
she declared that Mars was the father of her babes.
And yet it is said that she was deceived into doing
this, and was really deflowered by Amulius himself,
who came to her in armour and ravished her.
1 Cf. Livy, i. 4, 6-7.
99
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 Οἱ δὲ τοὔνομα τῆς τροφοῦ δι᾽ ἀμφιβολίαν ἐπὶ
TO μυθῶfδal ες ἐκτροπὴν THa φήμῃ παρασχεῖνa. Rov-4
Tas yap ἐκάλουν οἱ Λατῖνa οι τῶrνn Te θηρίΨω ν τὰ\ς
λυκαίν, ας, καὶ τῶaν γυναικῶaνn τὰς ἑταιρού,σ ας" εἶναι
δὲ τοιαύτην τὴν Φαυστύλου γυναῖκα τοῦ τὰ βρέ-
on θρέ/ψ αντος, v7 "Axxav Λαρεντίαi ν ὄ” νομα. ταύτ/ ῃ
δὲΝ καὶ θύ/ο υσιν οἱ (Fg ΡωμαῖοὉι , καὶ \ χοὰxς ἐb]π ιφέρ7 ει τοῦa
᾽ Απριλλίο/ υ μηνὸςΝ αὐbτ] ῇ"e m | ὁi g Tov”a v Apews ἱe ερεύςfe, καὶ \
Λαρεντίαν καλοῦσι τὴν ἑορτήν.
V. “Ἑτέραν δὲ τιμῶaσ ι Λαρεντία, ν ἐξ αἰτί,α ς
τοιαύτης. ὁ νεωκόρ, ος τοῦἴ ω ¢ Ἡρακλέο/ υς ἀλύω, ν,
ὡeς ἔ” οικεν, ὑe πὸ Ν σχολῆςa , προὔ”θ ετο πρὸ\ς τὸ\ν θεὸ\ν
διακυβεύειν, ὑπειπὼ\ν ὅτι νική/σ ας μὲν αὐτὸς ἕ° ξει
TL παρὰ Tova θεοῦn a χρηστόν/, ἡττηθεὶς\ δὲ τῷnr θεῷa 20
τρά΄π, εζαν ἄyAφ θονον παρέξ/ ει καὶ \ γυναῖaκ α καλὴ\ν
συναναπαυσομένην. ἐπὶ τούτοις τὰ\ς μὲν ὑπὲρ
τοῦ“ θεοῦa τιθείς/ , τὰ\ς δ᾽’ ὑς πὲρ\ αὑeτ οῦ nA ψήφ7ὁ ο υς,
ἀ> νεφάν,ὔ η νικώ/μ ενος. εὐ> συνθετεῖνnw δὲοὗ βουλόμ7 ενος
καὶ δικαιῶὉν ἐμμένειν τοῖaς ὁS ρισθεῖ“σ- ι, δεῖan πνόν τε
τῷan θεῷA παρεσκεύα᾽νσ ε, καὶ τὴν Λαρεντία, ν οὖ> σαν
ὡραίαν, οὔπω δὲ ἐπιφανῆ, μισθωσάμενος, εἱστία-
σεν ἐν τῷA ἱερῷla,l κλίΨν ην ὑποστορέσας, καὶ μετὰ τὸ
δεῖπνον συνεῖρξεν, ὡς δὴ τοῦ θεοῦ ἕξοντος αὐτήν.
καὶ μέντοι καὶ τὸν θεὸν ἐντυχεῖν λέγεται τῇ
γυναικὶ καὶ κελεῦσαι βαδίζειν ἕωθεν ἐπὶ τὴν
ἀ> γορὰν καὶ τὸν ἀπαντήiσe αντα πρῶnτ ον ἀσπασα-
μένην ποιεῖa σθαι φίλον. ἀπήν/ τησεν οὖν αὐτῇa
TOlaVl πολιτῶaνl ἀνὴρ ἡλικί,α ς TE πόρρω ἥκων καὶ
1 αὐτῇ bracketed in Sintenis?, to avoid the hiatus.
T1990
ROMULUS, 1v. 3-v. 3
But some say that the name of the children’s
nurse, by its ambiguity, deflected the story into the
realm of the fabulous. For the Latins not only
called she-wolves “lupae,” but also women of loose
character, and such a woman was the wife of
Faustulus, the foster-father of the infants, Acca
Larentia by name. Yet the Romans sacrifice also
to her, and in the month of April the priest of
Mars pours libations in her honour, and the festival is
called Larentalia.
V. They pay honours also to another Larentia, for
the following reason. The keeper of the temple of
Hercules, being at a loss for something to do, as it
seems, proposed to the god a game of dice, with the
understanding that if he won it himself, he should
get some valuable present from the god; but if he
lost, he would furnish the god with a bounteous
repast and a lovely woman to keep him company for
the night. On these terms the dice were thrown,
first for the god, then for himself, when it appeared
that he had lost. Wishing to keep faith, and
thinking it right to abide by the contract, he pre-
pared a banquet for the god, and engaging Larentia,
who was then in the bloom of her beauty, but not
yet famous,! he feasted her in the temple, where he
had spread a couch, and after the supper locked her
in, assured of course that the god would take pos-
session of her. And verily it is said that the god did
visit the woman, and bade her go early in the
morning to the forum, salute the first man who met
her, and make him her friend. She was met,
accordingly, by one of the citizens who was well on
in years and possessed of considerable property, but
1 In Morals, p. 273 a, she is called a public courtezan.
Iol
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
συνειλοχὼς οὐσίαν ἱκανήν, ἄπαις δὲ καὶ βεβιω-
κὼς ἄνευ γυναικός, ὄνομα Ῥαρρούτιος. οὗτος
ἔγνω τὴν Λαρεντίαν καὶ ἠγάπησε, καὶ τελευτῶν
ἀπέλιπε κληρονόμον ἐπὶ πολλοῖς καὶ καλοῖς
κτήμασιν, ὧν ἐκείνη τὰ πλεῖστα τῷ δήμῳ κατὰ
διαθήκας ἔδωκε. λέγεται δὲ αὐτὴν ἔνδοξον οὖσαν
ἤδη καὶ θεοφιλῆ νομιζομένην, ἀφανῆ γενέσθαι
περὶ τοῦτον τὸν τόπον ἐν ᾧ καὶ τὴν προτέραν
ἐκείνην Λαρεντίαν κεῖσθαι. καλεῖται δὲ νῦν ὁ
τόπος Βήλαυρον, OTL τοῦ ποταμοῦ πολλάκις
ὑπερχεομένου διεπεραιοῦντο πορθμείοις κατὰ τοῦ-
το τὸ χωρίον εἰς ἀγοράν" τὴν δὲ πορθμείαν
βηλατούραν καλοῦσιν. ἔνιοι δὲ λέγουσι τὴν
εἰς τὸν ἱππόδρομον φέρουσαν ἐξ ἀγορᾶς πάροδον
ἱστίοις καταπεταννύναι τοὺς τὴν θέαν παρέ-
χοντας, ἐντεῦθεν ἀρχομένους" ῥωμαϊστὶ δὲ τὸ
ἱστίον βῆλον ὀνομάζουσι. διὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἔχει
τιμὰς ἡ δευτέρα Λαρεντία παρὰ Ῥωμαίοις.
VI. Τὰ δὲβ ρέφη Φαυστύλος ᾿Αμουλίου συ-
φορβὸς ἀνείλετο λαθὼν ἅπαντας, ὡς δ᾽ ἔνιοί
φασι τῶν εἰκότων ἐχόμενοι. μᾶλλον, εἰδότος τοῦ
Νομήτορος καὶ συγχορηγοῦντος τροφὰς κρύφα
τοῖς τρέφουσι. καὶ γράμματα λέγονται καὶ
τἄλλα μανθάνειν οἱ παῖδες εἰς Ταβίους κομι-
σθέντες, ὅσα χρὴ τοὺς εὖ γεγονότας. κληθῆναι
δὲ καὶ τούτους ἀπὸ τῆς θηλῆς ἱστοροῦσι “Ῥωμύλον
καὶ “Ῥῶμον, ὅτι ᾿θηλάξζοντες ὥφθησαν τὸ θηρίον.
ἡ μὲν οὖν ἐν τοῖς σώμασιν εὐγένεια καὶ νηπίων
ὄντων εὐθὺς ἐξέφαινε μεγέθει καὶ ἰδέᾳ τὴν φύσιν'
αὐξόμενον δὲ θυμοειδεῖς ἦσαν ἀμφότεροι καὶ
ἀνδρώδεις καὶ φρονήματα πρὸς τὰ φαινόμενα
102
ROMULUS, v. 3-v1. 2
childless, and unmarried all his life, by name
Tarrutius. This man took Larentia to his bed and
loved her well, and at his death left her heir to many
and fair possessions, most of which she bequeathed
to the people. And it is said that when she was
now famous and regarded as the beloved of a god,
she disappeared at the spot where the former
Larentia also lies buried. This spot is now called
Velabrum, because when the river overflowed, as it
often did, they used to cross it at about this point in
ferry-boats, to go to the forum, and their word for
ferry is “velatura.’’ But some say that it is so-
called because from that point on, the street leading
to the Hippodrome! from the forum is covered over
with sazls by the givers of a public spectacle, and
the Roman word for sail is “velum.”’ It is for these
reasons that honours are paid to this second Larentia
amongst the Romans.
VI. As for the babes, they were taken up and
reared by Faustulus, a swineherd of Amulius, and no
man knew of it; or, as some say with a closer
approach to probability, Numitor did know of it, and
secretly aided the foster-parents in their task. And
it is said that the boys were taken to Gabii to learn
letters and the other branches of knowledge which
are meet for those of noble birth. Moreover, we are
told that they were named, from “ruma,” the Latin
word for teat,?>, Romulus and Romus (or Remus),
because they were seen sucking the wild beast.
Well, the noble size and beauty of their bodies,
even when they were infants, betokened their natural
disposition ; and when they grew up, they were both
of them courageous and manly, with spirits which
1 That is, the Circus Maximus. 3 Cf. chapter iv. 1.
103
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δεινὰ καὶ τόλμαν ὅλως ἀνέκπληκτον ἔχοντες" ὁ
δὲ “Ῥωμύλος γνώμῃ τε χρῆσθαι μᾶλλον. ἐδόκει
καὶ πολιτικὴν ἔχειν σύνεσιν, ἐν ταῖς περὶ νομὰς
καὶ κυνηγίας πρὸς τοὺς γειτνιῶντας ἐπιμιξίαις
πολλὴν ἑαυτοῦ παρέχων κατανόησιν ἡγεμονικοῦ
μᾶλλον ἢ πειθαρχικοῦ φύσει γεγονότος. διὸ
τοῖς μὲν ὁμοφύλοις ἢ ταπεινοτέροις προσφιλεῖς
ἦσαν, ἐπιστάτας δὲ καὶ διόπους βασιλικοὺς καὶ
ἀγελάρχας, ὡς μηδὲν αὐτῶν ἀρετῇ διαφέροντας,
ὑπερφρονοῦντες οὔτ᾽ ἀπειλῆς ἐφρόντιζον οὔτε
ὀργῆς. ἐχρῶντο δὲ διαίταις καὶ διατριβαῖς. ἐλευ-
θερίοις, οὐ τὴν σχολὴν ἐλευθέριον ἡγούμενοι
καὶ τὴν ἀπονίαν, ἀλλὰ γυμνάσια καὶ θήρας καὶ
δρόμους καὶ τὸ λῃστὰς ἀμύνασθαι καὶ κλῶπας
ἑλεῖν καὶ βίας ἐξελέσθαι τοὺς ἀδικουμένους.
ἦσαν δὴ διὰ ταῦτα περιβόητοι.
VII. Γενομένης δέ τινος πρὸς τοὺς Νομήτορος
βουκόλους τοῖς ᾿Αμουλίου διαφορᾶς καὶ βοσκη-
μάτων ἐλάσεως, οὐκ ἀνασχόμενοι συγκόπτουσι
μὲν αὐτοὺς καὶ τρέπονται, ἀποτέμνονται δὲ τῆς
λείας συχνήν. ἀγανακτοῦντος δὲ τοῦ Ν ομήτορος
ὠλιγώρουν" συνῆγον δὲ καὶ προσεδέχοντο πολλοὺς
μὲν ἀπόρους, πολλοὺς δὲ δούλους, θράσους ἀπο-
στατικοῦ καὶ φρονήματος ἀρχὰς ἐνδιδόντες. τοῦ
δὲ Ῥωμύλου πρός τινα θυσίαν ἀποτραπομένου
(καὶ γὰρ ἣν φιλοθύτης καὶ μαντικός), οἱ τοῦ
Νομήτορος βοτῆρες τῷ Pope μετ᾽ ὀλίγων βαδί-
ζοντι προστυχόντες ἐμάχοντο. καὶ γενομένων 2]
πληγῶν καὶ τραυμάτων ἐν ἀμφοτέροις ἐκράτησαν
οἱ τοῦ Νομήτορος καὶ συνέλαβον ζῶντα τὸν
104
ROMULUS, vi. 2-vu1. 2
courted apparent danger, and a daring which nothing
could terrify. But Romulus seemed to exercise
his judgement more, and to have political sagacity,
while in his intercourse with their neighbours in
matters pertaining to herding and hunting, he gave
them the impression that he was born to command
rather than to obey. With their equals or inferiors
they were therefore on friendly terms, but they
looked down upon the overseers, bailiffs, and chief
herdsmen of the king, believing them to be no better
men than themselves, and disregarded both their
threats and their anger. They also applied them-
selves to generous occupations and pursuits, not
esteeming sloth and idleness generous, but rather
bodily exercise, hunting, running, driving off robbers,
capturing thieves, and rescuing the oppressed from
violence. For these things, indeed, they were famous
far and near.
VII. When a quarrel arose between the herdsmen
of Numitor and Amulius,! and some of the latter’s
cattle were driven off, the brothers would not suffer
it, but fell upon the robbers, put them to flight, and
intercepted most of the booty. To the displeasure
of Numitor they gave little heed, but collected and
took into their company many needy men and many
slaves, exhibiting thus the beginnings of seditious
boldness and temper. But once when Romulus
was busily engaged in some sacrifice, being fond of
sacrifices and of divination, the herdsmen of Numitor
fell in with Remus as he was walking with few com-
panions, and a battle ensued. After blows and wounds
given and received on both sides, the herdsmen of
Numitor prevailed and took Remus prisoner, who was
1 Cf. Livy, i. 5, 3 ff
τος
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
‘Papov. ἀναχθέντος οὖν αὐτοῦ πρὸς τὸν Νομή-
τορα καὶ κατηγορηθέντος, αὐτὸς μὲν οὐκ ἐκόλασε,
χαλεπὸν ὄντα δεδιὼς τὸν ἀδελφόν, ἐλθὼν δὲ
πρὸς ἐκεῖνον ἐδεῖτο τυχεῖν δίκης, ἀδελφὸς ὧν καὶ
καθυβρισμένος ὑπὸ οἰκετῶν ἐκείνου βασιλέως
ὄντος. συναγανακτούντων δὲ τῶν ἐν Αλβῃ καὶ
δεινὰ πάσχειν οἰομένων τὸν ἄνδρα παρ᾽ ἀξίαν,
κινηθεὶς ὁ ᾿Αμούλιος αὐτῷ παραδίδωσι τῷ Νομή-
τορι τὸν Ῥῶμον ὅ τι βούλοιτο χρήσασθαι.
Παραλαβὼν δὲ ἐκεῖνος, ὡς ἧκεν οἴκαδε, θαυμά-
Cov μὲν ἀπὸ τοῦ σώματος τὸν νεανίσκον ὑπερ-
φέροντα μεγέθει καὶ ῥώμῃ πάντας, ἐνορῶν δὲ τῷ
προσώπῳ τὸ θαρραλέον καὶ ἰταμὸν τῆς ψυχῆς
ἀδούλωτον καὶ ἀπαθὲς ὑπὸ τῶν παρόντων, ἔργα
δὲ αὐτοῦ καὶ πράξεις ὅμοια τοῖς βλεπομένοις
ἀκούων, τὸ δὲ μέγιστον, ὡς ἔοικε, θεοῦ συμπα-
ρόντος καὶ συνεπευθύνοντος ἀρχὰς μεγάλων πραγ-
μάτων, ἁπτόμενος ἐπινοίᾳ καὶ τύχῃ τῆς ἀλη-
θείας, ἀνέκρινεν. ὅστις εἴη καὶ ὅπως γένοιτο,
φωνῇ TE πρᾳείᾳ καὶ φιλανθρώπῳ. βλέμματι
πίστιν αὐτῷ μετ᾽ ἐλπίδος ἐνδιδούς. ὁ δὲ θαρρῶν
ἔλεγεν" “ANN οὐδὲν ἀποκρύψομαί ce καὶ γὰρ
εἶναι δοκεῖς ᾿Αμουλίου βασιλικώτερος. ἀκούεις
γὰρ καὶ ἀνακρίνεις πρὶν ἢ κολάξειν' ὁ δ᾽ “ἀκρίτους
ἐκδίδωσι. πρότερον μὲν ἑαυτοὺς οἰκετῶν βασι-
λέως Φαυστύλου καὶ Λαρεντίας ἠπιστάμεθα παῖ-
δας (ἐσμὲν δὲ δίδυμοι), γενόμενοι δὲ ἐν αἰτίᾳ
πρὸς σὲ καὶ διαβολαῖς καὶ τοῖς περὶ ψυχῆς
ἀγῶσιν, ἀκούομεν μεγάλα περὶ ἑαυτῶν' εἰ δὲ
πιστώ, κρίνειν ἔοικε νῦν ὁ κίνδυνος. γοναὶ μὲν
106
ROMULUS, vn. 2-6
then carried before Numitor and denounced. Numitor
himself did not punish his prisoner, because he was
in fear of his brother Amulius, who was severe, but
went to Amulius and asked for justice, since he was
his brother, and had been insulted by the royal
servants. The people of Alba, too, were incensed,
and thought that Numitor had been undeservedly
outraged. Amulius was therefore induced to hand
Remus over to Numitor himself, to treat him as he
saw fit.
When Numitor came home, after getting Remus
into his hands, he was amazed at the young man’s com-
plete superiority in stature and strength of body, and
perceiving by his countenance that the boldness and
vigour of his soul were unsubdued and unharmed by
his present circumstances, and hearing that his acts
and deeds corresponded with his looks, but chiefly,
as it would seem, because a divinity was aiding
and assisting in the inauguration of great events, he
grasped the truth by a happy conjecture, and asked
him who he was and what were the circumstances of
his birth, while his gentle voice and kindly look
inspired the youth with confidence and hope. Then
Remus boldly said: “Indeed, I will hide nothing
from thee ; for thou seemest to be more like a king
than Amulius; thou hearest and weighest before
punishing, but he surrenders men without a trial.
Formerly we believed ourselves (my twin brother
and I) children of Faustulus and Larentia, servants
of the king; but since being accused and slandered
before thee and brought in peril of our lives, we
hear great things concerning ourselves; whether
they are true or not, our present danger is likely to
decide. Our birth is said to have been secret, and
107
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ya\p ἡe μῶAν ἀ> πόρ, ρητοι λέ/γ ονται, τροφαὶ \ δὲ καὶ \
τιθηνήσεις ἀτοπώτεραι νεογνῶν, οἷς ἐρρίφημεν
οἰωνοῖς καὶ θηρίοις, ὑπὸ τούτων τρεφόμενοι,
μαστῷ λυκαίνης καὶ δρυοκολάπτου ψωμίσμασιν,
ἐν σκάφῃ τινὶ κείμενοι παρὰ τὸν μέγαν ποταμόν.
ἔστι O ἡ σκάφη καὶ σώζεται, χαλκοῖς ὑποζώ-
σμασι γραμμάτων ἀμυδρῶν ἐγκεχαραγμένων, ἃ
γένοιτ᾽ ἂν ἴσως ὕστερον ἀνωφελῆ γνωρίσματα
τοῖς τοκεῦσιν ἡμῶν ἀπολομένων."
‘O μὲν οὖν Νομήτωρ ἔκ τε τῶν λόγων τούτων
καὶ πρὸς τὴν ὄψιν εἰκάζων τὸν χρόνον, οὐκ ἔφευγε
τὴν ἐλπίδα σαίνουσαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐφρόντιζεν ὅπως τῇ
θυγατρὶ περὶ τούτων κρύφα συγγενόμενος φρά-
σειεν᾽ ἐφρουρεῖτο γὰρ ἔτι καρτερῶς.
VIII. ‘O δὲ Φαυστύλος ἀκούσας τήν τε σύλ-
ληψὶν τοῦ Ῥώμου καὶ τὴν “παράδοσιν, τὸν μὲν
Ῥωμύλον ἠξίου βοηθεῖν, τότε σαφῶς διδάξας
περὶ τῆς γενέσεως" πρότερον δὲ ὑπῃνίττετο καὶ
παρεδήλου τοσοῦτον ὅσον προσέχοντας μὴ μικρὸν
φρονεῖν" αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν σκάφην κομίζων ἐχώρει
πρὸς τὸν Νομήτορα, σπουδῆς καὶ δέους μεστὸς
ὧν διὰ τὸν καιρόν. ὑποψίαν οὖν τοῖς , περὶ τὰς
πύλας φρουροῖς τοῦ βασιλέως παρέχων, καὶ
ὑφορώμενος * ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν καὶ ταραττόμενος περὶ
τὰς ἀποκρίσεις, οὐκ ἔλαθε τὴν σκάφην τῷ χλα-
μυδίῳ περικαλύπτων. ἣν δέ τις ἐν αὐτοῖς ἀπὸ
τύχης τῶν τὰ παιδία ῥῖψαι λαβόντων. καὶ γεγο-
νότων περὶ τὴν ἔκθεσιν. οὗτος ἰδὼν τὴν σκάφην
τότε, καὶ γνωρίσας τῇ κατασκευῇ καὶ τοῖς γράμ-
1 ὑφορώμενος corrected by Bekker to ἐρωτώμενος (questioned).
108
ROMULUS, vi. 6—vit1. 2
our nursing and nurture as infants stranger still.
We were cast out to birds of prey and wild beasts,
only to be nourished by them,—by the dugs of a
she-wolf and the morsels of a woodpecker, as we lay
in a little trough by the side of the great river. The
trough still exists and is kept safe, and its bronze
girdles are engraved with letters now almost effaced,
which may perhaps hereafter prove unavailing tokens
of recognition for our parents, when we are dead and
gone.”
Then Numitor, hearing these words, and conjec-
turing the time which had elapsed from the young
man’s looks, welcomed the hope that flattered him,
and thought how he might talk with his daughter
concerning these matters in a secret interview ; for
she was still kept in the closest custody.
VIII. But Faustulus, on hearing that Remus had
been seized and delivered up to Numitor, called upon
Romulus to go to his aid, and then told him clearly
the particulars of their birth; before this also he
had hinted at the matter darkly, and revealed
enough to give them ambitious thoughts when
they dwelt upon it. He himself took the trough
and went to see Numitor, full of anxious fear lest he
might not be in season. Naturally enough, the
guards at the king’s gate were suspicious of him,
and when he was scrutinized by them and made
confused replies to their questions, he was found to
be concealing the trough in his cloak. Now by
chance there was among the guards one of those
who had taken the boys to cast them into the river,
and were concerned in their exposure. This man,
now seeing the trough, and recognizing it by its
VOL. I. E 109
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μασιν, ἔτυχεν. ὑπονοίᾳ τοῦ ὄντος καὶ οὐ παρη-
μέλησεν, ἀχλὰ φράσας τὸ πρᾶγμα τῷ βασιλεῖ
κατέστησεν εἰς ἔλεγχον. ἐν δὲ πολλαῖς καὶ με-
γάλαις ἀνάγκαις ὁ Φαυστύλος οὔτ᾽ ἀήττητον
ἑαυτὸν διεφύλαξεν οὔτε παντάπασιν ἐκβιασθείς,
σώζεσθαι μὲν ὡμολόγησε τοὺς παῖδας, εἶναι δ᾽
ἄπωθεν τῆς "Αλβης ἔφη νέμοντας" αὐτὸς δὲ τοῦτο
πρὸς τὴν Ἰλίαν φέρων βαδίζειν, πολλάκις ἰδεῖν
καὶ θιγεῖν ἐπ᾿ ἐλπίδι βεβαιοτέρᾳ τῶν τέκνων
ποθήσασαν.
“Ὅπερ οὖν οἱ ταραττόμενοι καὶ μετὰ δέους ἢ
πρὸς ὀργὴν πράττοντες ὁτιοῦν ἐπιεικῶς πάσχουσι,
συνέπεσε παθεῖν τὸν ᾿Αμούλιον. ἄνδρα γὰρ ἄλλῃ
τε χρηστὸν καὶ τοῦ Νομήτορος φίλον ὑπὸ σπου-
δῆς ἔπεμψε, διαπυθέσθαι τοῦ Νομήτορος κε-
λεύσας εἴ τις ἥκοι λόγος εἰς αὐτὸν ὑπὲρ τῶν
παίδων ὡς περιγενομένων. ἀφικόμενος. οὖν ὁ
ἄνθρωπος, καὶ θεασάμενος ὅσον οὔπω τὸν Ῥῶ-
μον ἐν περιβολαῖς καὶ φιλοφροσύναις τοῦ Νομή-
τορος, τήν τε πίστιν ἰσχυρὰν ἐποίησε τὴς ἐλπίδος
καὶ παρεκελεύσατο τῶν πραγμάτων ὀξέως ἀντι-
λαμβάνεσθαι, καὶ συνὴν αὐτὸς ἤδη καὶ συνέ-
πραττεν. ὁ δὲ καιρὸς οὐδὲ βουλομένοις ὀκνεῖν
παρεῖχεν. ὁ γὰρ Ῥωμύλος ἐγγὺς ἦν ἤδη, καὶ
πρὸς αὐτὸν ἐξέθεον οὐκ ὀλίγοι τῶν πολιτῶν μίσει
καὶ φόβῳ τοῦ ᾿Αμουλίου. Πολλὴν δὲ καὶ σὺν
αὑτῷ δύναμιν ἦγε συλλελοχισμένην εἰς ἑκα-
τοστύας" ἑκάστης δὲ ἀνὴρ ἀφηγεῖτο χόρτου καὶ
ὕλης ἀγκαλίδα κοντῷ περικειμένην ἀνέχων: μα-
νίπλα ταύτας Λατῖνοι καλοῦσιν: ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου δὲ
καὶ νῦν ἐν τοῖς στρατεύμασι τούτους μανι-
πλαρίους ὀνομάζουσιν. ἅμα δὲ τοῦ μὲν Ῥώμου
110
ROMULUS, vu. 2-6
make and inscription, conceived a suspicion of the
truth, and without any delay told the matter to the
king,and brought the man before him to be examined.
In these dire and pressing straits, Faustulus did not
entirely hold his own, nor yet was his secret wholly
forced from him. He admitted that the boys were
alive and well, but said they lived at a distance from
Alba as herdsmen; he himself was carrying the
trough to Ilia, who had often yearned to see and
handle it, in confirmation of her hope for her
children.
As, then, men naturally fare who are con-
founded, and act with fear or in a passion, so
it fell out that Amulius fared. For he sent in all
haste an excellent man and a friend of Numitor’s,
with orders to learn from Numitor whether any
report had come to him of the children’s being alive.
When, accordingly, the man was come, and beheld
Remus almost in the affectionate embraces of
Numitor, he confirmed them in their confident hope,
and entreated them to proceed at once to action,
promptly joining their party himself and furthering
their cause. And the opportunity admitted of no
delay, even had they wished it; for Romulus was
now close at hand, and many of the citizens who
hated and feared Amulius were running forth to
join him. He was also leading a large force with
him, divided into companies of a hundred men, each
company headed by a man who bore aloft a handful
of hay and shrubs tied round a pole (the Latin word
for handful is “manipulus,” and hence in their
armies they still call the men in such companies
“manipulares.”). And when Remus incited the
111
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τοὺἉς ἐ» ντὸΝς ἀ» φιστάνZzτ ος, τοῦl al δὲἣν Ῥωμύλ/ ου προσά-4
youvtos ἔξωθεν, οὔτε πράξας οὐδὲν ὁ€ τύραννος
οὔτε βουλεύσας σωτήριον ἑαυτῷ, διὰ τὸ ἀπορεῖν
καὶ \ ταράτ/ τεσθαι, καταληφθεὶςΝ ἀ3 πέθ/ ανεν.
ὯΩν τὰ πλεῖnaσ τα καὶ τοῦa Φαβίο’, υ λέγοντος καὶ
τοῦn Ἰ]επαρηθίο, υ Διοκλέο,υ ς, ὃA ς δοκεῖ“ Ὁ πρῶnτ ος
ἐκδοῦaνn αι Ῥώμης κτίσ, ιν, ὕ¢ ποπτον μὲν ἐνίοις ἐστὶ
TO\ δραματικὸν Kal πλασματῶδaεn ς, οὐ δεῖa δὲ ἀπι-
στεῖaνn τὴν τύ΄χ ην ὁe ρῶa ντας οἵων ποιημάτων δη-
μιουργόςf ἐστι, Kal τὰ ς Ρωμαίω/ ν πράγματα λογι-
ζομένους ὡς οὐκ ἂν ἐνταῦθα προὔβη δυνάμεως,
μὴ\ θεί,α ν twaM N ἀ> ρχὴ\ν λαβόντα Kal μηδὲ\ν μέfγ α
μηδὲ παράδοξον ἔχουσαν.
IX.r ᾿Αμουλίο, υ δὲ ἀποθανόντος καὶ τῶν Tpay-
μάτων καταστάντων, Ἄλβην μὲν οὔτ᾽ οἰκεῖν μὴ
ἄ» ρχοντες οὔ> τ᾽ ἄYρd χειν ἐβού/λ οντο τοῦa μητροπάτορος
ζῶa ντος, ἀποδόν΄ τες δὲ τὴν ἡγεμονίIαe ν ἐκείνῳ Kal THan
μητρὶ τιμὰς πρεπούσ, ας, ἔγνωσαν οἰκεῖAν καθ᾽
ἑαυτούς, πόλ7 ιν ἐν ols χωρίο, ις ἐξ ἀρχῆaςn ἐνετρά-
φησαν κτί/σ αντες" αὕτη yaXp εὐπρεπεστάτη τῶnν
αἰτιῶlaν ἐστιν. ἣν δ᾽’ ἴσως ἀναγκαῖοa ν, οἰκετῶfaνl καὶ
ἀποστατῶνan πολλῶlνa ἠθροισμένων πρὸς\ αὐτούς,ἢ
καταλυθῆναι παντάπασι τούτων διασπαρέντων
ἢ συνοικεῖaνn ἰδίᾳ pet αὐτῶνlal. ὅτι γὰρ οὐκ ἠξί’ο υν
οἱe τὴ\ν " “AXBnY τ οἰ> κοῦaν τες ἀ» ναμιγνύνΨ,α ι τοὺς\ ἀ> πο-
στάτ/ ας ἑς αυτοῖς- οὐ>δQὲ\ προσδέχ/ εσθαι πολίτ/ ας, ἐ29δ0 ή-7
λωσε πρῶτον μὲν τὸ περὶ τὰς γυναῖκας ἔργον,
οὐ> χ ὕer βρει τολμηθέν᾿,ς ἀ> λλὰ ᾿ δι᾿’ ἀ3 νάγ/ κην, ἑ«ς κουσί7ω ν
ROMULUS, vu. 6-1x. 2
citizens within the city to revolt, and at the same
time Romulus attacked from without, the tyrant,
without taking a single step or making any plan for
his own safety, from sheer perplexity and confusion,
was seized and put to death.
Although most of these particulars are related by
Fabius and Diocles of Peparethus, who seems _ to
have been the first to publish a “ Founding of Rome,”
some are suspicious of their fictitious and fabulous
quality ; but we should not be incredulous when we
see what a poet fortune sometimes is, and when we
reflect that the Roman state would not have attained
to its present power, had it not been of a divine
origin, and one which was attended by great marvels.
IX. Amulius being now dead, and matters settled
in the city, the brothers were neither willing to live
in Alba, unless as its rulers, nor to beits rulers while
their grandfather was alive. Having therefore
restored the government to him and paid fitting
honours to their mother, they resolved to dwell by
themselves, and to found a city in the region where,
at the first, they were nourished and sustaine;d 1}
this surely seems a most fitting reason for their
course. But perhaps it was necessary, now that
many slaves and fugitives were gathered about them,
either to disperse these and have no following at all,
or else to dwell apart with them. For that the
residents of Alba would not consent to give the
fugitives the privilege of intermarriage with them,
nor even receive them as fellow-citizens, is clear, in
the first place, from the rape of the Sabine women,?
which was not a deed of wanton daring, but one of
necessity, owing to the lack of marriages by consent ;
ΘΕ ιν yi. 6,93 f ® See chapter xiv.
113
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀπορί/ᾳ γάμ/ ων: ἐτίla μησαν ya\p αὐτὰς ἁρπάσαντες
περιττῶςnan. ἔ7 πειτα τῆAς πό/λ εως τὴν πρώτ, ην
¢ἵ/ δρυσιν λαμβανούσ7η ς, ἱερό/ν τι φύξιμον τοῖaς ἀφι-
σταμένοις κατασκευάσαντες, ὃ Θεοῦ ᾿Ασυλαίου
προσηγόρ᾿ε υον, ἐ90.δ έἡ χοντο πάν΄ τας, οὔ”τ ε δεσπότf αις
δοῦlaλ) ον οὔ,τ ε OTa A χρήσ/ ταις οὔaτo᾽e ἄYρ χουσιν a> vdpo-
φόUνl ον ἐ> κδιδόν/ τες, ἀb]λ λὰA Y μαντεύμ4 ατι πυθοχρήσ/ τῳ
πᾶ΄σ-“ ι βεβαιοῦlνal τὴ\ν ἀ> συλία’ ν φάσ/ κοντες, ὥ«“σ τε
πληθῦσ“ αι ταχὺ τὴQν πόλιν' ἐπεὶ τάς γε πρώτ, ας
ἑστίας λέγουσι τῶν χιλίων μὴ πλείονας γενέσθαι.
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὕστερον.
€ Ορμήσ/ ασι δὲNV πρὸς\ τὸἊνν συνοικισμὸνΝ αὐ>τ’ οῖςfn
εὐ3 θὺ\ς ἣ9 ν διαφορὰ\ περὶ \ τοῦa τό,π ον. ς Ῥωμύλ΄ ος μὲ\ν
οὖν τὴν καλουμένην Ῥώμην κοναδράτην, ὅπερ
ἐστὶ τετράγωνον, ἔκτισε, καὶ ἐκεῖνον ἐβούλετο
πολίζειν τὸν τόπον, Ῥῶμος δὲ χωρίον τι τοῦ
3 ABevtiv/ ov καρτερόν,, ὃἃ ov bles ἐΣῚκ εῖaν ον μὲ\ν ὠ’ νομά[σ4 θη
« Ρεμών΄ ιον, viaAv δὲ “Peyvdpiov καλεῖτan αι. συνθε-
μέ7ν ων δὲδὲ τὴ\ν ἔ7 ριν ὄ” ρνισιν αἰὉσί οις βραβεῦσa αι καὶ
καθεζομέν4 ων χωρίς’,ὔ ἕξ φασι τῷCob en hs Ῥώμ΄ ῳ, διπλα-
σί/ο υς δὲ\ τῷnw ¢ Ῥωμύtλd ῳ προφανῆνan αι γῦaπ ας. οἱ ς δὲΝ
τὸ\ν μὲ\ν € Ῥῶaμ ον ἀληθῶAς ἰδεῖaν , ψεύσασθαι δὲ τὸν
«ςῬ ωμύλον: ἔλθόνf τος δὲ\ τοῦl a) ‘Pawpmou, τό/τ ε τοὺς
δώδεκα τῷfo ns Ῥωμύλ4 ῳ φανῆνA αι, διὸ καὶ νῦaν μάλιστα
χρῆa σθαι γυψὶ ς Ῥωμαίο/ υς οἰωνιζομένους.
« Hpod/ wpos δὲ ὁ£ ἸΤΠοντικὸς ἱστορεῖa καὶ to\v ‘Hpa- 20
κλέfα χαίρ/ ειν γυπὸς\ ἐπὶ πράξει φανέντος. ἔστι
μὲνἐ ν γὰγὰρρ aἀ βλαβέ στατον ζῴζωῴν ων ἁἁππάάν των, μηδδὲὲνν ὧὦν
114
ROMULUS, 1x. 2-6
for they certainly honoured the women, when they
had carried them off, beyond measure. And in the
second place, when their city was first founded, they
made a sanctuary of refuge for all fugitives,) which
they called the sanctuary of the God of Asylum.
There they received all who came, delivering none
up, neither slave to masters, nor debtor to creditors,
nor murderer to magistrates, but declaring it to be in
obedience to an oracle from Delphi that they made
the asylum secure for all men. Therefore the city
was soon full of people, for they say that the first
houses numbered no more than a thousand. This,
however, was later.
But when they set out to establish their city, a
dispute at once arose concerning the site. Romulus,
accordingly, built Roma Quadrata (which means
square), and wished to have the city on that site;
but Remus laid out astrong precinct on the Aventine
hill, which was named from him Remonium, but
now is called Rignarium. Agreeing to settle
their quarrel by the flight of birds of omen,? and
taking their seats on the ground apart from one
another, six vultures, they say, were seen by Remus,
and twice that number by Romulus. Some, however,
say that whereas Remus truly saw his six, Romulus
lied about his twelve, but that when Remus came to
him, then he did see the twelve. Hence it is that
at the present time also the Romans chiefly regard
vultures when they take auguries from the flight of
birds.
Herodorus Ponticus relates that Hercules also
was glad to see a vulture present itself when he
was upon an exploit. For it is the least harmful
mCi. Livy; 1S, 5: = CE Livy; +7,
115
PLUTARCH'S LIVES
σπείρουσιν ἢ φυτεύουσιν ἢ νέμουσιν ἄνθρωποι
σινόμενον, τρέφεται δὲ ἀπὸ νεκρῶν σωμάτων,
ἀποκτίννυσι δ᾽ οὐδὲν οὐδὲ λυμαίνεται ψυχὴν ἔχον,
πτηνοῖς δὲ διὰ συγγένειαν οὐδὲ νεκροῖς πρόσεισιν.
ἀετοὶ δὲ καὶ γλαῦκες καὶ ἱέρακες ζῶντα κόπτουσι
Ta\ ὁoμtό φυλα καὶ \ φονεύο΄ υσι: καίτ, οι kat ᾽ Αἰ->
σχύλον':
Ὄρρνιθος ὄρνις πῶς ἂν ἁγνεύοι φαγών;
ἔτι τἄλλα μὲν ἐν ὀφθαλμοῖς, ὡς ἔπος εἰπεῖν, ἀνα-
στρέφεται καὶ παρέχει διὰ παντὸς αἴσθησιν
ἑαυτῶν" ὁ δὲ γὺψ σπάνιόν ἐστι θέαμα καὶ νεοσ-
σοῖς γυπὸς οὐ ῥᾳδίως ἴσμεν ἐντετυχηκότες, ἀλλὰ
καὶ παρέσχεν ἐνίοις ἄτοπον ὑπόνοιαν, ἔξωθεν
αὐτοὺς ἀφ᾽ ἑτέρας τινὸς γῆς καταίρειν ἐνταῦθα,
τὸ σπάνιον καὶ μὴ συνεχές, οἷον οἱ μάντεις ἀξιοῦ-
σιν εἶναι τὸ μὴ κατὰ φύσιν μηδ᾽ ἀφ᾽ αὑτοῦ, πομπῇ
δὲ θείᾳ φαινόμενον.
Χ. Ἐπεὶ δ ἔγνω τὴν ἀπάτην ὁ Ῥῶμος, ἐχα-
λέπαινε, καὶ τοῦ Ῥωμύλου τάφρον ὀρύττοντος 7
TO τεῖχος ἔμελλε κυκλοῦσθαι, τὰ μὲν ἐχλεύαξε
τῶν ἔργων, τοῖς δ᾽ ἐμποδὼν ἐγένετο. τέλος δὲ
διαλλόμενον αὐτὸν οἱ μὲν αὐτοῦ Ῥωμύλου πατά-
ἕαντος, οἱ δὲ τῶν ἑταίρων τινὸς ἱζέλερος, ἐνταῦθα
πεσεῖν λέγουσιν. ἔπεσε δὲ καὶ Φαυστύλος ἐν τῇ
μάχῃ καὶ Πλειστῖνος, ὃὃν ἀδελφὸν ὄντα Φαυστύ-
λου συνεκθρέψαι τοὺς περὶ τὸν Ῥωμύλον ἱστοροῦ-
σιν. ὁ μὲν οὖν Κέλερ εἰς Τυρρηνίαν μετέστη καὶ
ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου τοὺς ταχεῖς οἱ “Ῥωμαῖοι καὶ ὀξεῖς
κέλερας ὀνομάζουσι" καὶ Κόϊντον Μέτελλον, ὅτι
116
ROMULUS, 1x. 6=x. 2
of all creatures, injures no grain, fruit-tree, or
cattle, and lives on carrion. But it does not kill or
maltreat anything that has life, and as for birds, it
will not touch them even when they are dead, since
they are of its own species. But eagles, owls, and
hawks smite their own kind when alive, and kill
them. And yet, in the words of Aeschylus :—!
“ How shall a bird that preys on fellow bird be
clean?”
Besides, other birds are, so to speak, always in our
eyes, and let themselves be seen continually; but
the vulture is a rare sight, and it is not easy to
come upon a vulture’s young, nay, some men have
been led into a strange suspicion that the birds come
from some other and foreign land to visit us here,
so rare and intermittent is their appearance, which
soothsayers think should be true of what does not
present itself naturally, nor spontaneously, but by a
divine sending.
X. When Remus knew of the deceit, he was
enraged,? and as Romulus was digging a trench
where his city’s wall was to run, he ridiculed some
parts of the work, and obstructed others. At last,
when he leaped across it, he was smitten (by
Romulus himself, as some say; according to others,
by Celer, one of his companions), and fell dead there.
Faustulus also fell in the battle,as well as Pleistinus,
who was a brother of Faustulus, and assisted him in
rearing Romulus and Remus. Celer, at any rate,
betook himself to Tuscany, and from him the
Romans call such as are swift and speedy, “ celeres.”’
Quintus Metellus, for instance, when his father died,
1 Suppliants, 226 (Dindorf) # Cf Livy, i°7; 2.
117
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τοῦA πατρὸς ἀποθανόν/ τος ἀγῶAν α μονομάχων ἡ€ μέ-7
ραις ὀλίγαις ἐποίησε, θαυμάσαντες τὸ τάχος τῆς
παρασκευῆςlal Κέλερα προσηγόρ/ ευσαν.
XI. c Ὁ δὲ\ €“ Ῥωμύ7λ ος ἐ»ν τῇA ς εμωνίᾳ, i θά/ ψας
to\v € Ῥῶ“ὦμἅμ ον ομοῦl ol καὶ \ τοὺ\ς τροφεῖς“ , ὠvκ ιζε τὴ\ν
πόλ΄ ιν, ἐ3κ Τυρρηνία/ ς μεταπεμψάμ/ε νος ἄ” νδρας
ἱεροῖς τισι θεσμοῖς καὶ γράμμασιν ὑφηγουμένους
ἕ7 καστα καὶ \ διδά/ σκοντας ὥcfσ περ ἐ3ν τελετῇ.A βόθ, -
ρος γὰρ ὠρύ7γ η περὶ τὸ νῦaν Kro pitν᾿ iov κυκλοτερής,
ἀπαρχαί τε πάντων, ὅσοις νό/ μῳ μὲν ὡς καλοῖςa
ἐχρῶAν το, φύσ» ει δ᾽>] ὡς ἀναγκαίοeιe ς, ἀπετέθησαν
ἐ9 νταῦἴθω α. καὶ Ν τέlλA ος, ἐ5)ξ ἧe ς ἀ» φῖaκ το γῆaςn ἕ“ καστος
osAa.L ynv κομί4ζ ων μοῖaρ αν, ἔΜ βαλλον εἰ>ς ταῦaτ α καὶ \
συνεμίγνυον. καλοῦσrn ι δὲ τὸ\ν βόLθe ρον τοῦlaτl ον ᾧ
Kal τὸ\ν ὄΕΣ λυμπον ὀ» νό, ματι μοῦἴνω δον. εἶ> τα ὥ“ σπερ‘
κύ4κ λxο ν κέ/ν τρῳ περιέ/ γραψαν τὴἣνν πόλaιNν . ὁi d δ᾽
οἰ2 κιστὴς\ ἐ’ μβαλὼΝν ἀb]ρ ό/τ ρῳ χαλκῆνA ὕ[2ν ιν, ὑς ποζεύ/ξ ας
δὲ βοῦfνal ἄρρενα καὶ \ θή΄λ. ειαν, αὐτὸςXx μὲν ἐπάγει
περιελαύ4ν ων αὔBAλ ακα βαθεῖAα ν τοῖCςal τέ4ρ μασι, τῶaν ὃ2
ἑ€ πομέν/ ων ἔ” ργον ἐ>σ τίν» , aἃ s ἀΨ νί/ στησι βώλA ους τὸA
ἄροτρον καταστρέφ/ ειν εἴσω, Kal μηδεμία, ν ἔξω
περιορᾶaν ἐκτρεπομένi}η ν. THfo l μὲ\ν οὖν γραμμῇ TO
τεῖr χος ἀφορίζουσι Kal καλεῖnτr αι κατὰ \ συγκοπὴν
πωμήριον, οἷον ὄ[ πισθεν τεί/ χους ἢ μετὰ\ τεῖA χος"
ὅπου δὲ πύλην ἐμβαλεῖν διανοοῦνται, τὴν ὕνιν
ἐ3 ξελό’ν τες καὶ \ TOa X ἄoAρ οτρον ὑ< περθέν7 τες διά/ λειμμα
1 «ῬῬεεμωνίᾳ Coraés and Bekker, with C: Ῥεμορίᾳ.
118
ROMULUS, x. 2-τῖι. 3
took only a few days to provide gladiatoria] contests
in his honour, and the people were so amazed at his
speed in preparing them that they gave him the
surname of Celer.
XI. Romulus buried Remus, together with his
foster-fathers, in the Remonia,! and then set himself
to building his city, after summoning from Tuscany
men who prescribed all the details in accordance
with certain sacred ordinances and writings, and
taught them to him as ina religious rite. A circular
trench was dug around what is now the Comitium,?
and in this were deposited first-fruits of all things
the use of which was sanctioned by custom as good
and by nature as necessary ; and finally, every man
brought a small portion of the soil of his native land,
and these were cast in among the first-fruits and
mingled with them. They call this trench, as they
do the heavens, by the name of “mundus.” Then,
taking this as a centre, they marked out the city in
a circle round it. And the founder, having shod a
plough with a brazen ploughshare, and having yoked
to it a bull and a cow, himself drove a deep furrow
round the boundary lines, while those who followed
after him had to turn the clods, which the plough
threw up, inwards towards the city, and suffer no
clod to lie turned outwards. With this line they
mark out the course of the wall, and it is called,
by contraction, “ pomerium,” that is “ post murum,”’
behind or neat the wall, And where they purposed to
put in a gate, there they took the share out of
the ground, lifted the plough over, and left a vacant
1 See chapter ix. 4.
2 A space adjoining the forum where the people met in
assembly. The mundus, or augural centre of the city, was
really on the Palatine.
119
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ποιοῦσιν. ὅθεν ἅπαν τὸ τεῖχος ἱερὸν πλὴν τῶν
πυλῶν νομίζουσι" τὰς δὲ πύλας ἱερὰς νομίζοντας
οὐκ ἣν ἄνευ δεισιδαιμονίας τὰ μὲν δέχεσθαι, τὰ
δ᾽ ἀποπέμπειν τῶν ἀναγκαίων καὶ μὴ καθαρῶν.
ΧΗ. Ὅτι μὲν οὖν ἡ κτίσις ἡμέρᾳ γένοιτο τῇ
πρὸ ἕνδεκα καλανδῶν Μαΐων ὁμολογεῖται" καὶ
τὴν ἡμέραν ταύτην ἑορτάζουσι Ῥωμαῖοι, γενέ-
θλιον τῆς πατρίδος ὀνομάζοντες. ἐν ἀρχῇ δ᾽, ὥς
φασιν, οὐδὲν ἔμψυχον ἔθυον, ἀλλὰ καθαρὰν καὶ
ἀναίμακτον ᾧοντο δεῖν τῇ πατρίδι τὴν ἐπώνυμον
τῆς γενέσεως ἑορτὴν φυλάττειν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ 24
καὶ πρὸ τῆς κτίσεως βοτηρική τις ἣν αὐτοῖς ἑορτὴ
κατὰ ταύτην τὴν ἡμέραν, καὶ ἸΠαρίλια προση-
γόρευον αὐτήν.
Νῦν μὲν οὖν οὐδὲν αἱ Ῥωμαϊκαὶ νουμηνίαι
πρὸς τὰς Ἑλληνικὰς ὁμολογούμενον ἔχουσιν"
ἐκείνην δὲ τὴν ἡμέραν, 4 τὴν πόλιν ὁ Ῥωμύλος
ἔκτιζεν, ἀτρεκῆ τριακάδα τυχεῖν λέγουσι; καὶ
σύνοδον ἐκλειπτικὴν ἐν αὐτῇ γενέσθαι σελήνης
πρὸς ἥλιον, ἣν εἰδέναι καὶ ᾿Αντίμαχον οἴονται,
τὸν Τήϊον ἐποποιόν, ἔτει τρίτῳ τῆς ἕκτης ὀλυμ-
πιάδος συμπεσοῦσαν. ἐν δὲ τοῖς κατὰ Βάρρωνα
τὸν φιλόσοφον χρόνοις, ἄνδρα Ῥωμαίων ἐν ἱστο-
ρίᾳ βιβλιακώτατον, ἢἣν Ταρούτιος ἑταῖρος αὐτοῦ,
φιλόσοφος “μὲν ἄλλως καὶ μαθηματικός, ἁπτό-
μενος δὲ τῆς περὶ τὸν πίνακα μεθόδου θεωρίας
ἕνεκα καὶ δοκῶν ἐν αὐτῇ περιττὸς εἶναι. τούτῳ
προὔβαλεν ὁ Βάρρων ἀναγαγεῖν τὴν Ῥωμύλου
γένεσιν εἰς ἡμέραν καὶ ὥραν, ἐκ τῶν λεγομένων
ἀποτελεσμάτων περὶ τὸν ἄνδρα ποιησάμενον τὸν
συλλογισμόν, ὥσπερ αἱ τῶν γεωμετρικῶν ὑφη-
120
ROMULUS, x1. 5--χη. 4
space. And this is the reason why they regard
all the wall as sacred except the gates; but if they
held the gates sacred, it would not be possible, with-
out religious scruples, to bring into and send out of
the city things which are necessary, and yet unclean.
XII. Now it is agreed that the city was founded
on the twenty-first of April, and this day the
Romans celebrate with a festival, calling it the
birthday of their country. And at first, as it is said,
they sacrificed no living creature at that festival,
but thought they ought to keep it pure and without
stain of blood, since it commemorated the birth of
their country. However, even before the founding
of the city, they had a pastoral festival on that day,
and called it Parilia.
At the present time, indeed, there is no agree-
ment between the Roman and Greek months, but
they say that the day on which Romulus founded
his city was precisely the thirtieth of the month,
and that on that day there was a conjunction of the
sun and moon, with an eclipse, which they think
was the one seen by Antimachus, the epic poet of
Teos, in the third year of the sixth Olympiad.!
And in the times of Varro the philosopher, a Roman
who was most deeply versed in history, there lived
Tarutius, a companion of his, who, besides being a
philosopher and a mathematician, had applied himself
to the art of casting nativities, in order to indulge a
speculative turn of mind, and was thought to excel
in it. ‘To this man Varro gave the problem of fixing
the day and hour of the birth of Romulus, making
his deductions from the conjunctions of events
reported in the man’s life, just as the solutions of
1 754 B.C.
121
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γοῦνται προβλημάτων ἀναλύσεις: τῆς γὰρ αὐτῆς
θεωρίας εἶναι χρόνον τε λαβόντας ἀνθρώπου
γενέσεως βίον προειπεῖν καὶ βίῳ δοθέντι θηρεῦ-
σαι χρόνον. ἐποίησεν οὖν τὸ “προσταχθὲν ὁ
Ταρούτιος, καὶ τά τε πάθη καὶ τὰ ἔργα τοῦ
ἀνδρὸς ἐπιδὼν καὶ χρόνον ζωῆς καὶ τρόπον
τελευτῆς καὶ πάντα τὰ τοιαῦτα συνθείς, εὖ
μάλα τεθαρρηκότως καὶ ἀνδρείως ἀπεφήνατο τὴν
μὲν ἐν τῇ μητρὶ γεγονέναι τοῦ Ῥωμύλου σύλλη-
yw ἔτει πρώτῳ τῆς δευτέρας ὀλυμπιάδος, ἐν
μηνὶ κατ᾽ Αἰγυπτίους Χοιάκ, τρίτῃ καὶ εἰκάδι,
τρίτης ὥρας, καθ᾽ ἣν ὁ ἥλι ος ἐξέλιπε παντελῶς"
τὴν δ᾽ ἐμφανῆ γένεσιν ἐν μηνὶ Θωύθ, ἡμέρᾳ
πρώτῃ μετ᾽ εἰκάδα, περὶ ἡλίου ἀνατολάς. κτι-
σθῆναι δὲ τὴν “Ῥώμην ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τῇ ἐνάτῃ Φαρ-
μουθὶ μηνὸς ἱσταμένου, μεταξὺ δευτέρας ὥρας
καὶ τρίτης" ἐπεὶ καὶ πόλεως τύχην, ὥσπερ ἀν-
θρώπου, κύριον ἔχειν οἴονται χρόνον, ἐκ τῆς
πρώτης γενέσεως πρὸς τὰς τῶν ἀστέρων ἐποχὰς
θεωρούμενον. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἴσως καὶ τὰ
τοιαῦτα τῷ ξένῳ καὶ περιττῷ προσάξεται μᾶλ-
λον ἢ διὰ τὸ μυθῶδες ἐνοχλήσει τοὺς ἐντυγχά-
νοντας αὐτοῖς.
XIII. Κτισθείσης δὲ τῆς πόλεως πρῶτον μὲν
ὅσον ἣν ἐν ἡλικίᾳ πλῆθος εἰς συντάγματα στρα-
τιωτικὰ διεῖλεν" ἕκαστον we σύνταγμα πεζῶν
τρισχιλίων ἣν καὶ τριακοσίων ἱππέων. ἐκλήθη
δὲ λεγεὼν τῷ λογάδας εἶναι τοὺς μαχίμους ἐκ
πάντων. ἔπειτα τοῖς μὲν ἄλλοις ἐχρῆτο δήμῳ
καὶ ποπούλους ὠνομάσθη τὸ πλῆθος: ἑκατὸν δὲ
τοὺς ἀρίστους ἀπέδειξε βουλευτάς, καὶ αὐτοὺς
122
ROMULUS, xn. 4-xm. 1
geometrical problems are derived; for the same
science, he said, must be capable not only of fore-
telling a man’s life when the time of his birth is
known, but also, from the given facts of his life, of
hunting out the time of his birth. This task, then,
Tarutius performed, and when he had taken a survey
of the man’s experiences and achievements, and had
brought together the time of his life, the manner of
his death, and all such details, he very courageously
and bravely declared that Romulus was conceived
in his mother’s womb in the first year of the second
Olympiad,! in the month Choeac of the Egyptian
calendar, on the twenty-third day, and in the third
hour, when the sun was totally eclipsed; and that
he was born in the month Thoth, on the twenty-
first day, at sun-rise; and that Rome was founded
by him on the ninth day of the month Phar-
muthi, between the second and third hour: for it is
thought that a city’s fortune, as well as that of a
man, has a decisive time, which may be known by
the position of the stars at its very origin. These
and similar speculations will perhaps attract readers
by their novelty and extravagance, rather than offend
them by their fabulous character.
XIII. When the city was built, in the first place,
Romulus divided all the multitude that were of age
to bear arms into military companies, each company
consisting of three thousand footmen and three hun-
dred horsemen. Such a company was called a
“legion,” because the warlike were selected out of all.
In the second place, he treated the remainder as a
people, and this multitude was called “populus” ;
a hundred of them, who were the most eminent, he
1 772 B.a
123
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μὲν πατρικίους, TO δὲ σύστημα σενᾶτον προσηγο-
2 ρευσεν. ὁ μὲν οὖν σενᾶτος ἀτρεκῶς γερουσίαν
σημαίνει" πατρικίους δὲ τοὺς βουλευτὰς κλη-
θῆναι λέγουσιν οἱ μὲν ὅτε παίδων γνησίων πα-
τέρες ἦσαν, οἱ δὲ μᾶλλον ὡς αὐτοὺς ἔχοντας
ἑαυτῶν ἀποδεῖξαι πατέρας, ὅπερ οὐ πολλοῖς
ὑπῆρξε τῶν πρώτων εἰς τὴν πόλιν συρρεόντων"
οἱ δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς πατρωνείας. οὕτω γὰρ ἐκάλουν
τὴν προστασίαν καὶ καλοῦσιν ἄχρι νῦν, οἰόμενοι
Πάτρωνά τινα τῶν σὺν ΕἙὐάνδρῳ παραγενομένων,
κηδεμονικὸν τῶν ὑποδεεστέρων ὄντα καὶ βοηθη-
τικόν, ἀφ᾽ αὑτοῦ τῷ πράγματι ταύτην τὴν προση-
γορίαν ἀπολιπεῖν. μάλιστα δ᾽ ἄν τις τυγχάνοι
τοῦ εἰκότος, εἰ νομίζοι τὸν Ῥωμύλον ἀξιοῦντα
τοὺς πρώτους καὶ δυνατωτάτους πατρικῇ κηδε-
μονίᾳ καὶ φροντίδι προσήκειν ἐπιμελεῖσθαι τῶν
ταπεινοτέρων, ἅμα δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους διδάσκοντα
μὴ δεδιέναι μηδ᾽ ἄχθεσθαι ταῖς τῶν κρειττόνων
τιμαῖς, ἀλλὰ χρῆσθαι μετ᾽ εὐνοίας καὶ νομίζοντας
“
καὶ προσαγορεύοντας “πατέρας, οὕτως ὀνομάσαι.
καὶ γὰρ ἄχρι νῦν τοὺς ἐν συγκλήτῳ τελοῦντας
οἱ μὲν ἔξωθεν ἄνδρας ἡγεμόνας καλοῦσιν, αὐτοὶ
δὲ Ῥωμαῖοι πατέρας συγγεγραμμένους, τῷ μέ- 25
γίστον μὲν ἀξίωμα καὶ τιμήν, ἥκιστα δὲ φθόνον
ἔχοντι χρώμενοι τῶν ὀνομάτων. ἐν ἀρχῇ μὲν
οὖν πατέρας αὐτοὺς μόνον, ὕστερον δὲ πλειόνων
προσαναλαμβανομένων, πατέρας συγγεγραμμέ-
νους “προσηγόρευσαν. καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἣν ὄνομα
σεμνότερον αὐτῷ τῆς πρὸς τὸ δημοτικὸν τοῦ
βουλευτικοῦ διαφορᾶς" ἑτέροις δὲ τοὺς δυνατοὺς
[24
ROMULUS, xi. 1-5
appointed to be councillors, calling the individuals
themselves “ patricians,” and their body a “ senate.”
Now the word “senate” means literally a Council of
Elders, and the councillors were called “ patricians,”
as some say, because they were fathers of lawful
children!; or rather, according to others, because
they could tell who their own fathers were, which
not many could do of those who first streamed into
the city ;a ccording to others still, from “ patronage,”
which was their word for the protection of inferiors,
and is so to this day; and they suppose that a
certain Patron, one of those who came to Italy with
Evander, was a protector and defender of the poor
and needy, and left his own name in the word which
designates such activity. But the most reasonable
opinion for any one to hold is that Romulus thought
it the duty of the foremost and most influential
citizens to watch over the more lowly with fatherly
care and concern, while he taught the multitude not
to fear their superiors nor be vexed at their honours,
but to exercise goodwill towards them, considering
them and addressing them as _f athers, whence their
name of Patricii. For down to the present time
foreign peoples call the members of their senate
“chief men,’ but the Romans themselves call them
“conscript fathers,” using that name which has the
greatest dignity and honour, and awakens the least
envy. At first, then, they called them simply
“ fathers,’ but later, when more had been added to
their number, they addressed them as “conscript
fathers.” By this more imposing title Romulus
distinguished the senate from the commonalty, and
in other ways, too, he separated the nobles from the
LiChe Livy, 1185.
125
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀ> πὸ \ τῶ~ν πολλῶνaA διή/ρ ει, πά4τ ρωνας ὀ3 νομάζ7 ων,
ὅπερ ἐστὶ προστάτας, ἐκείνους δὲ κλίεντας, ὅπερ
ἐ> στὶ \ πελάτi2α ς: ἅee μα δὲ\ πρὸἊςν ἀ» λλήλ΄ ους θαυμαστὴν\
εὔνοιαν αὐτοῖς καὶ μεγάλων δικαίων ὑπάρξουσαν
ἐνεποίiηa σεν. οὗ&τ οι μὲν yap ἐξηγητάς τε τῶaν νομί-
μων καὶ προστάτας δικαζομένοις συμβούλους τε
πάντων καὶ κηδεμόνας ἑαυτοὺς παρεῖχον, ἐκεῖνοι
δὲ τούτους ἐθεράπευον οὐ μόνον τιμῶντες, ἀλλὰ
καὶ πενομένοις θυγατέρ" ας συνεκδιδόντες καὶ χρέα7
συνεκτίνοντες. καταμαρτυρεῖν τε πελάτου προσ-
τάτην, ἢ προστάτου TEAATHV, οὔτε νόifμ ος οὐδεὶς
οὔ»τ ε ἄΜ ρχων ἠ5»ν ά»γ καζεν. ὕὉ στερον δέ/, τῶaν ἄYA λλων
δικαί,ω ν μενό,ν των, TOΝ λαμβάνειν χρή/μ ατα τοὺς
δυνατοὺς παρὰ Ν τῶaνn ταπεινοτέ4ρ ων αἰσχρὸἊνν ἐνο-
μίσθη καὶ ἀγεννές. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν περὶ τούτων.
XIV. Τετάρτῳ δὲ\ μηνὶ μετὰ\ τὴἉν κτίσ’ ιν, ὡς
Φάβιος ἱστορεῖ,a τὸ\ περὶ τὴν ἁρπαγὴνἣν ἐτολμήθη
τῶAν γυναικῶν“ . καὶ λέγουσι μὲν ἔνιοι τὸν ς “Po-
μύ΄λ ον αὐaτ ὸaνeX τῇA φύ,σ ει φιλοποό,λ εμον ὄv ντα, καὶ \
πεπεισμένον ἔκ τινων ἄρα λογίjωg ν ὅ¢ τι τὴ\ν «ς Ρώμην
πέπρωται πολέμ[4ο ις τρεφομέν/ ην καὶ \ αὐξομέν/ ην
γενέσθαι μεγί,σ την, Bi4a s ὑe πάρ, ξαι πρὸἊςν τοὺς\
Σαβίνους: οὐδὲ yap πολλάς, ἀλλὰ\ τριάκοντα
μό΄ν ας παρθέν᾽ὔο υς λαβεῖνὉ αὐ>τ όν/ , ἅ«“τ ε δὴ\ πολέμ/ ου
μᾶa λλον ἢa γά’μὔ ων δεόμενον. τοῦaτA ο δὲ\ οὐ>κ εἰb]κ ός, "
ἀ>?λ λὰ \ TH\Y μὲ\ν πό/λ ιν ὁ« ρῶ“ ν ἐ> ποί»κ ων εὐ᾽ θὺ\ς ἐ> μπυιπλα-
μένην, ὧν ὀλίγοι γυναῖaκ ας εἶ= χον, οἱ δ δὲ\ πολλοὶ
126
ROMULUS, xu. 5—x1v. 2
multitude, calling the one “ patrons,” that is to say,
protectors, and the other “clients,” that is to say,
dependants. At the same time he inspired both
classes with an astonishing goodwill towards each
other, and one which became the basis of important
rights and privileges. For the patrons advised their
clients in matters of custom, and represented them
in courts of justice, in short, were their counsellors
and friends in all things; while the clients were
devoted to their patrons, not only holding them in
honour, but actually, in cases of poverty, helping
them to dower their daughters and pay their debts.
And there was neither any law nor any magistrate
that could compel a patron to bear witness against
a client, or a client againt a patron. But in later
times, while all other rights and privileges remained
in force, the taking of money by those of high degree
from the more lowly was held to be disgraceful and
ungenerous. So much, then, on these topics.
XIV. It was in the fourth month after the
founding of the city, as Fabius writes, that the rape
of the Sabine women was perpetrated.!_ And some
say that Romulus himself, being naturally fond of
war, and being persuaded by sundry oracles, too,
that it was the destiny of Rome to be nourished and
increased by wars till she became the greatest of
cities, thereby merely began unprovoked hostilities
against the Sabines; for he did not take many
maidens, but thirty only, since what he wanted was
war rather than marriages. But this is not likely.
On the contrary, seeing his city filling up at once
with aliens, few of whom had wives, while the
greater part of them, being a mixed rabble of needy
Cf. Livy, :i.. 9:
127
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μιγάδ, ες ἐ5)ξ ἀ3 πό,ρ ων καὶ \ ἀ> φανῶAν ὄ” ντες ὑς περεω: -
ῥῶrnν το καὶ προσεδοκῶrνn το μὴ συμμενεῖνa βεβαίω7 ς,
ἐ> λπί/ζ ων δὲ\ πρὸς\ τοὺ\ς Σαβίν, ους τρό,π ον τινὰ\
συγκράσεως Kal κοινωνία, ς ἀρχὴν αὐτοῖςa TO\ ἀδί-
κημα ποιήσειν ἡμερωσαμένοις τὰς γυναῖκας, ἐπε-
χείρησε τῷ ἔργῳ τόνδε τὸν τρόπον.
Διεδόθη λόγος ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ πρῶτον ὡς θεοῦ
τινος ἀνευρήκοι βωμὸν ὑπὸ γῆ“ς κεκρυμμέν΄ο ν.
ὠνόμαζον δὲ τὸν θεὸν Κῶνσον, εἴτε βουλαῖον
ὄ” ντα (κωνσίλ, ιον γὰ\ρ ἔ” τι νῦa ν τὸ\ συμβούλ7 ιον
καλοῦσ“ ι, Kal TOUS ὑπάτους κωνσούλας, οἷeο ν προ-
βούλ, ους), εἴ» τε “ἵ ππιον Ἰ]οσειδῶ.a καὶ \ ya\p ὁ¢ € βωμὸς\
ἐ>ν τῷa μεί’ζ ονι τῶ»-ν“ ἱ€ πποδρό,μ ων ἔ” στιν, ἀ> φανὴς\
τὸΝν ἄ» λλον χρόν, ον, ἐν δὲ\ τοῖaς ἱ¢€π πικοῖςan ἀ5]γ ῶaσ ιν
ἀ’ νακαλυπτόμε, νος. οἱε δὲ\ Kal A ὅen λως φασὶ\ τοῦ8
βουλεύματος ἀπορρήτου καὶ ἀφανοῦς ὄντος ὑπό-
γείον οὐκ ἀλόγως τῷ θεῷ βωμὸν γενέσθαι κε-
Kpuppévov. ὡς δ᾽>] ἀνεφάνη, θυσίαν τε λαμπρὰν
ἐπ᾿ ? αὐτῷ καὶ ἀγῶAν α καὶ θέαν ἐκ καταγγελίας
ἐ5 πετέλ, ει πανηγυρικῆνl.a Kal N πολλοὶ \ μὲ\ν ἄ” νθρωποι
συνῆλθον, αὐτὸς δὲ προὐκάθητο μετὰ τῶν ἀρί
στων ἁe λουργίδ/ ι κεκοσμημένος. ἣν δὲ τοῦa καιροῦ “
τῆaς ἐπιχειρή/σ εως σύμβολον ἐξαναστάντα τὴν
ἁς λουργίδ/ α πτύξἋ αι καὶ περιβαλέσθαι πάλιν.
ἔ» χοντες οὖ5ν ξι, φη πολλοὶ \ προσεῖaχ ον αὐ3τ ῷ,fal Kal \
TOUn r σημείο, υ γενομένου σπασάμενοι τὰ ξίφη Kai
μετὰ\ βοῆaς ὁe ρμήσ/ αντες ἥρπαξον tas θυγατέρας
τῶ“ν Σαβίν’ ων, αὐτοὺς\ δὲ φεύ/γ οντας εἴων καὶ
128
ROMULUS, xiv. 2-5
and. obscure persons, were looked down upon and
expected to have no strong cohesion; and hoping
to make the outrage an occasion for some sort of
blending and fellowship with the Sabines after their
women had been kindly entreated, he set his hand
to the task, and in the following manner.
First a report was spread abroad by him that he
had discovered an altar of a certain god hidden
underground. They called this god Consus, and
he was either a god of counsel (for “consilium”’ is
still their word for counsel, and they call their chief
magistrates “consuls,” that is to say, counsellors), or
an equestrian Neptune. For the altar is in the.
Circus Maximus, and is invisible at all other times,
but at the chariot-races it is uncovered. Some,
however, simply say that since counsel is secret and
unseen, it is not unreasonable that an altar to the
god of counsel should be hidden. underground.!
Now when this altar was discovered, Romulus
appointed by proclamation a splendid sacrifice upon
it, with games, and a spectacle open to all people.
And many were the people who came together,
while he himself sat in front, among his chief men,
clad in purple. The signal that the time had come
for the onslaught was to be his rising and folding
his cloak and then throwing it round him again.
Armed with swords, then, many of his followers
kept their eyes intently upon him, and when the
signal was given, drew their swords, rushed in with
shouts, and ravished away the daughters of the
Sabines, but permitted and encouraged the men
1 The altar was kept buried in the earth to signify the
secret processes of nature in the production of crops and
vegetation. For Cousus was an ancient Italian god of
agriculture.
129
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
παρίεσαν. ἁρπασθῆναι δέ φασιν οἱ μὲν τριά-
6
κοντα μόνας, ἀφ᾽ ὧν καὶ τὰς φρατρίας ὀνομα-
σθῆναι, Οὐαλλέριος δὲ ᾿Αντίας ἑπτὰ καὶ εἴκοσι
καὶ πεντακοσίας, loBas δὲ τρεῖς καὶ ὀγδοήκοντα
καὶ ἑξακοσίας παρθένους: ὃ μέγιστον ἣν ἀπο-
λόγημα τῷ Ῥωμύλῳ: γυναῖκα γὰρ οὐ λαβεῖν
ἀλλ᾽ ἢ μίαν, “Ἑρσιλίαν, διαλαθοῦσαν αὐτούς, ἅτε
57 μὴ μεθ᾽ ὕβρεως μηδ᾽ ἀδικίας ἐλθόντας ἐπὶ τὴν 26
ἁρπαγήν, ἀλλὰ συμμῖξαι καὶ συναγαγεῖν εἰς
ταὐτὸ τὰ γένη ταῖς μεγίσταις ἀνάγκαις διανοη-
θέντας. τὴν δ᾽ “Ερσιλίαν οἱ μὲν Οστίλιον γῆμαι
λέγουσιν, ἄνδρα Ῥωμαίων ἐπιφανέστατον, οἱ δὲ
αὐτὸν Ῥωμύλον, καὶ γενέσθαι καὶ παῖδας αὐτῷ,
μίαν μὲν θυγατέρα ἸΙρίμαν, τῇ τάξει τῆς γενέ-
σεως οὕτω προσαγορευθεῖσαν, ἕνα δ᾽ υἱὸν μόνον,
ὃν ᾿Αόλλιον μὲν ἐνεῖνος ἀπὸ τῆς γενομένης ἀθροί-
σεως ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τῶν πολιτῶν ὠνόμασεν, οἱ δ᾽
ὕστερον ᾿Αβίλλιον. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἱστορῶν
Ζηνόδοτος ὁ Τροιζήνιος πολλοὺς ἔχει τοὺς
ἀντιλέγοντας.
XV. Ἐν δὲ; τοῖς ἁρπάξουσι τὰς παρθένους
τότε τυχεῖν λέγουσι τῶν οὐκ ἐπιφανῶν τινας
ἄγοντας κόρην τῷ τε κάλλει πολὺ καὶ τῷ μεγέθει
διαφέρουσαν. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ἀπαντῶντες ἔνιοι τῶν
κρειττόνων ἐπεχείρουν ἀφαιρεῖσθαι, βοᾶν τοὺς
ἄγοντας ὡς Ταλασίῳ κομίζοιεν αὐτήν, ἀνδρὶ νέῳ
μέν, εὐδοκίμῳ δὲ καὶ χρηστῷ" τοῦτ᾽ οὖν ἀκού-
to
σαντας εὐφημεῖν καὶ κροτεῖν ἐπαινοῦντας, ἐνίους
δὲ καὶ παρακολουθεῖν ἀναστρέψαντας εὐνοίᾳ καὶ
130
ROMULUS, xiv. 6—xv. 2
themselves to escape. Some say that only thirty
maidens were seized, and that from these the
Curiae} were named; but Valerius Antias puts the
number at five hundred and twenty-seven, and Juba
at six hundred and eighty-three, all maidens. And
this was the strongest defence which Romulus
could make, namely, that they took only one married
woman, Hersilia, and her by mistake, since they did
not commit the rape out of wantonness, nor even
with a desire to do mischief, but with the fixed pur-
pose of uniting and blending the two peoples in the
strongest bonds. As for this Hersilia, some say
that she was married to Hostilius, a most eminent
Roman, and others, to Romulus himself, and that
she also bore him children: one daughter, Prima,
so called from the order of birth, and one son only,
whom Romulus named Aollius, from the great
concourse? of citizens under him, but later ages
Avillius. However, Zenodotus of Troezen, who gives
us this account, is contradicted by many.
XV. Among those who ravished away the maidens
at that time, it chanced, they say, that certain men
of meaner sort were dragging along a damsel who far
surpassed the rest in beauty and stature ;a nd when
some men of superior rank met them and tried to
rob them of their prize, they cried out that they
were conducting the girl to Talasius, a young man,
but one of excellent repute. The other party, then,
on hearing this, shouted and clapped their hands in
approval, and some of them actuaily turned back
1 The thirty divisions into which the three ancient Roman
tribes were divided for political and ceremonial purposes.
Cf. Livy, i. 13, 6 f.
3 A Greek etymology, connecting the name with ἀολλής,
in throngs.
131
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
χάριτι τοῦa n Ταλασίο/υ , μετὰ\ βοῆiςa} τοὔ,ν ομα φθεγ-
γομέν͵ ους. ἀ»φ ᾽ 1} ov- δὴ\ τὸ\ν Ταλάσ/ ιον ἄ” χρι νῦaν , wes
“Ἕλληνες τὸν Ὑμέναιον, ἐπάδουσι «ς Ῥωμαῖοa ι τοῖaςl
γάμοις: Kal yap εὐτυχί/ᾳ φασὶ χρήσασθαι περὶ
τὴν γυναῖκα τὸν Ταλάσιον.
“Σέξτιος δὲ Σύλλας ὁ« ς Καρχηδόν/ι ος, οὔτε μου-
σῶν οὔτε χαρίτων ἐπιδεὴς ἀνήρ, ἔλεγεν ἡμῖν ὅτι
τῆς ἁρπαγῆς σύνθημα τὴν φωνὴν ἔδωκε ταύτην ὁ
3 Ῥωμύλος. ἅπαντες οὖν τὸν Ταλάσιον ἐβόων οἱ
τὰς παρθένους κομίζοντες: καὶ διὰ τοῦτο τοῖς γά-
μοις παραμένει τὸ ἔθος. οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι νομίζου-
σιν, ὧτν καὶ Sly ᾿Ιcaόl βας ἐb)σ τί,/ παράκ/ λησιν εἶ3 ναι καὶ \
παρακέλi ευσιν εἰ2ς φιλεργία, ν καὶ \ ταλασία,ν , οὔ” πω
to,t e τοῖaς € ἰἴὡλληνικοῖtςal ὀ3 νό/ μασι τῶaν 3 ᾿Ιταλικῶanν
ἐπικεχυμένων. εἰ δὲ τοῦaτ ο μὴ\ λέ/γ εται κακῶςan ,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐχρῶντο Ῥωμαῖοι τότε τῷ ὀνόματι τῆς
ταλασία/ς , καθάπερ ἡμεῖςa , ἑτέ, ραν ἄYν τις αἰτί,α ν
4 εἰκάσειε πιθανωτέραν. ἐπεὶ γὰρ οἱ Σαβῖνοι πρὸς
τοὺς\ ¢ Ῥωμαίο/ υς πολεμήσ/ αντες διηλλάγ, ησαν, ἐ5.γ έ-A,
vovto συνθῆκαι περὶ τῶν γυναικῶν, ὅπως μηδὲν
ἄBA λλο ἔ” ργον τοῖ-ς ἀ’ νδράσ/ ιν ἢἋ τὰμ ὴ περὶ \ τὴ\ν ταλασία΄ ν
ὑπουργῶσι. παρέμεινεν οὗν καὶ τοῖς αὖθις ya-
μοῦQσn ι τοὺς\ διδόντας ἢ3 παραπέμποντας ἢ ὅ¢ λως
παρόντας, ἀναφωνεῖνlal τὸΝν Ταλάσιον μετὰ παιδιᾶςa ,
μαρτυρομένους ὡς ἐπ᾽ οὐδὲν ἄλλο ὑπούργημα τῆς
5 γυναικὸς ἢ ταλασίαν εἰσαγομένης. διαμένει δὲ
μέχρι νῦaν τὸ\ τὴν νύμφην αὐτὴν ad ’ αὑτῆaς μὴ
ὑς περβαίνiεd ιν τὸ\ν οὐ᾽ δὸΝν εἰ᾽ς τὸ\ δωμάτ/ι ον, ἀ>]λ λ ᾽
αἰρομέν΄ ην εἰσφέ/ρ εσθαι, διὰ TO\ καὶ \ τό,τ ε κομισθῆ-fol
132
ROMULUS, xv. 2-5
and accompanied them, out of good will and favour
to Talasius, shouting his name as they went along.
Hence, indeed, down to the present time, Talasius
is the nuptial cry of the Romans, as Hymenaeus is
of the Greeks; for they say that ‘Talasius was
fortunate in his wife.
But Sextius Sulla, the Carthaginian, a man who
lacks neither learning nor charm, told me_ that
Talasius was the word which Romulus gave as a
watchword for the rape. All those, therefore, who
took the maidens away, shouted “Talasius!’’ and
on this account the custom now prevails at mar-
riages. But most writers are of the opinion—and
Juba is one of them—that the cry is an exhor-
tation and incitement to industry and “ talasia,” as
the Greeks call spinning, Italian words having not
yet at that time entirely submerged the Greek.
Now if this is right, and the Romans did at that
time use the word “talasia’’ for spinning, as we do,
then a more credible reason for the custom might be
conjectured as follows. When the Sabines, after
their war against the Romans, were reconciled with
them, it was agreed that their women should
perform no other tasks for their husbands than those
which were connected with spinning. It was
customary, therefore, at subsequent marriages, for
those who gave the bride away, or escorted her to
her new home, or simply looked on, to cry
“ Talasius!” merrily, in testimony that the woman
was led home for no other task than that of spinning.
And it continues to be a custom down to the present
time that the bride shall not of herself cross the
threshold into her new home, but be lifted up and
carried in, because the Sabine women were carried in
133
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
vat βιασθείσας, μὴ εἰσελθεῖν. ἔνιοι δὲ λέγουσι
καὶ τὸ τὴν κόμην τῆς γαμουμένης αἰχμῇ δια-
κρίνεσθαι δορατίου σύμβολον εἶναι τοῦ μετὰ μάχης
καὶ πολεμικῶς τὸν πρῶτον γάμον γενέσθαι: περὶ
ὧν ἐπιπλέον ἐν τοῖς Αἰτίοις εἰρήκαμεν.
᾿Ετολμήθη μὲν οὖν ἡ ἁρπαγὴ περὶ τὴν ὀκτω-
καιδεκάτην ἡμέραν τοῦ τότε μὲν Σεξτιλίου μηνός,
Αὐγούστου δὲ νῦν, ἐν ὗ τὴν τῶν Κωνσαλίων
ἑορτὴν ἄγουσιν.
XVI. Οἱ δὲ Σαβῖνοι πολλοὶ μὲν ἦσαν καὶ
πολεμικοί, κώμας δὲ WKOVY ἀτειχίστους, ὡς προσ-
ἢκον αὐτοῖς μέγα φρονεῖν καὶ μὴ φοβεῖσθαι
Λακεδαιμονίων ἀποίκοις οὖσιν. οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾽
ὁρῶντες αὑτοὺς ἐνδεδεμένους μεγάλοις ὁμηρεύμασε,
καὶ δεδιότες περὶ τῶν θυγατέρων, πρέσβεις ἀπέ-
στείλαν ἐπιεικῆ καὶ μέτρια προκαλούμενοι, τὸν
ἹῬωμύλον. ἀποδόντα τὰς κόρας αὐτοῖς καὶ λύσαν-
τα τὸ τῆς Bias ἔργον, εἶτα πειθοῖ καὶ νόμῳ
πράττειν τοῖς γένεσι φιλίαν καὶ οἰκειότητα. τοῦ
δὲ Ῥωμύλου τὰς μὲν κόρας μὴ προιεμένου,
παρακαλοῦντος δὲ τὴν κοινωνίαν δέχεσθαι τοὺς
Σαβίνους, οἱ μὲν ἄλλοι βουλευόμενοι καὶ παρα-
σκευαζόμενονι διέτριβον, “Axpwv δὲ βασιλεὺς
Κενινητῶν, ἀνὴρ θυμοειδὴς καὶ δεινὸς ἐν τοῖς
πολεμικοῖς, τά τε πρῶτα τολμήματα τοῦ Ῥωμύ-
λου δι’ ὑποψίας εἶχε, καὶ τῷ πραχθέντι περὶ τὰς 27
γυναῖκας ἤδη φοβερὸν ἡγούμενος πᾶσιν εἶναι καὶ
οὐκ ἀνεκτόν, εἰ μὴ κολασθείη, προεξανέστη τῷ
πολέμῳ καὶ μετὰ πολλῆς ἐχώρει δυνάμεως ἐπ᾽
1 μὴ εἰσελθεῖν bracketed by Bekker.
134
ROMULUS, xv. 5—xv1. 3
by force, and did not go in of their own accord.
And some say also that the custom of parting the
bride’s hair with the head of a spear is a reminder
that the first marriage was attended with war and
fighting ;o n which topic I have spoken more fully in
my “ Roman Questions.” 4
Leaving such matters aside, the rape was com-
mitted on the eighteenth day of the month once
called Sextilis, but now, August, on which day the
festival of the Consualia ? is celebrated.
XVI. Now the Sabines were a numerous and war-
like people, and dwelt in unwalled villages, thinking
that it behoved them, since they were Lacedae-
monian colonists, to be bold and fearless. Neverthe-
less, seeing themselves bound by precious hostages,
and fearing for their daughters, they sent ambassa-
dors with reasonable and moderate demands, namely,
that Romulus should give back to them their maidens,
disavow his deed of violence, and then, by persua-
sion and legal enactment, establish a friendly re-
lationship between the two peoples. But Romulus
would not surrender the maidens, and demanded
that the Sabines should allow community of mar-
riage with the Romans, whereupon they all held
long deliberations and made extensive preparations
for war. But there was one exception. Acron, king
of the Caeninenses, a man of courageous spirit and
skilled in war, had been suspicious of the daring
deeds of Romulus from the beginning, and now that
this violence had been done the women, thinking
him a menace to all peoples, and intolerable unless
chastised, at once rose up in arms, and with a great
1 Morals, p. 285 c (Question 87).
2 A harvest festival, named from Consus. See chapter
xiv. ὃ.
135
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 αὐΕτῚ όν,: καὶ Δ ὁ€ Je Ῥωμύλ/ ος ἐ9π ᾽ ϑ,. ἐ3 κεῖlaνl ον. γενό,μ ενοι ὃ ’
ἐν ὄψει καὶ κατιδόντες ἀλλήλους προὐκαλοῦντο
μάχεσθαι, τῶν στρατευμάτων ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις
ἀ> τρεμούνidτ ων. εὐ> ξάfμf ενος οὖ9ν ὁ« ς ἰςῬ ωμύλ/ο ς, εἰ»
κρατήσειε καὶ καταβάλοι, τῷ Διὶ φέρων ἀναθή-
σειν αὐτὸς TA ὅπλα TODa ἀνδρός, αὐτόν/ TE KaTA-
βάλλει κρατήσας καὶ τρέπεται τὸ στράτευμα
μάχης γενομένης, αἱςρ εῖa δὲ Kal τὴ\ ν πόλ’ ιν: οὐ μὴν
ἠδίκησε τοὺς ἐγκαταληφθέντας, ἀλλ᾽ ἢ τὰς οἰκίας
ἐκέλευσε καθελόντας ἀκολουθεῖν εἰς Ῥώμην, ὡς
πολίτας ἐπὶ τοῖς ἴσοις ἐσομένους.
δ Τούτου μὲν οὗν οὐκ ἔljσ τιν ὅty TL μᾶ“ λλον ηὔξησε
τὴν «ςῬ ώμην, ἀεὶ προσποιοῦaσ αν ἑαυτῇA καὶ συν-
νέ/ μουσαν ὧKaν Kpatnc/ eev? ὁ« ς δὲN e Ῥωμύλ4ο ς, ὡiςd ἂnNν
μάλιστα τὴ\ν εὐχὴν τῷa τε AitA . κεχαρισμένην καὶ
τοῖaς πολίτ, αις ἰδεῖaν ἐπιτερπῆa παράσχοι σκεψά-
μενος, ἐπὶ στρατοπέδ, ου δρῦa ν ἔτεμεν ὑπερμεγέθη,
καὶ διεμό[4 ρφωσεν ὥσπερ τρόfπ αιον, καὶ TOaY ὅiy πλων
τοῦ "Ακρωνος ἕκαστον ἐν τάξει περιήρμοσε καὶ
κατήρτησεν: αὐτὸς\ δὲ τὴ\ν μὲν ἐσθῆa τα περι-
εζώσατο, δάφνῃ δὲΝ ἐστέ/ ψατο τὴ\ν κεφαλὴν κομῶ-a
6 σαν. ὑς πολαβὼν\ δὲ\ τῷla l δεξιῷa TO\ τρό/π αιον ὦ” μῳ
προσερειδόμ, ενον ὀ’ ρθόν4 , ἐ>’β άδ/ ιζεν ἐ> ξάtgρ χων ἐ>π ι-c
νικίου παιᾶνος ἐν ὅπλοις ἑπομένῃ τῇ στρατιᾷ,
δεχομένων TOaV πολιτῶaνl μετὰ\ χαρᾶςa καὶ θαύμα-
τος. ἡ¢€ μὲ\ν οὖ5νS πομπὴ \ τῶaν αὖςθ ις θριά᾿ς μβων
ἀρχὴν καὶ “ζwnῆ λον παρέσt χε: τὸ\ δὲ\ τρό΄π αιον ἀνά-
136
ROMULUS, xvi. 3-6
force advanced against him.!_ Romulus also marched
out to meet him. But when they were face to
face and had surveyed each other, they challenged
mutually to single combat before battle, while their
armies remained quiet under arms. Romulus,
then, after making a vow that if he should conquer
and overthrow his adversary, he would carry home
the man’s armour and dedicate it in person to
Jupiter, not only conquered and overthrew him, but
also routed his army in the battle which followed,
and took his city as well. To the captured citizens,
however, he did no harm beyond ordering them to
tear down their dwellings and accompany him to
Rome, where, he promised them, they should be
citizens on equal terms with the rest.
Now this, more than anything else, was what gave
increase to Rome: she always united and incor-
porated with herself those whom she conquered.
But Romulus, after considering how he might
perform his vow in a manner most acceptable to
Jupiter and accompany the performance with a
spectacle most pleasing to the citizens, cut down a
monstrous oak that grew in the camp, hewed it
into the shape of a trophy, and fitted and fastened
to it the armour of Acron, each piece in its due
order. Then he himself, girding his raiment about
him and wreathing his flowing locks with laurel, set
the trophy on his right shoulder, where it was held
erect, and began a triumphal march, leading off in a
paean of victory which his army sang as it followed
under arms, and being received by the citizens with
joyful amazement. This procession was the origin
and model of all subsequent triumphs, and the
1 Cf. Livy, i. 10.
137
PLUTARCRH’S LIVES
θημα Φερετρίο/ υ Aro\s ἐb)π ωνομάσ/ θη. τὸ\ ya\p πλῆ-fo
Eau φερῖρε Ρωμαῖοι καλοῦσιν: εὔξατο δὲ πλῆξαι
τὸ\ν ἄ” νδρα Kal \ καταβαλεῖνa: ὀ3 πί/μ ια δὲ\ τὰ\ σκῦlλa) α,
φησὶ Βάρρων, καθότι καὶ τὴν περιουσίαν ὄπεμ
λέγουσι. πιθανώτερον δ᾽ ἄν τις εἴποι διὰ τὴν
πρᾶnξa ιν: ὄπους yap ὀνομάζεται τὸ\ ἔργον. av-
τουργῷ δὲ ἀριστείας στρατηγῷ στρατηγὸν ἀνε-
λόντι δέδοται καθιέρωσις ὀπιμίων.
Kal τρισὶ μόνidο ις τούτου τυχεῖaν ὑπῆaρ ξε Ῥω-
μαίοις ἡγεμόσι, πρώτῳ Ῥωμύλῳ, κτείναντι τὸν
Κενινήτ/ ην yw "ἼΑκρωνα, δευτέ/ρ ῳ ΚορνηλίῳY Κόσ/ σῳ,
Τυρρηνὸν ἀνελόντι Τολούμνιον, ἐπὶ πᾶσι δὲ
Κλαυδίῳ Μαρκέλ/ λῳ, Βριτομάρτου κρατήσαντι
Γαλατῶνa βασιλέως. Κeόs σσος μὲν οὖν καὶ Map-
κελλος ἤδη τεθρίπποις εἰσήλαυνον αὐτοὶ τὰ
τρόπαια φέροντε: Ῥωμύλον δ᾽ οὐκ ὀρθῶς φησιν
ἅρματι χρήσασθαι Διονύσιος. Ταρκύνιον yap
ἱστοροῦσι τὸν Δημαράτου τῶν βασιλέων πρῶτον
εἰς τοῦτο τὸ σχῆμα καὶ τὸν ὄγκον ἐξᾶραι τοὺς
θριάμf βους": ἕΨ τεροι δὲ\ πρῶaτ ον ἐ5φ ᾽ 6D ἅje ρματος θριαμ-
βεῦσαι Ποπλικόλαν. τοῦ δὲ Ῥωμύλου τὰς εἰκό-
vas ὁρᾶanν ἔστιν ἐν € Ρώμῃ τὰς τροπαιοφόρους πεζὰς
ἁπάσας.
XVII. Μετὰ δὲ τὴν Κενινητῶν ἅλωσιν ἔτι τῶν
ἄ” λλων Σαβίν, ων ἐ2ν παρασκευαῖςa ὄv ντων, συνέfσ τη-
σαν οἱ Φιδήνην καὶ ἹΚρουστουμέριον καὶ ᾿Αντέ-
μναν οἰκοῦ“ν τες ἐπὶ τοὺς ς Ρωμαίους" καὶ μάχης
138
ROMULUS, xvi. 6—xvit. 1
trophy was styled a dedication to Jupiter Feretrius,
so named from the Roman word “ferire,”’ to smite ;
for Romulus vowed to smite his foe and overthrow
him. And such spoils were called “ opima,’” because
as Varro says, “ opes”’ is the Roman word for richness ;
but it would be more plausible to say that they were
so called from the deed of valour involved, since
“opus” is the Roman word for deed or exploit. And
only to a general who with his own hand has per-
formed the exploit of slaying an opposing general,
has the privilege of dedicating the “ spolia opima ”’
been granted.
Furthermore, only three Roman leaders have at-
tained this honour: Romulus first, for slaying Acron
the Caeninensian ; next, Cornelius Cossus, for killing
Tolumnius the Tuscan; ! and lastly, Claudius Mar-
cellus, for overpowering Britomartus, king of the
Gauls.” Cossus indeed, and Marcellus, already used
a four-horse chariot for their entrance into the city,
carrying the trophies themselves, but Dionysius is
incorrect in saying that Romulus useda chariot. For
it is matter of history that ‘Tarquin, the son of
Demaratus, was first of the kings to lift triumphs
up to such pomp and ceremony, although others say
that Publicola was first to celebrate a triumph riding
on ἃ chariot.4 And the statues of Romulus bearing
the trophies are, as may be seen in Rome, all on foot.
XVII. After the capture of the Caeninensians,
while the rest of the Sabines were still busy with
their preparations, the people of Fidenae, Crustu-
merium, and Antemnae banded together against the
1 In 436 B.c., according to Livy, iv. 19, 1-5.
2 1ῃ 222 8.c. See Plutarch’s Marcellus, vii.
3 Antig. Rom. ii. 34. 4 Cf. Publicola, ix. 5.
139
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γενομέν,ὔ ης ἡe ττηθένY3 τες ὁ4 μοίω7 ς, τάς2 τε πόλ, εις « Ρω-
μύλῳ παρῆκαν ἑλεῖν καὶ τὴν χώραν δάσασθαι
καὶ μετοικίσαι σφᾶς αὐτοὺς εἰς Ῥώμην. ὁ δὲ
ς Ῥωμύλ΄.ο ς τὴ\ν μὲ\ν ἄΕΣλ λην κατένia ειμε χώlρs αν τοῖlςal
πολίταις, ὅσην δ᾽> εἶχον of τῶrnν ἡρπασμένων
παρθένων πατέρες, αὐτοὺς ἔχειν ἐκείνους εἴασεν.
᾿Επὶ τούτοις βαρέως φέροντες οἱ λοιποὶ Σα-
βῖrνn οι Τάτιον ἀποδείξ/ αντες στρατηγὸν ἐπὶ τὴν
Ῥ ὦ,μ ην ἐb]σ τράτ, ευσαν: ἣ5Sν δὲ\ ὃ δυσπρό/σ οδος ἡς πόλ, ις,
ἔ» χουσα πρόβλημα τὸ\ νῦlaνl Καπιτώλ/ι ον, ἐb]ν @5
φρουρὰ\ καθειστήκει καὶ Ταρπήϊο- ς ἡγεμὼν αὐτῆςan ,
οὐ᾽χ ὶ Ν Taprniaed παρθέν͵ο ς, wes ἔ” νιοι λέfγi ουσιν, εὐSK ήchθ η
τὸΝν « Ῥωμύλ΄ ον ἀ> ποδεικνύο,ν τες: ἀ> λλὰ \ θυγάτ΄ ηρ ἡΕ
Ταρπηΐα τοῦ ἄρχοντος οὖσα προὔδωκε τοῖς Σα-
βίνοις, ἐπιθυμήσασα τῶν χρυσῶν βραχιονιστήρων
οὺς εἶδε περικειμένους, καὶ ἤτησε μισθὸν τῆς προ-
δοσί’αὔ ς ἃἃ φοροῖaε ν ἐν ταῖrςn ἀριστεραῖςAn χερσί. συνθε-
μί΄ν ου δὲ τοῦn r Τατίο/ υ, νύκτωρ ἀνοίξασα πύλην μίαν
ἐLAδNέA ξατο τοὺς\ Σαβίν[4ο υς. οὐΡ ] μόνος οὗ[ν , ὡδς ἔΜ οικεν,
᾽ Avtiy7 ovos ἔφη προδιδόντας μὲν φιλεῖνlal , προδεδω-
κότας δὲ μισεῖν, οὐδὲ Καῖσαρ, εἰπὼν ἐπὶ τοῦ
Θρᾳκὸ\ ς «ς Ροιμητάλ7 κου, φιλεῖa ν μὲἣνν προδοσία, ν, προ-
δότην δὲ μισεῖνlal: ἀλλὰ κοινόν τι τοῦLaτl ο πάθος ἐ» στὶ
πρὸς τοὺς\ πονηροὺς τοῖaςn δεομένοις αὐτῶνan , ὥσπερ
ἰοῦrn Kal χολῆnςan ἐνί/ ων θηρίων δέονται: τὴν yap
χρείαν ὅτε λαμβάνουσιν ἀγαπῶντες, ἐχθαίρουσι
τὴν κακίαν ὅταν τύχωσι. τοῦτο καὶ πρὸς τὴν
Ταρπηΐαok ν to/t e παθὼν ὁid Τάτιος ἐκέλευσε μεμνη-
140
ROMULUS, xvi. 1~4
Romans,! and in a battle which ensued, they were
likewise defeated, and surrendered to Romulus their
cities to be seized, their territory to be divided, and
themselves to be transported to Rome. Romulus
distributed among the citizens all the territory thus
acquired, excepting that which belonged to the
parents of the ravished maidens; this he suffered its
owners to keep for themselves.
At this the rest of the Sabines were enraged, and
after appointing Tatius their general, marched upon
Rome. The city was difficult of access, having as
its fortress the present Capitol, on which a guard
had been stationed, with Tarpeius as its captain,—
not Tarpeia, a maiden, as some say, thereby making
Romulus a simpleton. But Tarpeia, a daughter of
the commander, betrayed the citadel to the Sabines,
having set her heart on the golden armlets which
she saw them wearing, and she asked as payment
for her treachery that which they wore on their left
arms. ‘Tatius agreed to this, whereupon she opened
one of the gates by night and let the Sabines in.
Antigonus was not alone, then, in saying that he
loved men who offered to betray, but hated those
who had betrayed ; nor yet Caesar, in saying of the
Thracian Rhoemetalces, that he loved treachery but
hated a traitor; but this is a very general feeling
towards the base on the part of those who need their
services, just as they need certain wild creatures
for their venom and gall; for while they feel the
need of them, they put up with them, but abhor
their vileness when they have obtained from them
what they want. This, too, was the feeling which
Tatius then had towards Tarpeia, when he ordered
1 Cf. Livy, i. 11,
VOL. 1. ε [141
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μέfν ους τῶAν ὁe μολογιῶaν τοὺ\ς Σαβίν, ους μηδενὸ\ς
αὐτῇ φθονεῖν ὧν ἐν ταῖς ἀριστεραῖς ἔχουσι. καὶ
πρῶτος ἅμα τὸν βραχιονιστῆρα τῆς χειρὸς
περιελὼAν καὶ \ to\v θυρεὸ\ν ἐἡ πΠΟέ Δρ ριψε. πάν΄ὕτ ων δὲ\
αὐ3τ... ὸ ᾿ ποιού/ν των βαλλομέν/ η τε τῷA χρυσῷA καὶ \
καταχωσθεῖaσ α τοῖlςal θυρεοῖaς“ ὑ€ πὸ \ πλήθ/ ους καὶ
βάρΨ' ους ἀ3 πέθ/ ανεν. ἑειά.» λω δὲΝ καὶ \ Ταρπήϊ7ο. ς προ-
Socias ὑπὸ Ῥωμύλον διωχθείς/, ὡς ᾿Ιόβας φησὶ
Γάλβαν Σουλπίκιον ἱστορεῖν. τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλα περὶ
Ταρπηΐαἃ ς λεγό,ν των ἀ» πίθ7 ανοι μέ,ν εἰ᾽ σιν οἱ e Τατίο, υ
θυγατέρα τοῦa ἡγεμόνος τῶaν Σαβίν/ ων οὖσαν av-
τήν, Ῥωμύλῳ δὲ Bia συνοικοῦAσ αν, ἱ€ στοροῦfνo) τες
ταῦτα ποιῆσαι καὶ παθεῖν ὑπὲρ τοῦ πατρός" ὧν
καὶ \ 9 ᾿Αντί, γονός΄ ἐb]σ τι. Σιμύ4λ ος δδ᾽᾽ ὁ« ποιητὴς\ καὶ A
παντάπασι ληρεῖa μὴ\ Σαβίν,ο ις οἰ» όμενος, ἀλλὰ
Κελτοῖς τὴν Ταρπηΐαν προδοῦναι τὸ Καπιτώλιον
ἐρασθεῖa σαν αὐτῶaν τοῦA βασιλέω/ ς. λέγει δὲ
ταῦτα"
e Η δ᾽ ἀγχοῦ Τάρπεια παραὶ Καπιτώλιον αἷπος
ναίουσα ἱῬώμης ἔπλετο τειχολέτις,
Κελτῶν ἣ στέρξασα γαμήλια λέκτρα γενέσθαι
σκηπτούχῳ, πατέρων οὐκ ἐφύλαξε δόμους.
Kal μετ᾽ asὀ λί’ὔγ͵ α περὶ \ τῆAς τελευτῆςA "
Τὴν δ᾽ οὔτ᾽ ἂρ Βόϊοί τε καὶ ἔθνεα μυρία Κελτῶν
χηράμ, ενοι ῥec είfs θρων ἐ᾽ ντὸΝς ἔ» θεντο Ἰ]ἀ δου'
ὅ“ πλα δ᾽3 ἐ"59 πιπροβαλόν“τ ες ἀ’ ρειμανέω/ ν ἀ2 πὸ \ χειρῶAν
κούρῃ ἐπὶ στυγερῇ κόσμον ἔθεντο φόνον.
142
ROMULUS, xvu. 4-5
his Sabines, mindful of their agreement, not to
begrudge the girl anything they wore on their left
arms. And he was first to take from his arm not
only his armlet, but at the same time his shield, and
cast them upon her. All his men followed his
example, and the girl was smitten by the gold and
buried under the shields, and died from the number
and weight of them. And Tarpeius also was con-
victed of treason when prosecuted by Romulus, as,
according to Juba, Sulpicius Galba relates. Of those
who write differently about Tarpeia, they are worthy
of no belief at all who say that she was a daughter
of Tatius, the leader of the Sabines, and was living
with Romulus under compulsion, and acted and
suffered as she did, at her father’s behest; of these,
Antigonus is one. And Simylus the poet is alto-
gether absurd in supposing that Tarpeia betrayed
the Capitol, not to the Sabines, but to the Gauls,
because she had fallen in love with their king. These
are his words :—
“And Tarpeia, who dwelt hard by the Capitolian
steep,
Became the destroyer of the walls of Rome;
She longed to be the wedded wife of the Gallic
chieftain,
And betrayed the homes of her fathers.”
And a little after, speaking of her death: —
“ Her the Boii and the myriad tribes of Gauls
Did not, exulting, cast amid the currents of the
Pos
But hurled the shields from their belligerent arms
Upon the hateful maid, and made their orna-
ment her doom.”
143
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
XVIII. Τῆς μέντοι Ταρπηΐας ἐκεῖ ταφείσης ὁ
λόφος ὠνομάζετο αρπήϊος, ἄχρι οὗ Ταρκυνίου
βασιλέως Διὶ τὸν τόπον καθιεροῦντος ἅμα τε τὰ
λείψανα μετηνέχθη καὶ τοὔνομα τῆς Ταρπηΐας
ἐξέλιπε. πλὴν πέτραν ἔτι νῦν ἐν τῷ Καπιτωλίῳ
Ταρπηΐαν καλοῦσιν, ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἐρρίπτουν τοὺς
κακούργους.
᾿᾿χομένης δὲτ ῆς ἄκρας ὑπὸ τῶν “Σαβίνων, ὅὅ τε
to
“Ῥωμύλος ὑπ᾽ ὀργῆς εἰς μάχην αὐτοὺς T povKa-
λεῖτο, Kal oO Τάτιος ἐθάρρει, καρτεράν, εἰ βια-
σθεῖεν, ἀναχώρησιν ὁρῶν αὐτοῖς ὑπάρχουσαν.
ὁ γὰρ μεταξὺ τόπος, ἐν ᾧ ,»συμπίπτειν ἔμελλον,
ὑπὸ πολλῶν λόφων περιεχόμενος ἀγῶνα μὲν ὀξὺν
ἐδόκει καὶ χαλεπὸν ὑπὸ δυσχωρίας ἀμφοτέροις
παρέξειν, φυγὰς δὲ καὶ διώξεις ἐν στενῷ βρα-
χείας. ἔτυχε δὲ τοῦ ποταμοῦ λιμνάσαντος οὐ πολ-
λαῖς πρότερον ἡμέραις, ἐἐ γκαταλελεῖφθαι τέλμα
βαθὺ καὶ τυφλὸν ἐν τόποις ἐπιπέδοις κατὰ τὴν
νῦν οὖσαν ἀγοράν" ὅθεν οὐκ ἦν ὄψει πρόδηλον,
οὐδ᾽ εὐφύλακτον, ἄλλως δὲ χαλεπὸν καὶ ὕπουλον.
ἐπὶ τοῦτο τοῖς Σαβίνοις ἀπειρίᾳ φερομένοις εὐτύ-
χημα γίγνεται. Κούρτιος γὰρ ἀνὴρ ἐπιφανής,
δόξῃ καὶ φρονήματι γαῦρος, ἵππον ἔχων πολὺ
πρὸ τῶν ἄλλων ἐχώρει: δεξαμένου δὲ τοῦ βαρά-
θρου τὸν ἵππον ἄχρι μέν τίνος ἐπειρᾶτο πληγῇ
καὶ παρακελεύσει χρώμενος ἐξελαύνειν, ὡς δ᾽ ἦν
ἀμήχανον, ἐάσας τὸν ἵππον ἑαυτὸν ἔσωξεν. ὃ
μὲν οὖν τόπος δι᾽ ἐκεῖνον ἔτι νῦν Κούρτιος λάκκος
ὀνομάξεται' φυλαξάμενοι δὲ τὸν κίνδυνον οἱ Σα-
βῖνοι μάχην καρτερὰν ἐμαχέσαντο κρίσιν οὐ
λαβοῦσαν, καίτοι πολλῶν πεσόντων, ἐν οἷς ἣν καὶ
144
ROMULUS, xvint. 1-4
XVIII. However, Tarpeia was buried there, and
the hill was called from her Tarpeius, until King
Tarquin dedicated the place to Jupiter, when her
bones were removed and the name of Tarpeia died
out, except that a cliff on the Capitol is still called
the Tarpeian Rock, from which they hurl male-
factors.
The citadel thus occupied by the Sabines,1 Romulus
angrily challenged them to battle, and Tatius was
bold enough to accept, since he saw that the Sabines,
if worsted, had a strong place of retreat. For the
intervening space, in which they were to join battle,
being surrounded by many hills, seemed to impose
upon both parties a sharp and grievous contest,
owing to the difficulties of the field, where flight and
pursuit must be narrowly confined and short. It
happened, too, since the river had overflowed not
many days before, that a deep and blind slime had
been left in the valley where the forum is now.
Wherefore it was not apparent to the eye, nor yet
easy to avoid, and besides it was soft beneath the
surface and dangerous. On to this the Sabines were
ignorantly rushing, when a piece of good fortune be-
fell them. Curtius, a conspicuous man among them,
eager for glory and high design, was advancing on
horseback far in front of the rest, when his horse
sank in the gulf of mud. For some time he tried
to drive him out, with blows and cries of encourage-
ment, but since it was impossible, he abandoned
his horse and saved himself. Accordingly, the place
to this day is called from him “lacus Curtius.”” But
the Sabines, having avoided this peril, fought a
sturdy fight, and one which was indecisive, although
1 Cf. Livy, i. 12.
145
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
5 Ὁστίλιος. τοῦτον “Epoidias ἄνδρα καὶ πάππον 29
Ὁστιλίου τοῦ μετὰ Νομᾶν βασιλεύσαντος γε-
νέσθαι λέγουσιν. αὖθις δὲ πολλῶν ἀγώνων ἐν
βραχεῖ συνισταμένων, ὡς εἰκός, ἑνὸς μάλιστα τοῦ
τελευταίου μνημονεύουσιν, ἐν ᾧ Ῥωμύλου τὴν
κεφαλὴν πληγέντος λίθῳ καὶ πεσεῖν ὀλίγον δεή-
σαντος τοῦ T ἀντέχειν ὑφεμένου τοῖς Σαβίνοις,
ἐνέδωκαν οἱ Ῥωμαῖοι καὶ φυγῇ πρὸς τὸ Παλάτιον
6 ἐχώρουν ἐξωθούμενοι τῶν ἐπιπέδων. ἤδη δὲ ὁ
Ῥωμύλος ἐκ τῆς πληγῆς ἀναφέρων ἐβούλετο μὲν
εἰς τὰ ὅπλα χωρεῖν τοῖς φεύγουσιν ἐναντίως, καὶ
μέγα βοῶν ἵστασθαι καὶ μάχεσθαι παρεκάλει.
πολλῆς δὲ τῆς φυγῆς αὐτῷ περιχεομένης καὶ
μηδενὸς ἀναστρέφειν τολμῶντος, ἀνατείνας εἰς
οὐρανὸν τὰς χεῖρας εὔξατο τῷ Aut στῆσαι τὸ
στράτευμα καὶ τὰ Ῥωμαίων πράγματα πεσόντα
7 μὴ περιϊδεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ὀρθῶσαι. γενομένης δὲ τῆς
εὐχῆς, αἰδώς τε τοῦ βασιλέως ἔργ. πολλοὺς καὶ
θάρσος ἐκ «μεταβολῆς παρέστη τοῖς φεύγουσιν.
ἔστησαν οὖν πρῶτον οὗ νῦν ὁ τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ
Στάτορος ἵδρυται νεώς, ὃν ἐπιστάσιον ἄν τις
ἑρμηνεύσειεν: εἶτα συνασπίσαντες πάλιν ἔωσαν
ὀπίσω τοὺς Σαβίνους ἐπὶ τὴν νῦν Ῥήγιαν προσ-
αγορευομένην καὶ τὸ τῆς Ἑστίας ἡἱ ερόν.
XIX. ᾿Ενταῦθα δ᾽ αὐτοὺς ὥσπερ ἐξ ὑπαρχῆς
μάχεσθαι παρασκευαξομένους ἐπέσχε δεινὸν ἰδεῖν
θέαμα καὶ λόγου κρείττων ὄψις. αἱ γὰρ ἡρπα-
σμέναι “θυγατέρες τῶν Σαβίνων ὥφθησαν ἀλλα-
χόθεν ἄλλαι μετὰ βοῆς καὶ ὀχολυγμοῦ διὰ τῶν
ὅπλων φερόμεναι καὶ τῶν νεκρῶν, ὥσπερ ἐκ θεοῦ
146
ROMULUS, xvi. 5—x1x. 1
many fell, among whom was Hostilius. This man,
they say, was husband of Hersilia! and grandfather
to the Hostilius who was king after Numa. After-
wards many conflicts raged within a short time, as
might be expected, but one is most memorable,
namely the last, in which Romulus was hit on the head
with a stone and almost fell to the ground, abandon-
ing his resistance to the Sabines. The Romans
thereupon gave way and began to fly to the Palatine,
now that they were repulsed from the plain. But
presently Romulus, recovering from his blow, wished
to stem the tide of fugitives and renew the battle,
and called upon them with a loud voice to stand and
fight. But as the waves of flight encompassed him
and no man dared to face about, he stretched his
hands towards heaven and prayed Jupiter to stay
his army and not suffer the Roman cause to fall, but
to restore it. No sooner was his prayer ended than
many stopped out of reverence for their king, and
courage returned to the fugitives. They made their
first stand, then, where now is the temple of Jupiter
Stator, which epithet might be interpreted as Stayer.
Then they closed their ranks again and drove the
Sabines back to where the so-called Regia? now
stands, and the temple of Vesta.
XIX. Here, as they were preparing to renew the
battle, they were checked by a sight that was
wonderful to behold and a spectacle that passes
description.’ The ravished daughters of the Sabines
were seen rushing from every direction, with shouts
and lamentations, through the armed men and the
1 Cf. chapter xiv. 6 f.
2 In historical times, the house of the Pontifex Maximus.
See Numa, xiv. 1. 8 Cf. Livy, i. 13.
147
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κάτοχοι, πρός, TE τοὺ\ς ἄ” νδρας αὑτῶaν καὶ \ τοὺς
πατέρας, αἱ μὲ\ν παιδία, κομί,ζ ουσαι νή,π ια πρὸς\
ταῖς ἀγκάλαις, αἱ δὲ τὴν κόμην προϊσχόμεναι
λελυμένην, πᾶσαι δ᾽ ἀνακαλούμεναι τοῖς φιλτά-
τοῖς ὀνόA μασι ποτὲ μὲν τοὺς Σαβίνους, ποτὲ δὲ
τοὺς\ ς Ῥωμαίο»υ ς. ἐ’ πεκλά4σ θησαν οὖ>ν ἀ2 μφύτUdε ροι,
καὶ διέ, σχον αὐταῖςa ἐν μέ,σ ῳ καταστῆνn αι τῆnς
παρατάξ,εὔ ως: καὶ \ κλαυθμὸςN ἅoe μα διὰ\ πάν, των ἐ> χώ-΄
ρει, καὶ πολὺς οἶκτος ἣν πρός τε τὴν ὄψιν καὶ
τοὺς\ λό,γ ους EBAT L μᾶaλ λον, εἰ7ς ἱe κεσί᾿α ν Kal \ δέSf,η σιν
ἐ>κ ὃ δικαιολογί,α ς καὶ \ παρρησία» ς τελευτῶ[νοἷ τας. oc “Τί7
ya\p (vἔ7 φασαν) ὑς μᾶaς ὃ δεινὸ\ ν ἢἋ λυπηρὸν\ ἐ> ργασά-/
μεναι, τὰ μὲν ἤδη πεπόνθαμεν, τὰ\ δὲ πάσχομεν
τῶν σχετλίων κακῶν; ἡρπάσθημεν ὑπὸ τῶν νῦν
ἐχόντων Bi,a Kai παρανόμως, ἁρπασθεῖσa αι δ'
ἠ» μελή(θ4 ημεν ὑ¢π ᾽’ 3 ἀ᾽ δελφῶaνn Kal ν πατέρ/ ων Kal \ οἱἰ’-
κείων χρόνον τοσοῦlτal ον ὅσος ἡμᾶnς πρὸς τὰΝ ἔχθι-
στα κεράσας ταῖaςl μεγί,σ ταις ἀνάγκαις, πεποίη/ κε
νῦaν ὑπὲρ τῶaν βιασαμέν4 ων καὶ παρανομησάντων
δεδιέναι μαχομένων καὶ κλαίεUeι ν θνησκόντων. οὐ
γὰρ ἤλθετε τιμωρήσοντες ἡμῖν παρθένοις οὔσαις
ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας, ἀλλὰ νῦν ἀνδρῶν ἀποσπᾶτε
γαμετὰς καὶ τέκνων μητέρ/ ας, οἰκτροτέiρe αν βοή-
θειαν ἐκείνης τῆAς ἀμελεία, ς καὶ \ προδοσίαΨ ς βοη-
θοῦντες ἡμῖν ταῖς ἀθλίαις. τοιαῦτα μὲν ἠγαπή-
θημεν ὑπὸ τούτων, τοιαῦἴωτ α δὲ ὑφ᾽ ᾽ ὑμῶ“ν ἐλεού-
μεθα. καὶ γὰρ εἰ δι’ ἄΥ̓͂λ λην αἰτίγαι ν ἐμάχεσθε,
παύσασθαι δι’ F ἡμᾶnς πενθεροὺς γεγονότ/ ας καὶ
148
ROMULUS, xix. 1-4
dead bodies, as if in a frenzy of possession, up to
their husbands and their fathers, some carrying
young children in their arms, some veiled in their
dishevelled hair, and all calling with the most
endearing names now upon the Sabines and now
upon the Romans. So then both armies were
moved to compassion, and drew apart to give the
women place between the lines of battle; sorrow
ran through all the ranks, and abundant pity was
stirred by the sight of the women, and still more
by their words, which began with argument and
reproach, and ended with supplication and entreaty.
“Wherein, pray (they said), have we done you
wrong or harm, that we must suffer in the past, and
must still suffer now, such cruel evils? We were
violently and lawlessly ravished away by those to
whom we now belong, but though thus ravished, we
were neglected by our brethren and fathers and
kinsmen until time had united us by the strongest
ties with those whom we had most hated, and made
us now fear for those who had treated us with
violence and lawlessness, when they go to battle,
and mourn for them when they are slain. For ye
did not come to avenge us upon our ravishers while
we were still maidens, but now ye would tear wives
from their husbands and mothers from their children,
and the succour wherewith ye would now succour
us, wretched women that we are, is more pitiful
than your former neglect and abandonment of us.
Such is the love which we have here enjoyed, such
the compassion shown to us by you. Even if ye
were fighting on other grounds, it were meet that
ye should cease for our sakes, now that ye are
become fathers-in-law and grandsires and have
149
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
5 παππους Kal οἰκείidο υς ὄντας ἐχρῆνa . εἰ δ᾽ ὑπὲρ
ἡμῶaνn ὁe πόλεμός/ ἐστι, κομίfeσ ασθε ἡμᾶlaςl μετὰ
γαμβρῶνA καὶ τέκνων καὶ ἀπόδ, οτε ἡμῖaν πατέρας
καὶ Ν οἰ>κ εί,ο υς, μηδὲX ἀ> φέ’λ ησθε παῖaδ ας καὶ \ ἄBAν δρας.
ἱe κετεύ4ο μεν ὑ«ςμ ᾶ“ς μὴ\ πάλ/ ιν αἰ᾽ χμάiλf ωτοι γενέ/σ θαι. 29
Τοιαῦaτ α πολλὰ \ τῆ“ςἅμ € ᾿Ἑρσιλί’α ς προαγορευ-
ov,e ns Kal \ τῶAν ἄΕΣ λλων δεομέΥν̓ ων, ἐΡῚ σπείifσ θησαν
ἀ> νοχαὶ \ καὶ \ συνῆnaλ θον εἰ’ς λό᾿γς ους οἱ ΕΠἡ γεμόν/ ες. at €
δὲ γυναῖκες ἐν τούτῳ τοῖς πατράσι καὶ τοῖς
ἀ1δ6ε λφοῖςa τοὺς\ ἄA νδὃρ ας προσῆγa ον καὶ \ τὰ\ téfx va, 1
προσέφερόν τε τροφὴν καὶ ποτὸν τοῖς δεομένοις,
καὶ τοὺς τετρωμένους ἐθεράπευον οἴκαδε κομί-
ζουσαι" καὶ παρεῖχον ὁρᾶν ἀρχούσας μὲν αὑτὰς
τοῦa οἴκου, προσέlχA οντας δὲ τοὺς ἄνδρας αὐταῖςn 30
καὶ μετ᾽ ΕῚ εὐνοίας τιμὴν ἅπασαν νέ, μοντας. ἐκ
τού,τ ου συντίθενται τῶaν μὲ\ν γυναικῶaν Ta\s βουλο-
μένας συνοικεῖν τοῖς ἔχουσιν, ὥσπερ εἴρηται,
παντὸς ἔργου Kal πάσης λατρεία/ ς πλὴν ταλασίας
ἀ> φειμένifα ς" οἰ»κ εῖaν δὲ\ κοινῇA τὴAν πόλ’ ιν ς Ρωμαίο, υς
καὶ Σαβίνους, καὶ καλεῖσθαι μὲν Ῥώμην ἐπὶ
Ῥωμύλῳ τὴν πόλf ιν, Κυρίτ/ ας δὲ\ € “Ρωμαίοid υς
ἅπαντας ἐπὶ τῇ Τατίου πατρίδι, βασιλεύειν δὲ
κοινῇ καὶ στρατηγεῖν- ἀμφοτέρ7ο υς. ὅ/ που δὲ\
ταῦ“τ α συνέθεντο μέ/χ ρι virvn Κομίτ/ ιον καλεῖτa αι"
κομῖaρ ε yap ῬωμαῖοὉι τὸΝ συνελθεῖνa καλοῦσrn ι.
XX. Διπλασιασθείσ, ης δὲ τῆaςn πόλ, εως, ἑκατὸν
μὲΝν ἐ»κ ΣαβίνIe ων πατρίκ/ι οι προσκατελέχ, θησαν, αἱ ς
1 +a τέκνα Coraés and Bekker, after Reiske: τέκνα,
150
ROMULUS, xix. 5-xx. 1
family ties among your enemies. If, however, the
war is on our behalf, carry us away with your sons-in-
law and their children, and so restore to us our
fathers and kindred, but do not rob us of our
children and husbands. Let us not, we beseech
you, become prisoners of war again.”
Many such appeals were made by Hersilia, and
the other women added their entreaties, until a
truce was made and the leaders held a confer-
ence. Meanwhile the women brought their hus-
bands and their children and presented them to
their fathers and brothers; they also carried food
and drink to those that wanted, and bore the
wounded to their homes for tender nursing; here
they also made it evident that they were mistresses
of their own households, and that their husbands
were attentive to them and showed them all honour
with good will. Thereupon agreements were made
that such women as wished to do so might continue to
live with their husbands, exempt, as aforesaid,! from
all labour and all drudgery except spinning; also
that the city should be inhabited by Romans and
Sabines in common; and that the city should be
called Rome, from Romulus, but all its citizens
Quirites, from the native city of Tatius?; and that
Romulus and Tatius should be joint kings and leaders
of the army. The place where these agreements
were made is to this day called Comitium, from the
Roman word “ conire,” or “ coire,” to come together.
XX. The city thus doubled in its numbers, a
hundred of the Sabines were added by election
to the Patricii,2 and the legions were enlarged
1 Cf. chapter xv. 4. 2 Cures, a Sabine town.
Cf. chapter xiii. 1.
15.
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δὲ λεγεῶAνa ες ἐγέtdν οντο πεζῶ»ν μὲν ἑξακισχιλίων,
ἱε ππέω, ν δὲ\ ἑe ξακοσίω, ν. φυλὰς\ δὲ\ τρεῖaς καταστή-7
σαντες ὠ’ νόAμ ασαν τοὺς\ μὲNν ἀ> πὸ Yared 3 Ῥωμύλ΄ ου € Ῥαμ-
νήνσης, τοὺς δὲ ἀπὸ\ Τατίου Τατιήνσης" τρίτους
δὲ\ Λουκερήνi σης διὰ\ τὸ\ ἄ” λσος, εἰ?ς ὃἃ πολλοὶ Ν κατα-
φυγόντες, ἀσυλία/ ς δεδομένης, τοῦa πολιτεύματος
μετέ/σ χον' τὰ\ δ᾽ἢ ἄλση λού΄κ ους ὀ? νομάζ/ ουσιν. ὅ“ τι
δ᾽ ἦσαν αἱ φυλαὶ τοσαῦται, τοὔνομα μαρτυρεῖ"
τρί, βους yaΝp ἔ” τι νῦaν Ta\s φυλᾶς\ καλοῦσanι , καὶ \
τριβούνους τοὺς φυλάρχους. ἑκάστη δὲ φυλὴ
δέκα φρατρία’ὔ ς εἶχεν, ἃς ἔνιοι λέγουσιν ἐπωνύμους
εἶναι ἐκείνων τῶν γυναικῶν. τοῦτο δὲ δοκεῖ
ψεῦaδ ος εἶ5 ναι: πολλαὶ ya\p ἔx χουσιν ἀπὸ χωρίων
τὰς προσηγορίας. ἄλλα μέντοι πολλὰ ταῖς γυ-
ναιξὶν εἰς τιμὴ\ν ἀπέδωκαν, ὧν Kal ταῦa τά éoTLY
ἐ5,ξ7ί στασθαι μὲΝν ὁ€ δοῦa βαδιζούσ/ αις, αἰ3 σχρὸν\ δὲ\
μηδένα μηδὲν εἰπεῖ-ν παρούσης γυναικός, μηδ᾽
ὀῪ φθῆaν αι γυμνόν,, ἢAa δί, κην φεύγ/ ειν παρὰ \ τοῖ“ςὉ ἐoyeπ ὶ BAN
τῶν φονικῶν καθεστῶσι, φορεῖν δὲ καὶ τοὺς παῖ-
das αὐ»τ ῶnν fu\e καλουμέν/ ην βοῦἴωλ λαν ἀ» πὸ Ν τοῦa
σχήματος, ὅμοιον πομφόλυγι, περιδέρραιόν τι
καὶ περιπόρφυρον.
᾿Εβουλεύοντο δὲ οἱ βασιλεῖς οὐκ εὐθὺς ἐν
κοινῷ μετ᾽ ἀχλήλων, ἀλλ᾽ ἑκάτερος πρότερον ἰδίᾳ
μετὰ τῶν ἑκατόν, εἶτα οὕτως εἰς ταὐτὸν ἅπαντας
συνῆγον. ᾧκει δὲ Τάτιος μὲν ὅπου νῦν ὁ τῆς
Μονήτης ναός ἐστι, Ῥωμύλος παρὰ τοὺς
λεγομένους βαθμοὺς καλῆς ἀκτῆς. οὗτοι δὲ εἰσὶ
1 καλῆς ἀκτῆς a corruption of Kd«ov? Cf. Diodorus, iv.
21,.2.
152
ROMULUS, xx. 1-4
to six thousand footmen and six hundred horse-
men.t ‘The people, too, were arranged in three
bodies, the first called Ramnenses, from Romulus;
the second Tatienses, from Tatius; and the third
Lucerenses, from the grove into which many betook
themselves for refuge, when a general asylum
was offered,? and then became citizens. Now the
Roman word for grove is “lucus.’”’ That these
bodies were three in number, their very name
testifies, for to this day they call them tribes, and
their chief officers, tribunes. And each tribe had
ten phratries, or brotherhoods, which, as some say,
were named after the thirty Sabine women ;? but
this seems to be false, since many of them bear the
names of places. However, they did make many
other concessions to the women, to do them honour,
some of which are as follow: to give them the right
of way when walking; not to utter any indecent
word in the presence of a woman; that no man
should be seen naked by them, or else that he be
liable to prosecution before the judges of homicide ;
and that their children should wear a sort of neck-
lace, the “bulla,” so called from its shape (which was
that of a bubble), and a robe bordered with purple.
The two kings did not at once hold council in
common with one another, but each at first sat with
his own hundred councillors apart, then afterwards
they united them all into one body, as at the present
time. Tatius dwelt where now is the temple of
Moneta, and Romulus beside the so-called Steps of
Fair Shore; 4 these are near the descent into the
1 Cf. chapter xiii. 1. 7 Cf. chapter ix. 3.
3 Cf. chapter xiv. 6.
4 The Greek text is probably corrupt. The ‘‘scalae Caci,”
or Steps of Cacus, must be meant.
P55
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
περὶ τὴν εἰς τὸν ἱππόδρομον τὸν μέγαν ἐκ 11α-
λατίου κατάβασιν. ἐνταῦθα δὲ καὶ τὴν κρά-
νείιαν ἔφασαν τὴν ἱερὰν γεγονέναι, μυθολογοῦντες
ὅτε πειρώμενος ὁ Ῥωμύλος αὑτοῦ λόγχην ἀκον-
τίσειεν ἀπὸ τοῦ ᾿Αουεντίνου τὸ ξυστὸν ἔχουσαν
κρανείας: καταδύσης δὲ τῆς αἰχμῆς εἰς βάθος,
ἀνασπάσαι μὲν οὐδεὶς πειρωμένων πολλῶν
ἴσχυσε, τὸ δὲ ξύλον ἔστεξεν ἡ γῆ ζώφυτος οὖσα,
καὶ βλαστοὺς ἀνῆκε καὶ στέλεχος εὐμέγεθες
κρανείας ἔθρεψε. τοῦτο δ᾽ οἱ μετὰ Ῥωμύλον
ὡς ὄν τι τῶν ἁγιωτάτων ἱερῶν φυλάττοντες καὶ
σεβόμενοι περιετείχισαν. ὅτῳ δὲ προσιόντι δό-
ξειε μὴ θαλερὸν εἶναι, μηδὲ χλωρόν, ἀλλ᾽ οἷον
ἀτροφεῖν καὶ φθίνειν, οὁ μὲν εὐθὺς ἔφραζε κραυγῇ
τοῖς προστυγχάνουσιν, οἱ δ᾽, ὥσπερ ἐμπρησμῷ
βοηθοῦντες, ἐβόων ὕδωρ, ὕδωρ, καὶ συνέ-
τρεχον πανταχόθεν ἀγγεῖα πλήρη κομίξοντες
ἐπὶ τὸν τόπον. Ταΐου δὲ Καίσαρος, ὥς φασι,
τὰς ἀναβάσεις ἐπισκευάξοντος καὶ τῶν τεχνιτῶν
περιορυττόντων τὰ πλησίον, ἔλαθον αἱ ῥίζαι
κακωθεῖσαι παντάπασι καὶ τὸ φυτὸν ἐμαράνθη.
XXI. Μῆνας μὲν οὖν οἱ Σαβῖνοι τοὺς Ῥωμαίων
ἐδέξαντο, καὶ περὶ αὐτῶν ὅσα καλῶς εἶχεν. ἐν τῷ
Nopa βίῳ γέγραπται: θυρεοῖς δὲ τοῖς ἐκείνων ὁ
Ῥωμύλος ἐχρήσατο, καὶ μετέβαλε τὸν ὁπλισμὸν
ἑαυτοῦ τε καὶ τῶν Ῥωμαίων, ᾿Αργολικὰς πρότε-
ρον ἀσπίδας φορούντων. ἑορτῶν δὲ καὶ θυσιῶν
ἀλλήλοις μετεῖχον, ἃς μὲν ἦγε τὰ γένη πρότερον
οὐκ ἀνελόντες, ἑτέρας δὲ θέμενοι καινάς, ὧν ἥ τε
τῶν Ματρωναλίων ἐστί, δοθεῖσα ταῖς γυναιξὶν
1 ὕδωρ, ὕδωρ with two Bodleian MSS. (850) ; ὕδωρ.
154
ROMULUS, xx. 4-χχι. 1
Circus Maximus from the Palatine. There also, it is
said, grew the sacred cornel-tree, of which the
following tale is told. Romulus, once, in trial of his
strength, cast thither from the Aventine hill a spear,
the shaft of which was made of cornel-wood; the
head of the spear sank deep into the ground, and
no one had strength to pull it up, though many tried,
but the earth, which was fertile, cherished the
wooden shaft, and sent up shoots from it, and pro-
duced a cornel-trunk of good size. Those who
came after Romulus preserved this with religious
care as one of the most sacred objects, and walled it
in. And if any visitor thought that it was not green
nor flourishing, but likely to wither away and die,
he immediately proclaimed it loudly to all he met,
and these, as though helping to save a house on fire,
would cry “Water! Water!’ and run _ together
from all sides carrying full buckets to the place.
But when Caius Caesar, as they say, was repairing
the steps about the enclosure, and the workmen dug
here and there in the neighbourhood, the roots were
inadvertently destroyed and the tree withered away.
XXI. The Sabines, then, adopted the Roman
months, about which I have written sufficiently in
my Life of Numa.! Romulus, on the other hand,
made use of their oblong shields, and changed his
own armour and that of the Romans, who before
that carried round shields of the Argive pattern.
Feasts and sacrifices they shared with one another,
not discarding any which the two peoples had
observed before, but instituting other new ones.
One of these is the Matronalia, which was bestowed
upon the women to commemorate their putting a
4 Chapters xviii. and xix.
155
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐπὶ τῇA τοῦA πολέμου καταλύσ,ε ι, καὶ ἡ τῶaν Kap-
pevtariov. τὴν δὲ Καρμένf ταν οἴονταί , τινες μοῖ-e
ραν εἶναι κυρίαν ἀνθρώπων γενέ/σ εως" διὸ Kal
τιμῶaσ ιν αὐτὴν αἱ μητέρ, ες. οἱ « δὲ\ THY τοῦA Evav- 31
δρου τοῦ ᾿Αρκάδος γυναῖκα, μαντικήν τινα καὶ
φοιβαστικὴν ἐμμέ4τ ρων χρησμῶνa γενομέν, ην, Καρ-
μένταν ἐπονομασθῆνa αι (τὰ ya\p ἔπη κάρμινα
καλοῦσalι )" Nixoatpatn/ ! 1 δὲδὲ ἦ4 ν ὄ” νομα κύiρa ιον αὐpτgῇ..
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ὁμολογεῖται" τὴν δὲ Καρμένταν
ἔνιοι πιθανώτερον ἀφερμηνεύουσιν οἷον ἐστερη-
μένην νοῦ, διὰ τὰς ἐν τοῖς ἐνθουσιασμοῖς παρα-
φροσύνας. τὸ μὲν yap στέ/ρ εσθαι καρῆρa ε, μέντεμ
δὲ\ τὸ\ν νοῦAν ὀ2 νομάζ/ ουσι. περὶ\ δὲ\ τῶAν ΠΠΙαριλί’ ων
προείρηται. τὰ δὲ Λουπερκάλια τῷA μὲν χρόUνd ῳ
δόξειεν ἂν εἶναι καθάρσια" δρᾶται γὰρ ἐν ἡμέραις
ἀ> ποφράσ, ι τοῦa Φεβρονυαρίο4 υ μηνός, , ὃΔ ν καθάρ4 σιον
ἄν τις ἑρμηνεύσ, ειε, Kal TH\Y ἡμέ΄ρ αν ἐκεί/ν ην TO
παλαιὸνΝ ἐ2 κά/λ ουν Φεβράτt?η ν: τοὔ” νομα δὲ\ τῆanς
ἑe ορτῆAς ἑ« λληνιστὶ Ν σημαίν’ε ι Λύκ/ αια, Kat \ δοκεῖA διὰ\
τοῦnrτ ο παμπάλαιος ἀπ᾽ »» ᾿Αρκάδων εἶναι τῶalν περὶ
Εὔανδρον. ἀλλὰ τοῦτο μὲν κοινόν ἐστι δύναται
γὰρ ἀπὸ τῆς λυκαίνης γεγονέναι τοὔνομα. καὶ γὰρ
ἀρχομένους τῆaς περιδρομῆnςa τοὺ\ς Λουπέρκους ὁ€ ρῶr-n
μεν ἐ» ντεῦfaθl εν ὅ“ που τὸ35ν5 «ς᾿ Ρωμύ4λ ον ἐ> κτεθῆrνn αι λέ,γ ου-
σι. τὰ δὲ δρώμενα τὴν αἰτίαν ποιεῖ δυστόπαστον'
σφάττουσι yap αἶγας, εἶ* τα μειρακίων δυοῖaν ἀπὸ
1 Νικοστράτη Coraés and Bekker with the MSS.: Νικο-
στράτῃ after Stephanus.
156
ROMULUS, xx. 1-4
stop to the war; and another is the Carmentalia.
This Carmenta is thought by some to be a Fate
presiding over human birth, and for this reason she
is honoured by mothers. Others, however, say that
the wife of Evander the Arcadian,! who was a
prophetess and inspired to utter oracles in verse,
was therefore surnamed Carmenta, since ‘ carmina”’
is their word for verses, her own proper name being
Nicostrate. As to her own name there is general
agreement, but some more probably interpret
Carmenta as meaning bereft of mind, because of
her ecstasies under inspiration, since “ carere”’ is the
Roman word for to be bereft, and “mens’’ for mind.
Of the Parilia I have spoken before. As for the
Lupercalia, judging by the time of its celebration,
it would seem to be a feast of purification, for it is
observed on the inauspicious days? of the month of
February, which name can be interpreted to mean
purification, and the very day of the feast was
anciently called Febrata. But the name of the
festival has the meaning of the Greek “ Lycaea,”
or feast of molves, which makes it seem of great
antiquity and derived from the Arcadians in the
following of Evander. Indeed, this meaning of
the name is commonly accepted ; for it can be con-
nected with the she-wolf of story. And besides, we
see that the Luperci® begin their course around
the city at that point where Romulus is said
to have been exposed. However, the actual cere-
monies of the festival are such that the reason for
the name is hard to guess. For the priests slaughter
1 Cf. Plutarch’s Roman Questions, 56 (Morals, p. 278 Ὁ, c),
and Livy, i. 7, 8. 2 Chapter xii. 1.
3 << Dies nefasti.” 4“ Cf. Livy, i. 5, 1-2,
5 Priests of Faunus, the Roman Pan.
157
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γέ4ν ους προσαχθέν, των αὐτοῖς, οἱ μὲν ἡς μαγμέν’ ῃ
μαχαίρ’ ᾳ τοῦa μετώ/π ου θυγγάνουσιν, ἕτεροι δ᾽ ἀπο-
μάτ4 τουσιν εὐ3 θύς΄ , ἔ» ριον βεβρεγμέν/ ον γά’λὔὕ ακτι
5 προσφέροντες. γελᾶν δὲ δεῖ τὰ μειράκια μετὰ τὴν
ἀπόμαξιν. ἐκ δὲ τούτου Ta δέρματα τῶaν αἰγῶaAν
κατατεμόντες διαθέ/ο υσιν ἐν περιζώσμασι γυμνοί,
τοῖaς σκύτεσι τὸν ἐμποδὼν παίοἐμ ντες. αἱ δ᾽ ἐν
ἡe λικίἐᾳς γυναῖκa ες οὐ> φεύiγf ουσι τὸΝ παίε4 σθαι, vout/f ov-
σαι πρὸς εὐτοκίαν καὶ κύησιν συνεργεῖν. ἴδιον
δὲ τῆaς ἑορτῆaς τὸ καὶ κύνα θύειν τοὺς Λουπέρ»κ ους.
6 Βούτ/ ας δέ, ὔὕ τις αἰΨτ ίΤαᾺ ς μυθώδ/ εις ἐ>ν ἐλεγείο’ ις
περὶQ τῶrν € Pwpaix“ avA ἀ> ναγράφ᾽ ων, φησὶ\ τοῦa ? ᾿Αμου-
λί/ο υ τοὺNς περὶ\ τὸ\ν € Ῥωμύλ4 ον κρατή(σa αντας ἐλθεῖaν
δρό/ μῳ μετὰ\ χαρᾶaςA ἐπὶ\ ToΝv τό/π ον ἐν ᾧ νηπίοις
οὖφσ ιν αὐJτ οῖςA ἡe λύtκA αινα θηλὴ\ν ὑidπ έσ/ χε, καὶ N μί/ μημα
τοῦr n τε δρόLdμ ου THY ἑορτὴNν ἄlγd εσθαι, Kal τρέχειν
τοὺς ἀπὸ γένους τοὺς
3 Εμποδίο/ υς τύ΄π τοντας, ὅμέπ ως τό4τ ε φά4σ γαν >ἔ χοντες
ἐξ Αλβης ἔθεον Ῥωμύλος ἠδὲ “Ρέμος.
καὶ τὸ μὲν ξίφος ἡ«ςμ αγμέν/ ον προσφέρ7 εσθαι τῷna
μετώπῳ τοῦA τότε φόνου καὶ κινδύ/ν ου σύ/μ βολον,
τὴν δὲ διὰ τοῦA γάλακτος ἀποκάθαρσιν ὑπό’μ νημα
7 τῆrnς τροφῆAς αὐ>τ ῶ6ν εἶ5Sν αι. Vdi7.o s δὲΠ Ὶ ᾿Ακί7ὔλ ιος ἱς στορεῖ a
πρὸ τῆaς κτίσεως τὰ θρέthμ ματα τῶ“ν περὶ τὸΝν
Ῥωμύλον ἀφανῆa γενέσθαι: τοὺ\ς δὲ\ τῷA Φαύν/ ῳ
προσευξαμένους ἐκδραμεῖνa γυμνοὺς\ ἐSparπ ὶ \ τὴ\ν ζή"hτk η-
σιν, ὅο πως ὑπὸ τοῦa ἱδρῶa τος μὴ\ ἐνοχλοῖν‘alτ ο' καὶ \
158
ROMULUS, xx1. 4-7
goats, and then, after two youths of noble birth have
been brought to them, some of them touch their
foreheads with a bloody knife, and others wipe the
stain off at once with wool dipped in milk. The
youths must laugh after their foreheads are wiped.
After this they cut the goats’ skins into strips and
run about, with nothing on but a girdle, striking all
who meet them with the thongs,! and young married
women do not try to avoid their blows, fancying that
they promote conception and easy child-birth. A
peculiarity of the festival is that the Luperci sacrifice
a dog also.
A certain Butas, who wrote fabulous explanations of
Roman customs in elegiac verse, says that Romulus
and Remus, after their victory over Amulius, ran
exultantly to the spot where, when they were babes,
the she-wolf gave them suck, and that the festival is
conducted in imitation of this action, and that the
two youths of noble birth run
“ Smiting all those whom they meet, as once with
brandished weapons,
Down from Alba’s heights, Remus and Romulus
ran.
And that the bloody sword is applied to their fore-
heads as a symbol of the peril and slaughter of that
day, while the eleansing of their foreheads with milk
is in remembrance of the nourishment which the babes
received. But Caius Acilius writes that before the
founding of the city Romulus and his brother once
lost their flocks, and after praying to Faunus, ran
forth in quest of them naked, that they might not
be impeded by sweat; and that this is the reason why
1 Cf. Plutarch’s Antony, xii. 1.
159
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
διὰ τοῦτο γυμνοὺς περιτρέχειν τοὺς Λουπέρκους.
τὸΝν δὲΝ κύUνA α φαίη/ τις ἄ»ν , εἰ> μὲ\ν iCἡ: θυσία/ καθαρμός/
9 ἐστι, θύuεf σθαι καθαρσίῳ χρωμέν, ων αὐτῷ"a Kal yap
vA EdAnves eΜ v τε τοῖaς καθαρσίο/ι ς σκύλακας ἐκφέ-
ρουσι καὶ Ν πολλαχοῦ a χρῶaν ται τοῖaς λεγομένοις
περισκυλακισμοῖς" εἰ δὲ τῇ λυκαίνῃ χαριστήρια
ταῦτα καὶ τροφεῖα καὶ σωτήρια Ῥωμύλου τελοῦ-
σιν, οὐκ ἀτό, πως ὁ€ κύων opaTTEeTaL’ λύκοις γάρ
ἐ> στι πολεμ, ίος" εἰ> ’ μὴ\ νὴ\ Δί,α κολάζlA εται τὸ\ ζῷrn ον
ὡς παρενοχλοῦνaA τοὺ\ς Λουπέρκους ὅé ταν περι-
θέωσι.
XXII. Λέγῇ εται δὲ καὶ τὴν περὶ τὸ πῦaρ ay-
στείαν Ῥωμύλον καταστῆσαι πρῶτον, ἀποδεί-
Eavta παρθένους ἱε ερὰ\ς € “᾿ὥστιάδας mpocayopevo-
ένας. οἱ δὲ τοῦτο μὲν εἰς Νομᾶν ἀναφέρουσι,
BτὰE δ᾽᾽ ἄΜ λλα τὸ\ν ς ῬωμύλA ον θεοσεβῆ διαφερόνidτ ως,
ἔτι δὲ μαντικὸν ἱστοροῦfoσl ι γενέ/σ θαι, καὶ φορεῖfνr
ἐπὶ μαντικῇ a TO\ καλούμ, ενον λί,τ υον, ἔστι δὲ καμ-
πύλη ῥάβδος, 7 τὰἂ ν πλινθία, καθεζομένους ἐπ᾽
οἰωνῶaν διαγράφειν. τοῦτο δ᾽> ἐν ἸΙαλατί»ῳ φυ-
λαττόμενον ἀφανισθῆνa αι περὶ τὰ\ Κελτικὰ τῆAς
πό,λ εως ἁς λούσ, ης: EL5 TA μέν/ τοι τῶlaν βαρβάρἊΨ ων
ἐκπεσόντων εὑρεθῆὉν αι κατὰ τέφρας βαθεία/ ς ἀπα-
θὲς ὑπὸ τοῦ πυρὸς ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς ἄλλοις ἀπολω-
λόσι καὶ διεφθαρμένοις.
» ἔθθη κε δὲδὲ Kal \ νό, μους τινάς/ , ὧ2ν σφοδὃρ ὸς\ μέν/
ἐ2 στιν ὁς γυναικὶ Ν μὴ\ διδοὺ\ς ἀ> πολείπ/ ειν ἄx νδρα,
γυναῖκα δὲ διδοὺς ἐκβάλλειν 1 ἐπὶ φαρμακείᾳ καὶ
1 ἐκβάλλειν Bekker, after Coraés: ἐκβαλεῖν.
160
ROMULUS, xxi. 7-xx11. 3
the Luperci run about naked. If the sacrifice is a
purification, one might say that the dog is sacri-
ficed as being a suitable victim for such rites, since
the Greeks, in their rites of purification, carry forth
puppies for burial, and in many places make use of
the rites called “periskulakismoi;”1 and if these
rites are performed in grateful remembrance of
the she-wolf that nourished and preserved Romu-
lus, it is not without reason that the dog is slain,
since it is an enemy to wolves, unless, indeed, the
animal is thus punished for annoying the Luperci
when they run about.
XXII. It is said also that Romulus first introduced
the consecration of fire, and appointed holy virgins
to guard it, called Vestals. Others attribute this
institution to Numa,? although admitting that
Romulus was in other ways eminently religious, and
they say further that he was a diviner, and carried
for purposes of divination the so-called “ lituus,’’ a
crooked staff with which those who take auguries
from the flight of birds mark out the regions of the
heavens. This staff, which was carefully preserved on
the Palatine, is said to have disappeared when the city
was taken at the time of the Gallic invasion; after-
wards, however, when the Barbarians had been
expelled, it was found under deep ashes unharmed
by the fire, although everything about it was com-
pletely destroyed.?
He also enacted certain laws, and among them
one of severity, which forbids a wife to leave her
husband, but permits a husband to put away his wife
1 Sacrifices where puppies were killed and carried about.
2 See Numa, chapters ix. and x.
ὃ Cf. Camillus, xxxii. 4-5.
161
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τέκνων vToBorAn! καὶ μοιχευθεῖσαν: εἰ δ᾽ ἄλλως 32
τις ἀποπέμψαιτο, τῆς οὐσίας αὐτοῦ τὸ μὲν τῆς
γυναικὸς εἶναι, τὸ δὲ τῆς Δήμητρος ἱερὸν κελεύων"
τὸν δ᾽ ἀποδόμενον γυναῖκα θύεσθαι χθονίοις θεοῖς.
ἴδιον δὲ τὸ μηδεμίαν δίκην κατὰ πατροκτόνων
ὁρίσαντα πᾶσαν ἀνδροφονίαν πατροκτονίαν προσ-
εἰπεῖν, ὡς τούτου μὲν ὄντος ἐναγοῦς, ἐκεῖνου δὲ
ἀδυνάτου. καὶ μέχρι χρόνων πολλῶν ἔδοξεν
ὀρθῶς ἀπογνῶναι τὴν τοιαύτην ἀδικίαν" οὐδεὶς
γὰρ ἔδρασε τοιοῦτον οὐδὲν ἐν “Ῥώμῃ σχεδὸν ἐἐ τῶν
ἑξακοσίων διαγενομένων, ἀλλὰ πρῶτος μετὰ τὸν
᾿Αννιβιακὸν πόλεμον ἱστορεῖται Λεύκιος “Ὅστιος
πατροκτόνος γενέσθαι. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἱκανὰ
περὶ τούτων.
XXIII. “Eres δὲ πέμπτῳ τῆς Τατίου βασιλείας,
οἰκεῖοί τινες αὐτοῦ καὶ συγγενεῖς πρέσβεσιν ἀπὸ
Λαυρέντου βαδίζουσιν εἰς Ῥώμην ἐντυχόντες καθ᾽
ὁδόν, ἐπεχείρουν ἀφαιρεῖσθαι τὰ χρήματα βίᾳ,
καὶ μὴ προϊεμένους, ἀλλ᾽ ἀμυνομένους ἀνεῖλον.
ἔργου δὲ δεινοῦ τολμηθέντος, ὁ μὲν Ῥωμύλος
εὐθὺς δεῖν ὥετο κολάζεσθαι τοὺς ἀδικήσαντας,
ὁ δὲ Τάτιος ἐξέκρουε καὶ παρῆγε. καὶ τοῦτο
μόνον αὐτοῖς ὑπῆρξεν αἴτιον ἐμφανοῦς “διαφορᾶς
τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα ,κατακοσμοῦντες ἑαυτοὺς ὡς ἔνι μά-
λιστα κοινῶς ἐχρῶντο καὶ μεθ᾽ ὁμονοίας τοῖς
πράγμασιν. οἱ δὲ τῶν ἀνῃρημένων οἰκεῖοι, πάσης
ἐξειργόμενοι δίκης νομίμου διὰ τὸν Τάτιον, ἀπο-
κτιννύουσιν αὐτὸν ἐν Λαβινίῳ θύοντα μετὰ Ῥω-
μύλου προσπεσόντες, τὸν δὲ Ρωμύλον ὡς δίκαιον
1 ἐπὶ φαρμακείᾳ καὶ τέκνων ὑποβολῇ with Cobet: ἐπὶ φαρ-
μακείᾳ τέκνων ἢ κλειδῶν ὑποβολῇ (for poisoning his children or
counterfeiting his keys).
162
ROMULUS, xxu. 3-xxii1. 2
for using poisons, for substituting children, and for
adultery ; but if a man for any other reason sends his
wife away, the law prescribes that half his substance
shall belong to his wife, and the other half be con-
secrate to Ceres; and whosoever puts away his wife,
shall make a sacrifice to the gods of the lower world.
It is also a peculiar thing that Romulus ordained no
penalty for parricides, but called all murder parricide,
looking upon one as abominable, and upon the other
as impossible. And for many ages his judgement of
such a crime seemed to have been right, for no one
did any such deed at Rome for almost six hundred
years; but after the war with Hannibal, Lucius
Hostius is reported to have been the first parricide.
So much, then, may suffice concerning these
matters.
XXIII. In the fifth year of the reign of Tatius,
some retainers and kinsmen of his, falling in with
ambassadors from Laurentum on their way to Rome,
attempted to rob them of their money,! and when
they would not stand and deliver, slew them. It
was a bold and dreadful crime, and Romulus thought
its perpetrators ought to be punished at once, but
Tatius tried to put off and turn aside the course of
justice. ‘This was the sole occasion of open variance
between them; in all other matters they acted in
the utmost concert and administered affairs with
unanimity. The friends of the slain ambassadors,
shut out as they were from all lawful redress, through
the efforts of Tatius, fell upon him as he was sacri-
ficing with Romulus at Lavinium, and killed him, but
escorted Romulus on his way with loud praises of his
1 Cf. Livy, i. 14, 1-3.
163
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 ἄνδρα προὔπεμψαν εὐφημοῦντες. ὁe δὲ τὸ μὲν
σῶμα τοῦ Τατίου κομίσας ἐντίμως ἔθαψε, καὶ
κεῖται περὶ τὸ καλούμενον ᾿Αρμιλούστριον ἐν
᾿Αουεντίν/ ῳ, τῆaςn δὲ δί/ κης τοῦa n φόνου παντάπασιν
ἠμέλησεν. ἔνιοι δὲ τῶaν συγγραφέω/ ν ἱστοροῦ“σ ι
τὴν μὲν πόλ, ιν τῶaν Λαυρεντίων φοβηθεῖἴσω αν ἐκδι-
δόναι τοὺνςι αὐ>τ όχ, ειρας Tatio7 v, τὸ\ν δὲNT ue Ῥωμύλ4 ον
4 ἀφεῖν- αι, φήσαντα φό,ν ον φό/ν ῳ λελύσθαι. τοῦaτ ο
δὲ λό,γ ον μέν τινα παρέσχε καὶ ὑποψία/ ν ὡς
ἀ5 σμέν, ῳ γέ/γ ονεν αὐ>)τ ῷf a TOἊ Ν τοῦa συνά΄ρ χοντος ἀ> παλ-
λαγῆνa αι, τῶlaν) δὲ πραγμάτ/ ων οὐδὲ\ν διετάραξεν,
οὐδὲ διεστασίασε τοὺς Σαβίν/ο υς, ἀλλ᾽ > οἱ μὲν
εὐ> νοί/ᾳ THa πρὸς\ αὐ|τ ὸν/, οἱ e δὲd€ φό4β8ῳ τῆaςn ὃ δυνά, μεως,
οἱ ς & ὡς θεῷSS χρώμ΄,ε νοι εἰ>ς πᾶaσn αν εὔ,ν οιαν, θαυ-
μάζοντες διετέλουν.
5 ᾿Εθαύμαζον δὲ πολλοὶ καὶ Ἁ τῶlaνl ἐκτὸς ἀνθρώπων
τὸν Ῥωμύλον: οἱ δὲ προγενέσ/ τεροι Λατῖνa οι πέμ-
ψαντες αὐτῷn φιλί/α ν ἐποιήσαντο καὶ συμμαχίαν.
Φιδήνας δὲ εἷλεν, ἀστυγείτ/ ονα τῆnaς Ῥώμ΄ ης πόλιν,
ὡς “μὲν ἔνιοί φασιν, ἐξαίφνης τοὺς ἱππέας πέμψας
καὶ κελεύσας ὑποτεμεῖν τῶν πυλῶν τοὺς στρό-
φιγγᾶς, εἶτα ἐπιφανεὶς αὐτὸς ἀπροσδοκήτως"
6 ἕτεροι δὲ λέγουσι προτέρους ἐκείνους ἐμβαλόντας
ἐλάσασθαί τὲ λείαν καὶ καθυβρίσ/ αι πολλὰ τὴν
χώραν καὶ τὸ προάστειον, ἐνέδρας δὲ τὸν Ῥω-
μύλον θέμενον αὐτοῖς καὶ διαφθείραντα πολλοὺς
λαβεῖν τὴν πόλιν. οὐ μὴν ἀνεῖλεν οὐδὲ κατέ-
σκαψεν, ἀ᾽ λλὰ \ € Ῥωμαίω’, ν ἐ> ποί/η σεν ἀ)π οικίαIe ν,
1 χρώμεχνροώιμ ενοι εεἰἰς ς πᾶπᾶσαν σαν εὔνοιεὔνοια ν MSS., ; Coraés ; Bekker corrPeerctt s
to χρώμενον εἰς πᾶν εὐμενεῖ (because heaven favoured him in
ai his undertakings.)
164
ROMULUS, xxi. 3-6
justice. Romulus brought the body of Tatius home
and gave it honourable burial, and it lies near the
so-called Armilustrium, on the Aventine hill; but
he took no steps whatsoever to bring his murderers
to justice. And some historians write that the city
of Laurentum, in terror, delivered up the murderers
of Tatius, but that Romulus let them go, saying that
murder had been requited with murder. This led
some to say and suspect that he was glad to be rid
of his colleague, but it caused no disturbance in the
government, nor did it lead the Sabines into faction,
nay, some through the good-will they had for him,
others through their fear of his power, and others
because they regarded him as a benevolent god,
all continued to hold him in reverence to the
end.
Romulus was held in reverence also by many
foreign peoples, and the earlier Latins sent ambas-
sadors and established friendship and alliance with
him. Fidenae, a neighbouring city to Rome, he
took,! as some say, by sending his horsemen of a
sudden with orders to cut away the pivots of the gates,
and then appearing himself unexpectedly ; but others
say that the men of Fidenae first made an incursion,
driving off booty and devastating the territory and
outskirts of the city, and that Romulus set an ambush
for them, killed many of them, and took their city. He
did not, however, destroy or raze it to the ground,
but made it a colony of Rome, and sent thither
1 Cf. Livy, i. 14, 4-11.
165
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δισχιλίους καὶ πεντακοσίους ἀποστείλας οἰκή-
Topas εἰδοῖς ᾿Απριλλίαις.
XXIV. ᾿Εκ τούτου λοιμὸς ἐμπίπτει, θανάτους
μὲν αἰφνιδίους ἀνθρώποις ἄνευ νόσων ἐπιφέρων,
ἁπτόμενος δὲ καὶ καρπῶν ἀφορίαις καὶ θρεμ-
μάτων ἀγονίαις. ὕσθη δὲ καὶ σταγόσιν αἵματος
ἡ πόλις, ὥστε πολλὴν προσγενέσθαι τοῖς ἀναγ-
καίοις πάθεσι δεισιδαιμονίαν. ἐπεὶ δὲ καὶ τοῖς τὸ
Λαύρεντον οἰκοῦσιν ὅμοια συνέβαινεν, ἤδη παν-
τάπασιν ἐδόκει τῶν ἐπὶ Τατίῳ συγκεχυμένων δι-
καίων ἐπί τε τοῖς πρέσβεσι φονευθεῖσι μήνιμα δαι-
μόνιον ἀμφοτέρας ἐλαύνειν τὰς πόλεις. ἐκδοθέν-
των δὲ τῶν φονέων καὶ κολασθέντων παρ᾽ ἀμφο-
τέροις, ἐχώφησεν ἐπιδήλως τὰ δεινά" καὶ καθαρμοῖς
ὁ “Ρωμύλος ἥγνισε τὰς πόλεις, OVS ἔτι νῦν στο-
ροῦσιν ἐπὶ τῆς Φερεντίνης πύλης συντελεῖσθαι.
Πρὶν δὲ λῆξαι τὸν λοιμὸν ἐπέθεντο Καμέριοι 33
Ῥωμαίοις καὶ κατέδραμον τὴν χώραν, ὡς ἀδὺυ-
νάτων ἀμύνεσθαι διὰ τὸ πάθος. εὐθὺς οὖν ὁ
Ῥωμύλος ἐστράτευσεν ἐπ᾽ αὐτοὺς καὶ μάχη
κρατήσας ἑξακισχιλίους ἀπέκτεινε: καὶ τὴν
πόλιν ἑλών, τοὺς μὲν ἡμίσεις τῶν περιγενομένων
εἰς Ῥώμην ἐξῴώκισε, τῶν oS ὑπομενόντων διπλα-
σίους ἐκ Ῥώμης κατῴκισεν εἰς τὴν Καμερίαν
Σεξτιλίας καλάνδαις. τοσοῦτον αὐτῷ περιῆν
πολιτῶν ἑκκαίδεκα ἔτη σχεδὸν οἰκοῦντι τὴν
Ῥώμην. ἐν δὲ τοῖς ἄλλοις λαφύροις καὶ χαλκοῦν
ἐκόμισε τέθριππον ἐκ Καμερίας" τοῦτο δὲ ἀνέ-
στῆσεν ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου, ποιησάμενος
ἑαυτὸν ὑπὸ Νίκης στεφανούμενον.
ΧΧΥ. Οὕτω δὲ ῥωννυμένοις τοῖς πράγμασιν
οἱ μὲν ἀσθενέστεροι τῶν προσοίκων ὑπεδύοντο
166
ROMULUS, xxut. 6—xxv. 1
twenty-five hundred colonists, on the Ides_ of
April.
XXIV. After this, a plague fell upon the land,
bringing sudden death without previous sickness
upon the people, and afflicting the crops with un-
fruitfulness and the cattle with barrenness. There
was a rain of blood also in the city, so that many
superstitious fears were added to their unavoidable
sufferings. And when similar calamities visited the
people of Laurentum, all agreed at once that it was
the miscarriage of justice for the death of Tatius
and the slain ambassadors which brought the wrath
of heaven down upon both cities. The murderers,
therefore, were delivered up oa both sides and
punished, and the mischief visibly abated. Romulus
also purified the cities with lustral rites, which they
say are celebrated to this day at the Ferentine gate.
But before the pestilence had ceased, the people
of Cameria attacked the Romans and overran their
territory, thinking them incapable of defending
themselves by reason of their distress. Romulus
therefore at once marched against them, overcame
them in battle, and killed six thousand of them.
He also took their city, transplanted half of the sur-
vivors to Rome, and sent to Cameria as colonists
from Rome twice the number he had left there, and
this on the first of August. So many citizens had
he to spare after dwelling in Rome less than sixteen
years. Among other spoils he brought also a bronze
four-horse chariot from Cameria, and dedicated it in
the temple of Vulcan. For it he had a statue made
of himself, with a figure of Victory crowning him.
XXV. The Roman state thus gathering strength,
its weaker neighbours submitted to it, and were
167
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ \ τυγχάν, οντες ἀ9 δεί’α, ς ἠδ. γάπων" οἱ € δὲδὲ ὃ δυνατοὶ \
δεδιότες καὶ φθονοῦντες οὐκ ᾧοντο δεῖν περιορᾶν,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐνίστασθαι τῇaA αὐξήσει καὶ κολούεfdι ν τὸΝν
Ῥωμύλον. πρῶaτn οι δὲ Τυρρηνῶaν Οὐήϊ7ο.- ι, χώ/ρ αν
κεκτημένοι πολλὴAνY καὶ πόλ/ ιν μεγά/λ ην οἰ2 κοῦaν τες,
ἀρχὴν ἐποιήσαντο πολέμου Φιδήνας ἀπαιτεῖν,
ὡς προσήκουσαν αὐτοῖςa . τὸΝ δ᾽ οὐκ ἄ“δ ικον ἦν
μόνον, ἀ᾽ λλὰ Ν καὶ \ γελοῖοa ν, O“ TL κινδυνεύiοd υσι τόaτ ε
καὶ πολεμουμένοις οὐ προσαμύναντες, ἀλλ᾽ ᾽ ἐά-
σαντες ἀπολέσθαι τοὺ\ς ἄνδρας, οἰκί»α ς καὶ γῆaν
ἀ: παιτοῖεa ν ἄBA λλων ἐ3 χόὟνΝ των. καθυβρισθέν,τ ες οὖ4ν
ὑε πὸ Ἂ τοῦa e Ῥωμύλ4 ου ἐ3ν ταῖaς ἀ3.π οκρίσεσι δί, χα διεῖλον
ἑαυτούς, καὶ τῷ μὲν ἐπέκειντο τῷ Φιδηνῶν στρα-
τεύματι, τῷla l δὲ πρὸς « Ῥωμύλον ἀπήντων. πρὸς
μὲΝν οὖ3ν Φιδήν, αις δισχιλίlο4 υς € “Ῥωμαί,ω ν κρατή-/
σαντες ἀ> πέκ, τειναν, ὑe πὸ \ € Ῥωμύλ/ ου δὲ\ νικηθέν»» τες
ὑπὲρ ὀκτακισχιλίους ἀπέβαλον. αὖθις δὲ περὶ
Φιδήνην ἐμαχέσαντο' καὶ τὸ μὲν πλεῖστον ἔργον
αὐτοῦ( ols Ῥωμύλου γενέσθαι, τέχνην τε μετὰ τόλμης
πᾶγισ αν ἐ»π ιδειξαμέν, ου ῥeώv μῃ τε καὶ \ ποδωκείὔᾳὕ
πολὺ δόξαντος ἀνθρωπίνης κρείττονι κεχρῆσθαι,
πάν/ τες ὁ«ςμ ολογοῦσlalι : TO δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ἐνί, ων λεγόμενον
κομιδῇA μυθῶδn ές, ἐ5]σ τι, μᾶnaλ λον δὲA reyὅ λως ἄ» πιστον,
OΨ TL μυρίiωd ν καὶ τετρακισχιλίων πεσόνf των ὑπερ-
ημίσεις ἦσαν odἃ s αὐτὸς ἰδίᾳ χειρὶ Ῥωμύλος ἔ-
κτεινεν, ὅeiπ ου γε Kal Μεσσήνιοι κόLf μπῳ χρήσασθαι
δοκοῦaσ ι περὶ ’ ᾿Αριστομένους λέγοντες ὡς τρὶς
ἑ¢€ κατομφόνια θύσειεν ἀπὸ Λακεδαιμονίων.
4 Γενομέν4 ης δὲΝ τῆaςn τροπῆςa , ἀφεὶς φεύγειν τοὺς
168
ROMULUS, xxv. 1-4
satisfied to be let alone ; but the powerful ones, out
of fear and jealousy, thought they ought not to
tolerate, but resist and check the growing power of
Romulus. And of the Tuscans, the people of Veii,
who possessed much territory and dwelt in a great
city, were the first to begin war! with a demand for
Fidenae, which they said belonged to them. Now
this was not only unjust, it was actually ridiculous,
that they, who had not come to the aid of the
people of Fidenae when they were in the perils of
war, but suffered them to perish, then demanded
their houses and land from those who had come into
possession of them. Accordingly, Romulus gave
them contemptuous answers, upon which they
divided themselves into two armies, attacked Fidenae
with one, and confronted Romulus with the other.
Before Fidenae, then, they overpowered two thousand
Romans and slew them; but they were defeated by
Romulus with a loss of eight thousand men. Once
more a battle was fought near Fidenae, and here all
agree that the victory was chiefly due to Romulus
himself, who displayed every possible combination of
skill and bravery, and seemed endowed with strength
and swiftness far beyond the lot of man. But there
is a statement made by some writers which is alto-
gether fabulous, nay rather, wholly incredible, name-
ly, that of the fourteen thousand Tuscans who fell in
this battle, more than half were slain by Romulus
with his own hand ; for even the Messenians seem to
have been boastfully extravagant in saying that
Aristomenes thrice offered sacrifice for a hundred
Lacedaemonian enemies slain.
After the rout of the enemy, Romulus suffered the
1 Cf, Livy, i. 15, 1-5.
169
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
περιόντας ὁ Ῥωμύλος, ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν ἐχώρει τὴν
πόλιν: οἱ δ᾽ οὐκ ἠνέσχοντο μεγάλης συμφορᾶς
γενομένης, ἀλλὰ δεηθέντες ,ὁμολογίαν ἐποιήσαντο
καὶ “φιλίαν εἰς, ἔτη. ἑκατόν, χώραν τε πολλὴν
προέμενοι τῆς ἑαυτῶν, ἣν Σεπτεμπάγιον καλοῦ-
σιν, ὅπερ ἐστὶν ἑπταμόριον, καὶ τῶν παρὰ τὸν
ποταμὸν ἐκστάντες ἁλοπηγίων, καὶ πεντήκοντα
τῶν ἀρίστων ὁμήρους ἐγχειρίσαντες, ἐθριάμ-
βευσε δὲ καὶ ἀπὸ τούτων εἰδοῖς ᾿Οκτωβρίαις,
ἄλλους τε πολλοὺς αἰχμαλώτους ἔχων καὶ τὸν
ἡγεμόνα τῶν Οὐηΐων, ἄνδρα πρεσβύτην, ἀφρόνως
δόξαντα καὶ παρ᾽ ἡλικίαν ἀπείρως τοῖς πράγμασι
κεχρῆσθαι. διὸ καὶ νῦν ἔτι θύοντες ἐπινίκια,
γέροντα μὲν ἄγουσι δι ἀγορᾶς εἰς Καπιτώλιον
ἐν περιπορφύρῳ, βοῦλλαν αὐτῷ παιδικὴν ἅψαν-
τες, κηρύττει δ᾽ ὁ κῆρυξ Σαρδιανοὺς ὠνίους.
Τυρρηνοὶ γὰρ ἄποικοι Σαρδιανῶν λέγονται, Τυρ-
ρηνικὴ δὲ πόλις οἱ Οὐήϊοι.
XXVI. Τοῦτον ἔσχατον πόλεμον ὁ Ῥωμύλος
ἐπολέμησεν. el0,, δ πολλοί, μᾶλλον δὲ πλὴν
ὀλίγων πάσχουσι πάντες οἱ μεγάλαις καὶ παρα-
λόγοις ἀρθέντες εὐτυχίαις εἰς δύναμιν καὶ ὄγκον,
οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς διέφυγε παθεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκτεθαρρηκὼς
τοῖς πράγμασι καὶ βαρυτέρῳ φρονήματι χρώ-
μενος, ἐξίστατο τοῦ δημοτικοῦ, καὶ παρήλλαττεν
εἰς “μοναρχίαν ἐπαχθῆ καὶ λυποῦσαν ἀπὸ τοῦ
σχήματος “πρῶτον ᾧ κατεσχημάτιζεν ἑαυτόν.
ἁλουργῆ μὲν γὰρ ἐνεδύετο χιτῶνα, καὶ τήβεννον 34
ἐφόρει περιπόρφυρον, ἐν , θρόνῳ δ᾽ ἀνακλίτῳ
καθήμενος ἐχρημάτιζεν. ἦσαν δὲ περὶ αὐτὸν
ἀεὶ τῶν νέων οἱ καλούμενοι Κέλερες, ἀπὸ τῆς
περὶ τὰς ὑπουργίας ὀξύτητος. ἐβάδιζον δὲ πρόσ-
170
ROMULUS, xxv. 4—XxvI. 2
survivors to escape, and moved upon their city itself.
But they could not hold out after so great a reverse,
and suing for peace, made a treaty of friendship
for a hundred years, giving up a large portion of
their territory, called Septempagium, or the Seven
Districts, abandoning their salt-works along the river,
and delivering up fifty of their chief men as hostages.
Romulus also celebrated a triumph for this victory on
the Ides of October, having in his train, besides
many other captives, the leader of the Veientes, an
elderly man, who seems to have conducted the
campaign unwisely, and without the experience to be
expected of his years. Wherefore to this very day,
in offering a sacrifice for victory, they lead an old
man through the forum to the Capitol, wearing a
boy’s toga with a bulla attached to it, while the
herald cries: “ Sardians for sale !”’ For the Tuscans
are said to be colonists from Sardis, and Veii is a
Tuscan city.
XXVI. This was the last war waged by Romulus.
Afterwards, like many, nay, like almost all men who
have been lifted by great and unexpected strokes of
good fortune to power and dignity, even he was em-
boldened by his achievements to take on a haughtier
bearing, to renounce his popular ways, and to change
to the ways of a monarch, which were made hateful
and vexatious first by the state which he assumed.
For he dressed in a scarlet tunic, and wore over it a
toga bordered with purple, and sat on a recumbent
throne when he gave audience. And he had always
about him some young men called Celeres, from
their snifiness in doing service.1 Others, too, went
1 Cf. chapter x. 2; and Livy, i. 15, 8.
171
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
θεν ἕτεροι βακτηρίαις ἀνείργοντες τὸν ὄχλον,
ὑπεζωσμένοι δὲ ἱμάντας, ὥστε συνδεῖν εὐθὺς ods
προστάξειε.
Τὸ δὲ δῆσαι Λατῖνοι πάλαι μὲν λιγᾶρε, νῦν δὲ
ἀλλιγᾶρε καλοῦσιν: ὅθεν οἵ τε ῥαβδοῦχοι λικτώ-
pets, at τε ῥάβδοι βάκυλα καλοῦνται, διὰ τὸ
χρῆσθαι τότε βακτηρίαις. εἰκὸς δὲ λικτώρεις
ἐντιθεμένου τοῦ κάππα νῦν ὀνομάζεσθαι, πρό-
τερον λιτώρεις, ᾿Ελληνιστὶ δὲ λειτουργοὺς ὄντας.
λήϊτον γὰρ τὸ δημόσιον ἔτι νῦν “ἕλληνες καὶ
λαὸν τὸ πλῆθος ὀνομάζουσιν.
XXVII. ᾿Επεὶ δὲ τοῦ πάππου Νομήτορος ἐν
"AXByn τελευτήσαντος, αὐτῷ βασιλεύειν προσῆκον,
εἰς μέσον ἔθηκε τὴν πολιτείαν δημαγωγῶν, καὶ
κατ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἀπεδείκνυεν ἄρχοντα τοῖς ᾿Αλβα-
νοῖς, ἐδίδαξε καὶ τοὺς ἐν Ρώμῃ δυνατοὺς ἀβασί-
λευτον ζητεῖν καὶ αὐτόνομον πολιτείαν, ἀρχο-
μένους ἐν μέρει καὶ ἄρχοντας. οὐδὲ γὰρ οἱ
καλούμενοι πατρίκιοι πραγμάτων μετεῖχον, ἀλλ᾽
ὄνομα καὶ σχῆμα περιῆν ἔντιμον αὐτοῖς, ἔθους ἕνε-
κα μᾶλλον ἢ γνώμης ἀθροιζομένοις εἰς τὸ βουλευ-
τήριον. εἶτα σιγῇ προστάττοντος ἠκροῶντο" καὶ
τῷ πρότεροι τὸ δεδογμένον ἐκείνῳ πυθέσθαι τῶν
πολλῶν πλέον ἔχοντες ἀπηλλάττοντο. καὶ τἄλλα
μὲν ἦν ἐλάττονα: τῆς δὲ γῆς τὴν δορίκτητον
[72
ROMULUS, xxvi. 2—xxvil. 2
before him with staves, keeping off the populace, and
they were girt with thongs, with which to bind at
once those whom he ordered to be bound.
To bind, in the Latin language, was formerly
“ligare,” though now it is “alligare” ; whence the
wand-bearers are called “lictores,” and the wands
themselves ‘ bacula,” from the use, in the time of
Romulus, of “ bakteriai,’” which is the Greek word
for staves.1 But it is likely that the “c” in the word
“lictores,’ as now used, has been added, and that
the word was formerly “litores,” which is the Greek
‘leitourgoi,’ meaning public servants. For the Greeks
still call a public hall “leiton,” and the people
laos: 2
XXVII. But when his grandfather Numitor died
in Alba, and its throne devolved upon Romulus,
he courted the favour of the people by putting the
government in their hands, and appointed an annual
ruler for the Albans. In this way he taught the
influential men at Rome also to seek after a form of
government which was independent and without a
king, where all in turn were subjects and rulers.
For by this time not even the so-called patricians
had any share in the administration of affairs, but a
name and garb of honour was all that was left them,
and they assembled in their council-chamber more
from custom than for giving advice. Once there,
they listened in silence to the commands of the
king, and went away with this advantage only over
the multitude, that they learned earlier what he had
decreed. The rest of his proceedings were of lesser
importance ; but when of his own motion merely
1 For this assumed use of Greek words by the Romans,
cf. chapter xv. 3.
ἐν ΑΕ
VOL. I.
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
αὐτὸς ἐφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ Sacdpevos τοῖς στρατιώταις,
καὶ τοὺς ὁμήρους τοῖς Οὐηΐοις ἀποδούς, οὔτε
πεισθέντων οὔτε βουλομένων ἐκείνων, ἔδοξε κο-
μιδῇ τὴν γερουσίαν προπηλακίζειν. ὅθεν εἰς
ὑποψίαν καὶ διαβολὴν ἐνέπεσε παραλόγως ἀφα-
νισθέντος αὐτοῦ μετ᾽ ὀλίγον χρόνον. ἠφανίσθη
δὲ νώναις ᾿Ιουλίαις, ὡς νῦν ὀνομάζουσιν, ὡς δὲ
τότε, Κυντιλίαις, οὐδὲν εἰπεῖν βέβαιον οὐδὲ
ὁμολογούμενον πυθέσθαι περὶ τῆς τελευτῆς ἀπο-
λιπών, ἀλλ᾽ ἢ τὸν χρόνον, ὡς προείρηται. δρᾶται
γὰρ ἔτι νῦν ὅμοια τῷ τότε πάθει πολλὰ κατὰ τὴν
ἡμέραν ἐκείνην.
Οὐ δεῖ δὲ θαυμάζειν τὴν ἀσάφειαν, ὅπου Σκη-
πίωνος ᾿Αφρικανοῦ μετὰ δεῖπνον οἴκοι τελευτή-
σαντος, οὐκ ἔσχε πίστιν οὐδ᾽ ἔλεγχον ὁ τρόπος
τῆς τελευτῆς, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν αὐτομάτως ὄντα φύσει
νοσώδη καμεῖν λέγουσιν, οἱ δ᾽ αὐτὸν ὑφ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ
φαρμάκοις ἀποθανεῖν, οἱ δὲ τοὺς ἐχθροὺς τὴν
ἀναπνοὴν ἀπολαβεῖν αὐτοῦ νύκτωρ παρεισπεσόν-
Tas. καίτοι Σκηπίων ἔἔ κειτο νεκρὸς ἐμφανὴς ἰδεῖν
πᾶσι, καὶ τὸ σῶμα παρεῖχε πᾶσιν ὁρώμενον
ὑποψίαν τινὰ τοῦ πάθους καὶ κατανόησιν'
Ῥωμύλου δὲ ἄφνω μεταλλάξαντος οὔτε μέρος
ὥφθη σώματος οὔτε λείψανον ἐσθῆτος. ἀλλ’ οἱ
μὲν εἴκαξον ἐἐν τῷ ἱερῷ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου τοὺς βου-
λευτὰς ἐπαναστάντας αὐτῷ καὶ διαφθείραντας,
νείμαντας τὸ σῶμα καὶ μέρος ἕκαστον ἐνθέμενον εἰς
τὸν κόλπον ἐξενεγκεῖν" ἕτεροι δ᾽ οἴονται μήτε ἐν
τῷ ἱερῷ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου μήτε μόνων τῶν βουλευ-
τῶν παρόντων γενέσθαι τὸν ἀφανισμόν, ἀλλὰ
τυχεῖν μὲν ἔξω περὶ τὸ καλούμενον αἰγὸς ἕλος
174
ROMULUS, xxv. 2-6
he divided the territory acquired in war among
his soldiers, and gave back their hostages to
the Veientes, without the consent or wish of the
patricians, he was thought to be insulting their
senate outright. Wherefore suspicion and calumny
fell upon that body when he disappeared unaccount-
ably a short time after. He disappeared on the
Nones of July, as they now call the month, then
Quintilis, leaving no certain account nor even any
generally accepted tradition of his death, aside from
the date of it, which I have just given. For on that
day many ceremonies are still performed which bear
a likeness to what then came to pass.
Nor need we wonder at this uncertainty, since
although Scipio Africanus died at home after dinner,
there is no convincing proof of the manner of his
end, but some say that he passed away naturally,
being of a sickly habit, some that he died of
poison administered by his own hand, and some that
his enemies broke into his house at night and
smothered him. And yet Scipio's dead body lay
exposed for all to see, and all who beheld it formed
therefrom some suspicion and conjecture of what had
happened to it; whereas Romulus disappeared sud-
denly, and no portion of his body or fragment of his
clothing remained to be seen. But some conjectured
that the senators, convened in the temple of Vulcan,
fell upon him and slew him, then cut his body
in pieces, put each a portion into the folds of his
robe, and so carried it away. Others think that it
was neither in the temple of Vulcan nor when the
senators alone were present that he disappeared,
but that he was holding an assembly of the people
175
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐκκλησίαν ἄγοντα Tov Ῥωμύλον, ἄφνω δὲ θαυμα-
στὰ καὶ κρείττονα λόγου περὶ τὸν ἀέρα πάθη
γενέσθαι καὶ μεταβολὰς ἀπίστους" τοῦ μὲν γὰρ
ἡλίου τὸ φῶς ἐπιλιπεῖν, νύκτα δὲ κατασχεῖν, οὐ
πρᾳεῖαν, οὐδὲ ἥσυχον, ἀλλὰ βροντάς τε δεινὰς
καὶ πνοὰς ἀνέμων ζάλην ἐλαυνόντων πανταχόθεν
ἔχουσαν: ἐν δὲ τούτῳ τὸν μὲν πολὺν ὄχλον
σκεδασθέντα φυγεῖν, τοὺς δὲ δυνατοὺς συστραφῆς-
ναι μετ᾽ ἀλλήλων" ἐπεὶ δ᾽ἔ ληξεν ἡἡ ταραχὴ καὶ
τὸ φῶς ἐξέλαμψε καὶ τῶν πολλῶν εἰς ταὐτὸ
πάλιν συνερχομένων ζήτησις ἣν τοῦ βασιλέως
καὶ πόθος, οὐκ ἐᾶν τοὺς δυνατοὺς ἐξετάζειν οὐδὲ
πολυπραγμονεῖν, ἀλλὰ τιμᾶν παρακελεύεσθαι 35
πᾶσι καὶ σέβεσθαι Ῥωμύλον, ὡς ἀνηρπασμένον
εἰς θεοὺς καὶ θεὸν εὐμενῆ γενησόμενον αὐτοῖς ἐκ
χρηστοῦ βασιλέως. τοὺς μὲν οὖν πολλοὺς ταῦ-
τα “πειθομένους καὶ χαίροντας ἀπαλλάττεσθαι
μετ᾽ ἐλπίδων ἀγαθῶν προσκυνοῦντας" εἶναι δέ
τινας οἱ τὸ πρᾶγμα πικρῶς καὶ δυσμενῶς ἐξελέγ-
χοντες ἐτάραττον τοὺς πατρικίους καὶ διέβαλλον,
ὡς ᾿ἀβέλτερα τὸν δῆμον ἀναπείθοντας, αὐτοὺς δὲ
τοῦ βασιλέως αὐτόχειρας os
XXVIII. Οὕτως οὖν ἄνδρα τῶν πατρικίων
γένει πρῶτον, ἤθει τε δοκιμώτατον, αὐτῷ τε
“Ῥωμύλῳ πιστὸν καὶ συνήθη, τῶν ἀπ᾽ "Ἄλβης
ἐποίκων, ᾿Ιούλιον Πρόκλον, εἰς ἀγορὰν προελ-
θόντα 5 καὶ τῶν ἁγιωτάτων ἔνορκον ἱερῶν ἁψά-
μενον εἰπεῖν ἐν πᾶσιν ὡς ὁδὸν αὐτῷ βαδίζοντι
“Ῥωμύλος ἐξ ἐναντίας προσιὼν φανείη, καλὸς μὲν
1 οὕτως οὖν Coraés, following Stephanus and C, has οὕτως
οὖν ταραττομένων (while such disorder prevatled).
2 προελθόντα MSS., Coraés, Sintenis!: παρελθόντα.
176
ROMULUS, xxvit. 6-xxvil. 1
outside the city near the so-called Goat’s Marsh,!
when suddenly strange and unaccountable disorders
with incredible changes filled the air; the light of
the sun failed, and night came down upon them,
not with peace and quiet, but with awful peals of
thunder and furious blasts driving rain from every
quarter, during which the multitude dispersed and
fled, but the nobles gathered closely together ; and
when the storm had ceased, and the sun shone out,
and the multitude, now gathered together again
in the same place as before, anxiously sought for
their king, the nobles would not suffer them to
inquire into his disappearance nor busy themselves
about it, but exhorted them all to honour and
revere Romulus, since he had been caught up into
heaven, and was to be a benevolent god for them
instead of a good king. The multitude, accord-
ingly, believing this and rejoicing in it, went away
to worship him with good hopes of his favour ; but
there were some, it is said, who tested the matter
in a bitter and hostile spirit, and confounded the
patricians with the accusation of imposing a silly tale
upon the people, and of being themselves the
murderers of the king.
XXVIII. At this pass, then, it is said that one of
the patricians, a man of noblest birth, and of the
most reputable character, a trusted and intimate
friend also of Romulus himself, and one of the
colonists from Alba, Julius Proculus by name,? went
into the forum and solemnly swore by the most
sacred emblems before all the people that, as he was
travelling on the road, he had seen Romulus coming
1 Cf, Livy, i. 16,1-4, 2 Cf. Livy, i. 16, 5-8.
177
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὀφθῆναι Kat μέγας, ὡς οὔποτε πρόσθεν, ὅπλοις δὲ
λαμπροῖς καὶ φλέγουσι κεκοσμημένος. αὐτὸς μὲν
οὖν ἐκπλαγεὶς πρὸς τὴν ὄψιν “ἾὮ βασιλεῦ,"
avat, “τί δὴ παθὼν ἢ διανοηθεὶς ἡμᾶς μὲν ἐν
αἰτίαις ἀδίκοις καὶ πονηραῖς, πᾶσαν δὲ τὴν πόλιν
ὀρφανὴν ἐν μυρίῳ πένθει προλέλοιπας;᾽ " ἐκεῖνον
δ᾽ ἀποκρίνασθαι, τ Θεοῖς ἔδοξεν, ὦ Πρόκλε, τοσοῦ-
τον ἡμᾶς γενέσθαι μετ᾽᾿ ἀνθρώπων χρόνον, ἐκεῖθεν
ὄντας," καὶ πόλιν ἐπ᾽ ἀρχῇ καὶ δόξῃ μεγίστῃ
κτίσαντας αὖθις οἰκεῖν οὐρανόν. ἀλλὰ χαῖρε, καὶ
φράζε Ῥωμαίοις ὅτι σωφροσύνην μετ᾽ ἀνδρείας
ἀσκοῦντες ἐπὶ πλεῖστον ἀνθρωπίνης ἀφίξονται
δυνάμεως. ἐγὼ δὲ ὑμῖν εὐμενὴς ἔσομαι δαίμων
Κυρῖνος." ταῦτα πιστὰ μὲν εἶναι τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις
ἐδόκει διὰ τὸν τρόπον τοῦ λέγοντος καὶ διὰ τὸν
ὅρκον: οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ δαιμόνιόν τι συν-
ἐφάψασθαι πάθος ὅὅ μοιον ἐνθουσιασμῷ' μηδένα
γὰρ ἀντειπεῖν, ἀλλὰ πᾶσαν ὑπόνοιαν καὶ δια-
βολὴν ἀφέντας εὔχεσθαι Κυρίνῳ καὶ θεοκλυ-
τεῖν ἐκεῖνον.
Ἔοικε μὲν οὖν ταῦτα τοῖς ὑφ᾽ “Ελλήνων περί
te Αριστέου τοῦ Ἱ]ροκοννησίου καὶ Κλεομήδους
τοῦ ᾿Αστυπαλαιέως μυθολογουμένοις. ᾿Αριστέαν
μὲν γὰρ ἔν τινι κναφείῳ τελευτῆσαί φασι, καὶ τὸ
σῶμα μετιόντων αὐτοῦ τῶν φίλων ἀφανὲς οἴχε-
σθαι" λέγειν δέ τινᾶς εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀποδημίας ἥκοντας
ἐντυχεῖν ᾿Αριστέᾳ τὴν ἐπὶ Κρότωνος πορευομένῳ"
Κλεομήδη δέ, ῥἡ ώμῃ καὶ μεγέθει σώματος ὑπερ-
φυᾶ γενόμενον ἔμπληκτόν τε τῷ τρόπῳ καὶ
μανικὸν ὄντα, πολλὰ δρᾶν βίαια, καὶ τέλος ἔν
1 ἐκεῖθεν ὄντας MSS., Coraés, Sintenis!, and Bekker;
Sintenis? transposes to follow οὐρανόν.
178
ROMULUS, xxvin. 1-4
to meet him, fair and stately to the eye as never
before, and arrayed in bright and shining armour.
He himself, then, affrighted at the sight, had said:
“ O King, what possessed thee, or what purpose hadst
thou, that thou hast left us patricians a prey to unjust
and wicked accusations, and the whole city sorrowing
without end at the loss of its father?’’ Whereupon
Romulus had replied: “It was the pleasure of the
gods, O Proculus, from whom I came, that I should
be with mankind only a short time, and that after
founding a city destined to be the greatest on earth
for empire and glory, I should dwell again in heaven.
So farewell, and tell the Romans that if they practise
self-restraint, and add to it valour, they will reach
the utmost heights of human power. And I will be
your propitious deity, Quirinus.”” These things seemed
to the Romans worthy of belief, from the character
of the man who related them, and from the oath
which he had taken; moreover, some influence from
heaven also, akin to inspiration, laid hold upon their
emotions, for no man contradicted Proculus, but all
put aside suspicion and calumny and prayed to
Quirinus, and honoured him as a god.
Now this is like the fables which the Greeks tell
about Aristeas of Proconnesus! and Cleomedes of
Astypaleia.? For they say that Aristeas died in
a fuller’s shop, and that when his friends came to
fetch away his body, it had vanished out of sight;
and presently certain travellers returning from
abroad said they had met Aristeas journeying towards
Croton. Cleomedes also, who was of gigantic
strength and stature, of uncontrolled temper, and
like a mad man, is said to have done many deeds
1 Cf. Herodotus, iv. 14 f. 2 Cf. Pausanias, ix. 6 ff.
179
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τινι διδασκαλείῳ/ παί/δ ων τὸΝν ὑe περεί/δ οντα τὴἊνν
ὀροφὴν κίονα πατάξαντα τῇ χειρὶ κλάσαι μέσον
καὶ τὴν στέγην καταβαλεῖν. ἀπολομένων δὲ τῶν
παίδων διωκόμενον εἰς κιβωτὸν καταφυγεῖν
μεγάλην, καὶ τὸ πῶμα κατακλείσαντα συνέχειν
ἐb ντός, , ὥ[4σ τε ἀ3 ποσπάσ/ αι μὴ\ δύ/ νασθαι πολλοὺς\
ὁμοῦr n βιαζομέν/ ους: κατασχίσ/ αντας δὲ THY κιβω-
τὸν οὔτε ζῶa ντα To\v ἄνθρωπον εὑρεῖanν οὔτε νεκρόν.
ἐκπλαγέντας οὖν ἀποστεῖλa αι θεοπρό,π ους εἰς
Δελφούς,, οἷς τὴ\ν ΠυθίαV4 ν εἰπεῖtνal "
"Ἔσχατος ἡρώων Κλεομήδης ᾿Αστυπαλαιεύς.
λέγεται δὲ καὶ τὸν ᾿Αλκμήνης ἐκκομιζομένης
νεκρὸν ἄδηλον γενέσθαι, λίθον δὲ φανῆναι κεί-
μενον ἐπὶ τῆς κλίνης. καὶ ὅλως πολλὰ τοιαῦτα
μυθολογοῦσι, παρὰ τὸ εἰκὸς ἐκθειάξοντες τὰ
θνητὰ τῆς φύσεως ἅμα τοῖς θείοις.
᾿Απογνῶναι μὲν οὖν παντάπασι τὴν θειότητα
τῆς ἀρετῆς ἀνόσιον καὶ ἀγεννές, οὐρανῷ δὲ μι-
γνύειν γῆν ἀβέλτερον. ἐατέον οὖν, ἐχομένοις τῆς
ἀσφαλείας, κατὰ ἸΤΠίνδαρον, ὡς
σῶμα μὲν πάντων ἕπεται θανάτῳ περισθενεῖ,
ζωὸν δ᾽ ἔτι λείπεται αἰῶνος εἴδωλον: τὸ γάρ
ἐστι μόνον
ἐκ θεῶν.
ἥκει γὰρ ἐκεῖθεν, ἐκεῖ δ᾽ ἄνεισιν, οὐ μετὰ σώ-
ματος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐὰν ὅτι μάλιστα σώματος ἀπαλ-
λαγῇ καὶ διακριθῇ καὶ γένηται καθαρὸν παντά-
πασι καὶ ἄσαρκον καὶ ἁγνόν. Ain γὰρ ψυχὴ
180
ROMULUS, xxvii. 4-7
of violence, and finally, in a school for boys, he
smote with his fist the pillar which supported the
roof, broke it in two, and brought down the house.
The boys were killed, and Cleomedes, being pursued,
took refuge in a great chest, closed the lid down,
and held it so fast that many men with their united
strength could not pull it up; but when they broke
the chest to pieces, the man was not to be found,
alive or dead. In their dismay, then, they sent
messengers to consult the oracle at Delphi, and the
Pythian priestess gave them this answer :—
“ Last of the heroes he, Cleomedes, Astypalaean.”
It is said also that the body of Alemene disappeared,
as they were carrying her forth for burial, and a
stone was seen lying on the bier instead. In short,
many such fables are told by writers who improbably
ascribe divinity to the mortal features in human
nature, as well as to the divine.
At any rate, to reject entirely the divinity of
human virtue, were impious and base; but to mix
heaven with earth is foolish. Let us therefore take
the safe course and grant, with Pindar,! that
“Our bodies all must follow death’s supreme
behest,
But something living still survives, an image of
life, for this alone
Comes from the gods.”
Yes, it comes from them, and to them it returns, not
with its body, but only when it is most completely
separated and set free from the body, and becomes
altogether pure, fleshless, and undefiled. For “a dry
1 Fragment 131, Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Gr. i.4 p. 427.
181
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀρίστη, καθ᾽ Ἡράκλειτον, ὥσπερ ἀστραπὴ νέ- 86
φους διαπταμένη τοῦ σώματος. ἡ δὲ σώματι
πεφυρμένη καὶ περίπλεως σώματος, οἷον ἀναθυ-
μίασις ἐμβριθὴς καὶ ὁμιχλώδης, δυσέξαπτός €ἐσ τι
καὶ δυσανακόμιστος. οὐδὲν οὖν δεῖ τὰ σώματα
τῶν , ἀγαθῶν συναναπέμπειν παρὰ φύσιν εἰς οὐ-
ρανόν, ἀλλὰ τὰς ἀρετὰς καὶ τὰς ψυχὰς παντά-
πασιν οἴεσθαι κατὰ φύσιν καὶ δίκην θείαν ἐἐκ μὲν
ἀνθρώπων εἰς ἥρωας, ἐκ δ᾽ ἡρώων εἰς δαίμονας,
ἐκ δὲ δαιμόνων, ἂν τέλεον ὥσπερ ἐν τελετῇ καθαρ-
θῶσι καὶ ὁσιωθῶσιν ἅπαν ἀποφυγοῦσαι τὸ
θνητὸν καὶ παθητικόν, οὐ νόμῳ πόλεως, ἀλλ᾽
ἀληθείᾳ καὶ κατὰ τὸν εἰκότα λόγον εἰς θεοὺς
ἀναφέρεσθαι, τὸ κάλλιστον καὶ μακαριώτατον
τέλος ἀπολαβούσας.
XXIX. Τὴν δὲ γενομένην ἐπωνυμίαν τῷ Ῥω-
μύλῳ τὸν Κυρῖνον οἱ μὲν ᾿Ενυάλιον προσαγορεύ-
ovow: οἱ δὲ πολίτην, ὅτι καὶ τοὺς πολίτας
Κυρίτας ὠνόμαζον' οἱ δὲ τὴν αἰχμὴν ἢ τὸ δόρυ
τοὺς παλαιοὺς κῦριν ὀνομάζειν, καὶ Κυρίτιδος
Ἥρας ἄγαλμα καλεῖν ἐπ᾽ αἰχμῆς ἱδρυμένον,ἐ ν δὲ
τῇ Ῥηγίᾳ δόρυ καθιδρυμένον Ἄρεα προσαγορ-
εύειν, καὶ δόρατι τοὺς ἐν πολέμοις ἀριστεύοντας
γεραίρειν' ὡς οὖν ἀρήϊόν τινα τὸν Ῥωμύλον ἢ
αἰχμητὴν θεὸν ὀνομασθῆναι Κυρῖνον. ἱερὸν μὲν
οὖν αὐτοῦ κατεσκευασμένον ἐν τῷ λόφῳ τῷ Κυ-
ρίνᾳ προσαγορευομένῳ δι’ ἐκεῖνον, ἡ δ᾽ ἡμέρα ἡ
μετήλλαξεν, ὄχλου φυγὴ καλεῖται, . καὶ νῶναι
Καπρατῖναι διὰ τὸ θύειν εἰς τὸ τῆς αἰγὸς ἕλος ἐκ
1 Ain γὰρ ψυχὴ ἀρίστη Bekker: αὕτη γὰρ ψυχὴ ξηρὴ καὶ
ἀρίστη.
2 οἱ δὲ πολίτην, ὅτι Coraés and Bekker, with two Bodleian
MSS. (B8?): of δὲ ὅτι.
182
ROMULUS, xxvii. 7—xx1x. 2
soul is best,’ according to Heracleitus,! and it flies
from the body as lightning flashes from a cloud. But
the soul which is contaminated with body, and sur-
feited with body, like a damp and heavy exhalation,
is slow to release itself and slow to rise towards its
source. We must not, therefore, violate nature by
sending the bodies of good men with their souls to
heaven, but implicitly believe that their virtues and
their souls, in accordance with nature and divine
justice, ascend from men to heroes, from heroes to
demi-gods, and from demi-gods, after they have been
made pure and holy, as in the final rites of initiation,
and have freed themselves from mortality and sense,
to gods, not by civic law, but in very truth and
according to right reason, thus achieving the fairest
and most blessed consummation.
XXIX. To the surname of Quirinus bestowed
on Romulus, some give the meaning of Mars,
others that of Citizen, because the citizens were
called Quirites; but others say that the ancients
called the spear-head (or the whole spear) “ quiris,”
and gave the epithet Quiritis to the Juno whose
statue leans upon a spear, and the name Mars to
a spear consecrated in the Regia, and a spear as a
prize to those who performed great exploits in war ;
and that Romulus was therefore called Quirinus
as a martial, or spear-mielding, god. However that
may be, a temple in his honour is built on the hill
called Quirinalis after him, and the day on which
he vanished is called People’s Flight, and Capra-
tine Nones, because they go out of the city and
1 Fragment 74 (Bywater, Heracliti Hphesii reliquiae, p. 30).
183
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πόλεως κατιόντας" τὴν γὰρ αἶγα κάπραν ὀνομά-
ζουσιν. ἐξιόντες δὲ πρὸς τὴν θυσίαν πολλὰ τῶν
ἐπιχωρίων ὀνομάτων φθέγγονται μετὰ βοῆς, οἷον
Μάρκου, Λουκίου, [᾿αἴου, μιμούμενοι τὴν τότε
τροπὴν καὶ ἀνάκλησιν ἀλλήλων μετὰ δέους καὶ
ταραχῆς.
"Ἔνιοι μέντοι τὸ μίμημα, τοῦτό φασι μὴ φυγῆς,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπείξεως εἶναι καὶ σπουδῆς, εἰς αἰτίαν
τοιαύτην ἀναφέροντες τὸν λόγον. ἐπεὶ Κελτοὶ
τὴν Ῥώμην καταλαβόντες ἐξεκρούσθησαν ὑπὸ
Καμίλλου καὶ δι’ ἀσθένειαν ἡ πόλις οὐκέτι pa-
δίως ἑαυτὴν ἀνελάμβανεν, ἐστράτευσαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτὴν
πολλοὶ τῶν Λατίνων, ἄρχοντα Λίβιον ἸΠοστού-
μιον ἔχοντες. οὗτος δὲ καθίσας τὸν στρατὸν οὐ
πρόσω τῆς Ῥώμης ἔπεμπε κήρυκα, βούλεσθαι
λέγων τοὺς Λατίνους ἐκλιποῦσαν ἤδη τὴν πα-
λαιὰν οἰκειότητα καὶ συγγένειαν ἐκζωπυρῆσαι,
καιναῖς αὖθις ἀνακραθέντων ἐπιγαμίαις τῶν
γενῶν. ἂν οὖν πέμψωσι παρθένους τε συχνὰς
καὶ γυναικῶν τὰς ἀνάνδρους, εἰρήνην ἔσεσθαι καὶ
φιλίαν αὐτοῖς, ὡς ὑπῆρξε πρὸς Σαβίνους πρό-
τερον ἐκ τῶν ὁμοίων. ταῦτα ἀκούσαντες οἱ Ῥω-
μαῖοι τόν τε πόλεμον ἐφοβοῦντο καὶ τὴν παρά.
δοσιν τῶν γυναικῶν οὐδὲν αἰχμαλωσίας ἐπιεικέ:-
στερον ἔχειν ἐνόμιξον. ἀποροῦσι δ᾽ αὐτοῖς θερά-
παινα Φιλωτίς, ὡς δ᾽ ἔνιοι: λέγουσι, Τουτόλα καλου-
μένη, συνεβούλευσε μηδέτερα ποιεῖν, ἀλλὰ χρησα-
μένους δόλῳ διαφυγεῖν ἅμα τὸν πόλεμον καὶ τὴν
ἐξομήρευσιν. ἦν δ᾽ ὁ δόλος αὐτήν τε τὴν Diro-
τίδα καὶ σὺν αὐτῇ θεραπαινίδας εὐπρεπεῖς
κοσμήσαντας ὡς ἐλευθέρας ἀποστεῖλαι πρὸς τοὺς
πολεμίους: εἶτα νύκτωρ τὴν Φιλωτίδα πυρσὸν
184
ROMULUS, xxix. 2-5
sacrifice at the Goat’s Marsh; and “ capra’”’ is their
word for ske-goat. And as they go forth to the
sacrifice, they shout out many local names, like
Marcus, Lucius, and Caius, in imitation of the way
in which, on the day when Romulus disappeared,
they called upon one another in fear and confusion.
Some, however, say that this imitation is not one
of flight, but of haste and eagerness, and explain it
as referring to the following occasion. After the
Gauls had captured Rome and been driven out by
Camillus, and when the city was still too weak to
recover itself readily, an expedition was made against
it by many of the Latins, under the command of
Livius Postumius. This general stationed his army
not far from Rome, and sent a herald with the
message that the Latins wished to renew their
ancient relationship and affinity with the Romans, by
fresh intermarriages between the two peoples. If,
therefore, the Romans would send them a goodly
number of virgins and their widows, they should
have peace and friendship, such as they had formerly
made with the Sabines on the like terms. On hear-
ing this message, the Romans hesitated between
going to war, which they feared, and the surrender
of their women, which they thought no more desir-
able than to have them captured. But while they
were in this perplexity, a serving-maid called Philotis
(or, as some say, Tutola) advised them to do neither,
but by the use of a stratagem to escape alike the
war and the giving of hostages. Now the stratagem
was this, that they should send to the enemy Philotis
herself, and with her other comely serving-maids
arrayed like free-born women; then in the night
Philotis was to display a signal-fire, at which the
185
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἄραι, τοὺς δὲ Ῥωμαίους ἐπελθεῖν μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων
καὶ χρήσασθαι κοιμωμένοις τοῖς πολεμίοις. ταῦτα
δ᾽ ἐδρᾶτο πεισθέντων. τῶν Λατίνων" καὶ τὸν πυρσὸν
ἀνέσχεν ἡ Φιλωτὶςἐ ἔκ τινος ἐρινεοῦ, περισχοῦσα
προκαλύμμασι καὶ παραπετάσμασιν ὄπισθεν,
ὥστε τοῖς πολεμίοις ἀόρατον εἶναι τὸ φῶς, τοῖς δὲ
“Ῥωμαίοις κατάδηλον. ὡς οὖν ἐπεῖδον, εὐθὺς ἐξήε-
σαν ἐπειγόμενοι καὶ διὰ τὴν ἔπειξιν ἀλλήλους περὶ
τὰς πύλας ἀνακαλοῦντες πολλάκις. ἐμπεσόντες δὲ
τοῖς ,πολεμίοις ἀπροσδοκήτως καὶ κρατήσαντες,
ἐπινίκιον “ἄγουσι τὴν ἑορτήν. καὶ Καπρατῖναι
μὲν αἱ νῶναι καλοῦνται διὰ τὸν ἐρινεὸν καπρί-
φικον ὑπὸ Ρωμαίων ὀνομαζόμενον, ἑστιῶσι δὲ
τὰς γυναῖκας ἔξω, συκῆς κλάδοις σκιαζομένας.
αἱ δὲ θεραπαινίδες ἀγείρουσι περιϊοῦσαι καὶ 37
παίζουσιν, εἶτα πληγαῖς καὶ βολαῖς λίθων χρῶν-
ται πρὸς ἀλλήλας, ὡς καὶ τότε τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις
παραγενόμεναι καὶ συναγωνισάμεναι μαχομένοις.
Ταῦτ᾽ οὖν" πολλοὶ προσίενται τῶν συγγρα-
φέων, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν χρῆσθαι τῇ
ἀνακλήσει τῶν “ὀνομάτων καὶ τὸ πρὸς τὸ ἕλος τὸ
τῆς αἰγὸς ὡς ἐπὶ θυσίαν Σ βαδίζοντας ἔοικε τῷ
προτέρῳ λόγῳ προστίθεσθαι ,μᾶλλον, εἰ μὴ νὴ
Δία τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας ἐν χρόνοις ἑτέροις ἀμφό-
τερα τὰ πάθη συνέτυχε γενέσθαι. λέγεται δὲ
Ῥωμύλος τέσσαρα μὲν ἔτη καὶ πεντήκοντα γε-
γονώς, ὄγδοον δὲ βασιλεύων ἐκεῖνο καὶ τρια-
κοστὸν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων ἀφανισθῆναι.
1 οὖν with Cobet: οὐ (by few).
2 θυσίαν with Coraés (as in xxix. 2): θάλατταν (sea).
186
ROMULUS, xxix. 5-7
Romans were to come in arms and deal with their
enemies while asleep. This was done, with the
approval of the Latins, and Philotis displayed the
signal-fire from a certain wild fig-tree, screening it
behind with coverlets and draperies, so that its light
was unseen by the enemy, but visible to the Romans.
When, accordingly, they beheld it, they sallied forth
at once in great haste, and because of their haste
calling upon one another many times at the gates.
They fell upon their enemies when they least
expected it and mastered them, and now celebrate
this festival in memory of their victory. And the
Nones on which it falls are called Capratine from
the wild fig-tree, the Roman name for which is
“ caprificus,’ and they feast the women outside the
city in booths made of fig-tree boughs. Then the
serving-maids run about in companies and play, after
which they strike and throw stones at one another,
in token that on that earlier day they assisted the
Romans and shared with them in their battle.
These details are accepted by many historians,
but their calling out one another’s names in the
day time, and their marching out to the Goat’s
Marsh as for sacrifice, seem to be more consonant
with the former story, unless, to be sure, both
actions happened to take place on the same day in
different periods. Romulus is said to have been
fifty-four years of age, and in the thirty-eighth year
of his reign when he disappeared from among
men.
1 Cf. Camillus, xxxiii.
187
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
@HSEQS KAI POMYAOY ΣΎΓΚΡΙΣΙΣ
I.“A μὲν οὖν ἄξια μνήμης πυθέσθαι περὶ
Ῥωμύλου καὶ Θησέως συμβέβηκεν ἡμῖν, ταῦτ᾽
ἐστί. φαίνεται δὲ πρῶτον ὁ μὲν ἐκ προαιρέσεως,
οὐδενὸς ἀναγκάζοντος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξὸν ἀδεῶς ἐν Τροι-
ζῆνι βασιλεύειν διαδεξάμενον ἀρχὴν οὐκ ἄδοξον,
αὐ1τ ὸςrN ἀPiφp ᾽ Ee ἑre αυτοῦ a μεγά΄λ ων ὀ3 ρεχθείς, " ὁς δὲ\ Sov-
λείας φυγῇ παρούσης καὶ τιμωρίας ἐπιφερομένης,
ἐκεῖaν ο TO τοῦa Ἰ]λάτωνος, ἀτεχνῶaς ὑπὸ δέ4ο υς ἀν-
δρεῖος γενόμενος, καὶ φόβῳ τοῦ τὰ ἔσχατα παθεῖν
ἐπὶ τὸ δρᾶn ν μεγάλα δι’3 ἀνάγκην παραγενό-
μενος. ἔπειτα τούτου μὲν ἔργον ἐστὶ τὸ μέγιστον
ἀνελεῖν ἕνα τὸν "Αλβης τύραννον, ἐκείνον δὲ
πάρεργα Kal προάγωνες ἦσαν ὁ Σκεί,ρὔ ων, ὁ Σίν, ις,
ὁ ἹΠροκρούστης, ὁ Κορυνήτης, ods ἀναιρῶν καὶ
κολάζων ἀπήλαττε τὴν “Ελλάδα δεινῶν τυράννων
πρὶν ὅστις ἐστὶ γινώσκειν τοὺς ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ σωζο-
μένους. καὶ τῷ μὲν παρῆν ἀπραγμόνως κομί-
ἕεσθαι διὰ\ θαλάτ,ὕτ ης ἀ> δικουμέν, ῳ μηδὲ\ν ὑGuπeὸss TOaV
λῃστῶνa , «ςῬ ωμύλA ῳ δ᾽᾽ ov> παρῆνn μὴ\ πρά4γ ματα
ἔ7 χειν 2 ᾿Αμουλίlοg υ ζῶ“ ντος. μέFγe α δὲb τού7τ ου τεκμή-x
ριον: ὁ μὲν γὰρ οὐδὲν αὐτὸς ἀδικούμενος ὥρμησεν
ὑeπsὲ ρ ἄ” λλων ἐsπaὶ τοὺ\ς πονηρούς͵,΄ οἱ ew δ᾽ ὅof σον αὐ3τ οὶ
κακῶς οὐκ ἔπασχον ὑπὸ τοῦ τυράννου, περιεώρων
ἀδικοῦντα πάντας. καὶ μὴν εἰ μέγα τὸ τρωθῆναι
188
THESEUS AND ROMULUS, τ. 1-3
COMPARISON OF THESEUS AND ROMULUS
I. Sucn, then, are the memorable things about
Romulus and Theseus which I have been able to
learn. And it appears, first of all, that Theseus, of
his own choice, when no one compelled him, but
when it was possible for him to reign without fear at
Troezen as heir to no inglorious realm, of his own
accord reached out after great achievements;
whereas Romulus, to escape present servitude and
impending punishment, became simply “ courageous
out of fear,” as Plato phrases it,! and through the
dread of extreme penalties proceeded to perform
great exploits under compulsion. In the second
place, the chief deed of Romulus was the slaying of
a single tyrant of Alba; whereas for mere by-adven-
tures and preliminary struggles Theseus had Sciron,
Sinis, Procrustes, and Corynetes, by slaying and
chastising whom he freed Greece from dreadful
tyrants before those who were saved by him knew
who he was. Theseus might have travelled to
Athens by sea without any trouble, and suffering
no outrage at the hands of those robbers; whereas
Romulus could not be without trouble while Amulius
lived. And there is strong proof of this; for
Theseus, although he had suffered no wrong at
their hands himself, sallied out in behalf of others
against those miscreants ;w hile Romulus and Remus,
as long as they themselves were not harmed by
the tyrant, suffered him to wrong everybody else.
And surely, if it was a great thing for Romulus
1 Phaedo, p. 68 ἃ.
189
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μαχόμενον Σαβίνοις καὶ \ ἀνελεῖν Ακρωνα καὶ
πολλῶνA μάχῃ κρατῆaσ αι πολεμίω, ν, τού7τ οις μὲν
ἔστι τοῖς ἔργοις κενταυρομαχίαν καὶ τὰ πρὸς
᾿Αμαζόνας παραβαλεῖν: ὃ δ᾽ ἐτόλμησε! Θησεὺς
περὶ \ To\v Κρητικὸν\ δασμόνf , εἴ” τε τινὶ \ θηρί,ῳ βοράν/ ,
εἴ” τε πρόUdσ φαγμα τοῖaς > ᾿Ανδρό/ γεω τά4φ οις, εἴ7θa᾽?, ὃὰ
κουφό/τ ατόν, ἐστι τῶanν λεγομένων, λατρεύειν TAP
ἀ> νδράσ4 ιν ὑ¢€ βρισταῖςa καὶ \ δυσμενέσ/ ιν ἀ’ κλεῆn an λα-
τρείαν καὶ ἄτιμον ἐπιδοὺς ἑαυτόν, ἑκουσίως μετὰ
παρθένων πλεύσας Kal παίδ/ ων νέων, οὐκ ἂν εἴποι
τις ἡλίlκd ης ἐστὶ τόλμης ἢ μεγαλοφροσύνης ἢ δι-
καιοσύνης περὶ TO κοινὸν ἢ3 πόθου δό/ ξης Kal
ἀρετῆςA . ὥ“σ τ᾽ ἔμοιγε φαίνεται μὴ κακῶςa ὁρί-
ζεσθθα ι τοὺ\ς φιλοσόφ/ ους τὸNν ἔ7 ρωτα 4θ εῶSeν ὑe πη-
ρεσίαν πρὸςΝ ἐπιμέλειαν καὶ σωτηρίαν νέων. ὁ
yaΝp 2 ᾿Αριά, δνης ἔ” ρως παντὸς\ μᾶκιλ λον ἔ” οικεν ἔ” ργον
θεοῦn καὶ μηχανὴ γενέσθαι σωτηρία, ς ἕνεκα τοῦa
ἀνδρός. καὶ οὐκ ἄξιον αἰτιᾶ“Ὁσ θαι τὴAν ἐρασθεῖnσn αν,
ἀ? λλὰ \ θαυμάζ, ειν εἰἢ μὴ\ πάν, τες οὕ° τω p Kal \ πᾶaσ αι
διετέθησαν" εἰ δ᾽ ἐκεί,ν η μόνη τοῦτa᾽n? ἔπαθεν, εἰκό-
τως ἔγωγε φαί’ηὔ ν ἂ>) ν αὐτὴν ἀξιέραστον θεῷLal γεγο-
vévat, φιλόκαλον καὶ φιλάγαθον καὶ τῶaνn ἀρί/ στων
ἐρωτικὴ\ν οὗσαν.
11. ᾿Αμφοτέρων τοίνυν τῇA φύlσA ει πολιτικῶAν
γεγονότων, οὐδέ,τ ερος διεφύλαξε τὸΝν βασιλικὸν
τρόπον; ἐξέστη δὲ καὶ μετέβαλε μεταβολὴν ὁ
μὲν δημοτικήν, ὁ δὲ τυραννικήν, ταὐτὸν ἀπ᾽
1 ὃ 8 ἐτόλμησε Coraés and Sintenis would begin the
second chapter here.
190
THESEUS AND ROMULUS, 1. 3-1. 1
to be wounded in a battle with the Sabines, and
to slay Acron, and to conquer many enemies in
battle, with these exploits we may compare, on
the part of Theseus, his battle with the Centaurs
and his campaign against the Amazons; but as
for the daring which he showed about the Cretan
tribute, whether that was food for some mon-
ster, or a sacrifice on the tomb of Androgeos, or
whether—and this is the mildest form of the story—
he offered himself for inglorious and dishonourable
servitude among insolent and cruel men when he
volunteered to sail away with maidens and young
boys, words cannot depict such courage, magna-
nimity, righteous zeal for the common good, or
yearning for glory and virtue. It is therefore my
opinion that the philosophers! give an excellent
definition of love when they call it “a ministration of
the gods for the care and preservation of the young.”
For Ariadne’s love seems to have been, more than
anything else, a god’s work, and a device whereby
Theseus should be saved. And we should not blame
her for loving him, but rather wonder that all men
and women were not thus affected towards him;
and if she alone felt this passion, I should say, for
my part, that she was properly worthy of a god’s
love, since she was fond of virtue, fond of goodness,
and a lover of the highest qualities in man.
II. Although Theseus and Romulus were both
statesmen by nature, neither maintained to the end
the true character of a king, but both deviated from it
and underwent a change, the former in the direction
of democracy, the latter in the direction of tyranny,
making thus the same mistake through opposite
1 Polemon, as cited in Morals, p. 780 ἃ,
Ig!
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐναντίων παθῶν ἁμαρτόντες. δεῖ yap τὸν ap-
χοντα σώζειν πρῶτον αὐτὴν τὴν ἀρχήν: σώξεται
δ᾽ οὐχ ἧττον ἀπεχομένη τοῦ μὴ προσήκοντος ἢ
περιεχομένη τοῦ προσήκοντος. ὁ δ᾽ ἐνδιδοὺς ἢ
ἐπιτείνων οὐ μένει βασιλεὺς οὐδὲ ἄρχων, ἀλλ᾽ ἢ
δημαγωγὸς ἢ δεσπότης γιγνόμενος, ἐμποιεῖ τὸ
μισεῖν ἢ καταφρονεῖν τοῖς ἀρχομένοις. οὐ μὴν
ἀλλ᾽ ἐκεῖνο μὲν ἐπιεικείας δοκεῖ καὶ φιλανθρω-
πίας εἶναι, τοῦτο δὲ φιλαυτίας ἁμάρτημα καὶ
χαλεπότητος.
TIT. Ei δὲ δεῖ καὶ τὰ δυστυχηθέντα μὴ παντά-
πασι ποιεῖσθαι δαίμονος, ἀλλ᾽ ἠθικὰς καὶ παθη- 38
τικὰς ζητεῖν ἐν αὐτοῖς διαφοράς, θυμοῦ μὲν ἀλο-
γίστου καὶ τάχος ἐχούσης ἄβουλον ὀργῆς μήτε
τις ἐκεῖνον ἐν τοῖς πρὸς τὸν ἀδελφὸν ἀπολυέτω
μήτε τοῦτον ἐν τοῖς πρὸς τὸν υἱόν" ἡ δὲ κινήσασα
τὸν θυμὸν ἀρχὴ μᾶλλον παραιτεῖται τὸν ὑπὸ
μείξονος αἰτίας ὥσπερ ὑπὸ πληγῆς χαλεπωτέρας
ἀνατραπέντα. Ῥωμύλῳ μὲν γὰρ ἐκ βουλῆς καὶ
σκέψεως περὶ κοινῶν συμφερόντων διαφορᾶς γε-
νομένης οὐκ ἂν ἠξίωσέ τις ἄφνω τὴν διάνοιαν
ἐν τηλικούτῳ πάθει γενέσθαι" Θησέα δὲ πρὸς
τὸν υἱόν, a πάμπαν ὀλίγοι τῶν ὄντων διαπεφεύ-
γασιν, ἔρως καὶ ζηλοτυπία καὶ διαβολαὶ γυναι-
κὸς ἔσφηλαν. ὃ δὲ μεῖζόν ἐστιν, ὁ) μὲν Ῥωμύλου
θυμὸς εἰς ἔργον ἐξέπεσε καὶ πρᾶξιν οὐκ εὐτυχὲς
ἔχουσαν τέλος, ἡ δὲ Θησέως "ὀργὴ μέχρι λόγου
καὶ βλασφημίας καὶ κατάρας πρεσβυτικῆς
προῆλθε, τὰ δ᾽ ἄλλα φαίνεται τῇ τύχῃ χρήσα-
σθαι τὸ μειράκιον. ὥστε ταύτας μὲν ἄν τις ἀπο-
δοίη τῷ Θησεῖ τὰς ψήφους.
192
THESEUS AND ROMULUS, π΄. 1-111. 2
affections. For the ruler must preserve first of all
the realm itself, and this is preserved no less by
refraining from what is unbecoming than by cleaving
to what is becoming. But he who remits or extends
his authority is no longer a king or a ruler; he
becomes either a demagogue or a despot, and im-
plants hatred or contempt in the hearts of his
subjects. However, the first error seems to arise
from kindliness and humanity; the second from
selfishness and severity.
III. Again, if the misfortunes of men are not to
be attributed altogether to fortune, but to the dif-
ferent habits and passions which will be found
underlying them, then no one shall acquit Romulus
of unreasoning anger or hasty and senseless wrath
in dealing with his brother, nor Theseus in dealing
with his son, although the cause which stirred his
anger leads us to be more lenient towards the one
who was overthrown by a stronger provocation, as by
a heavier blow. For since the difference between
Romulus and his brother arose from a deliberate
investigation of the common welfare, there could
have been no good reason for his flying into such
a passion; while Theseus was impelled to wrong
his son by love, jealousy, and a woman’s slanders,
the overmastering power of which very few men
have escaped. And what is of greater weight, the
anger of Romulus vented itself in action and a deed
of most unfortunate issue; whereas the wrath of
Theseus got no farther than words of abuse and an
old man’s curse, and the rest of the youth’s calamities
seem to have been due to fortune. On these counts,
therefore, one would give his vote of preference to
Theseus.
193
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
IV. ᾽ ᾿Εκεί, νῳ δὲ\ πρῶAτ ον μὲ\ν ὑe πάρ4 χει μέfγ α τὸ\
μικροτώτ΄,ὔα ς λαβεῖνa ἀ5 ρχὰςΝ ἐΞ,π ὶ τὰ\ πράγν΄ ματα.
δοῦλοι γὰρ δὴ καὶ συφορβῶν παῖδες dvopato-
μενοι, πρὶν ἐλεύθεροι γενέσθαι, πάντας ὀλίγου
δεῖa ν ἠλευθέρωσαν Λατίν/ο υς, evil χρόνῳ τῶaν
καλλίστων ὀνομάτων ἅμα τυχόντες, φονεῖς
ἐχθρῶaν καὶ σωτῆρa ες οἰκεί/ ων καὶ βασιλεῖςA ἐθνῶaν
καὶ οἰκισταὶ πόλεων, οὐ μετοικισταί, καθάπερ
ἣΦ ν ὁς Θησεύς4, ἐ3κ πολλῶνa συντιθθεὶ ς\ καὶ συνοικο-
δομῶaν ἕa ν οἰ3 κητήρ/ ιον, ἀ» ναιρῶaν δὲδὲ πολλὰςδὴ πόλΙ͂ εις
ἐ> πωνύμ4 ους βασιλέω/ ν Kal Ay ἡete ρώ,ω ν παλαιῶν“ἅ.μ € Ῥω-
μύλος δὲ ταῦτα μὲν ὕστερον ἔδρα, τοὺς πολε-
μί/ο υς ἀ’ ναγκάζ/ ων τὰA οἰ? κεῖaα καταβάλi λοντας Kal \
ἀφανίζοντας τοῖς νενικηκόσι προσνέμεσθαι: τὸ
δὲ πρῶτον οὐ μετατιθεὶς οὐδ᾽ αὔξων τὴν ὑπάρ-
χουσαν, ἀλλὰ ποιῶν ἐξ οὐχ ὑπαρχόντων καὶ
κτώμενος ἑαυτῷa χώραν ὁ€ μοῦ,A πατρίδ“ α, βασιλείαν,
γένη, γάμους, οἰκειότητας, ἀνήρ’ ει μὲν οὐδένα οὐδὲ
ἀ> πώλ/ λυεν, εὐ>]ε ργέτ/ ει δὲ\ τοὺ\ς ἐ» ξ ἀ> οί’κὔ ων καὶ νι, ἀἢν ε-
στί,ω ν δῆ“ὦμ ον ἐ52 θέἢ λοντας εἶs ναι καὶ \ πολίτ’ ας. λῃ-
στὰς δὲ καὶ κακούργους οὐκ ἀπέκτεινεν, ἀλλ᾽
ἔθνη προσηγάγετο πολέμῳ καὶ πόλεις κατεστρέ-
ψατο καὶ βασιλεῖς ἐθριάμβευσε καὶ ἡγεμόνας.
V. Kat TO μὲν ‘Popov πάθος ἀμφισβητού-
μενον ἔχει. τὸν αὐτόχειρα, καὶ τὸ πλεῖστον εἰς
ἑτέρους “τῆς αἰτίας τρέπουσι: τὴν δὲ μητέρα
διολλυμένην ἔσωσε περι ανῶς, καὶ τὸν πάππον
evn
ἀκλεῶς δουλεύοντα καὶ ἀτίμως εἰς τὸν Αἰνείου
θρόνον ἐκάθισε. καὶ πολλὰ μὲν ἑκὼν εὐεργέ-
τησεν, ἔβλαψε δὲ αὐτὸν οὐδὲ ἄκων. τὴν δὲ
194
THESEUS AND ROMULUS, vw. τον. 2
IV. But Romulus has, in the first place, this great
superiority, that he rose to eminence from the
smallest beginnings. For he and his brother were
reputed to be slaves and sons of swineherds, and yet
they not only made themselves free, but freed first
almost all the Latins, enjoying at one and the same
time such most honourable titles as slayers of their
foes, saviours of their kindred and friends, kings of
races and peoples, founders of cities; not trans-
planters, as Theseus was, who put together and
consolidated one dwelling-place out of many, but
demolished many cities bearing the names of ancient
kings and heroes. Romulus, it is true, did this later,
compelling his enemies to tear down and obliterate
their dwellings and enrol themselves among their
conquerors ; but at first, not by removing or enlarg-
ing a city which already existed, but by creating
one from nothing, and by acquiring for himself at
once territory, country, kingdom, clans, marriages
and relationships, he ruined no one and killed no one,
but was a benefactor of men without homes and
hearths, who wished instead to be a people and
citizens of a common city. Robbers and miscreants,
it is true, he did not slay, but he subdued nations in
war, laid cities low, and triumphed over kings and
commanders.
V. Besides, there is dispute as to who actually
slew Remus, and most of the blame for the deed is
put upon others than Romulus; but Romulus did
unquestionably save his mother from destruction,
and he set his grandfather, who was living in inglorious
and dishonourable subjection, upon the throne of
Aeneas. Moreover, he did him many favours of his
own accord, and did him no harm, not even inadver-
195
PLUTARCHR’S LIVES
Θησέως λήθην καὶ ἀμέλειαν τῆς περὶ τὸ ἱστίον
ἐντολῆς μόλις ἂν οἶμαι μακρᾷ τινε παραιτήσει
καὶ ἐν ῥᾳθύμοις δικασταῖς αἰτίαν ἀποφυγεῖν
πατροκτονίας" ὃ δὴ καὶ συνιδών τις ᾿Αττικὸς ἀνὴρ
ὡς παγχάλεπόν ἐστι βουλομένοις ἀπολογεῖσθαι,
πλάττει τὸν Αἰγέα τῆς νεὼς προσφερομένης ὑπὸ
σπουδῆς ἀνατρέχοντα πρὸς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν θέας
ἕνεκα καὶ σφαλλόμενον καταπεσεῖν, ὥσπερ ὀπα-
δῶν ἔρημον, ἢ τὴν ἐπὶ θάλατταν ὁδὸν σπεύδοντι
μὴ παρούσης τινὸς θεραπείας.
VI. Καὶ μὴν τὰ περὶ τὰς ἁρπαγὰς τῶν γυ-
ναικῶν ἡμαρτημένα Θησεῖ μὲν εὐσχήμονος ἐνδεᾶ
προφάσεως γέγονε. πρῶτον μὲν ὅτι πολλάκις"
ἥρπασε γὰρ ᾿Αριάδνην καὶ ᾿Αντιόπην καὶ ᾿Αναξὼ
τὴν Τροιζηνίαν, ἐπὶ πάσαις δὲ τὴν “Ελένην,
παρηκμακὼς οὐκ ἀκμάζουσαν, ἀλλὰ νηπίαν καὶ
ἄωρον αὐτὸς ὥραν ἔχων ἤδη γάμων πεπαῦσθαι
‘Kal νομίμων: ἔπειτα διὰ τὴν αἰτίαν: οὐ yap
ἀξιώτεραί γε παιδοποιοὶ τῶν ᾿Αθήνησιν Ἔρε-
χθηίδων καὶ Κεκροπέδων αἱ Τροιζηνίων καὶ
Λακώνων καὶ ᾿Αμαζόνων ἀνέγγυοι θυγατέρες
ἦσαν. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ὑποψίαν ἔχει πρὸς
ὕβριν καὶ Kad ἡδονὴν πεπρᾶχθαι. “Ῥωμύλος
δὲ πρῶτον μὲν ὀκτακοσίων ὀλίγον ἀριθμῷ δεούσας 39
ἁρπάσας, οὐ πάσας, ἀλλὰ μίαν, ὥς φασιν,
Ἑρσιλίαν ἔλαβε, τὰς δ᾽ ἄλλας διένειμε τοῖς
ἀγαθοῖς 1 τῶν πολιτῶν" ἔπειτα τῇ μετὰ ταῦτα
τιωῇ καὶ ἀγαπήσει καὶ δικαιοσύνῃ τῇ περὶ τὰς
γυναῖκας ἀπέδειξε τὴν βίαν ἐκείνην καὶ τὴν
1 ἀγαθοῖς MSS. and edd. : ἀγάμοις (unmarried).
196
THESEUS AND ROMULUS, v. 2-v1. 2
tently. Theseus, on the contrary, for his forgetfulness
and neglect of the command about the sail, can
hardly, I think, escape the charge of parricide, be
the plea of his advocate ever so long and his judges
ever so lenient. Indeed, a certain Attic writer,
conscious that would-be defenders of Theseus have
a difficult task, feigns that Aegeus, on the approach
of the ship, ran up to the acropolis in his eager-
ness to catch sight of her, and stumbled and fell
down the cliff; as though he were without a re-
tinue, or was hurrying down to the sea without any
servants.
VI. Furthermore, the transgressions of Theseus in
his rapes of women admit of no plausible excuse.
This is true, first, because there were so many ; for he
carried off Ariadne, Antiope, Anaxo of Troezen, and
at last Helen, when he was past his prime and she
had not reached her prime, but was an unripe child,
while he was already of an age too great for even
lawful wedlock. It is true, secondly, because of the
reason for them; for the daughters of Troezenians
and Laconians and Amazons were not betrothed to
him, and were no worthier, surely, to be the mothers
of his children than the daughters of Erechtheus
and Cecrops at Athens. But one may suspect that
these deeds of his were done in lustful wantonness.
Romulus, on the other hand, in the first place,
although he carried off nearly eight hundred women,
took them not all to wife, but only one, as they say,
Hersilia, and distributed the rest among the best of
the citizens. And in the second place, by the
subsequent honour, love, and righteous treatment
given to these women, he made it clear that his
197
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀδικί,α ν κά΄λ λιστον ἔΝ ργον καὶ \ πολιτικώ,τ ατον εἷτς
3 κοινωνία/ ν γενομέν/ ην. οὕLAτ ω συνέμ/ ιξεν ἀ» λλήλ/ οις
καὶ συνέπηξε τὰ γέ,ν η, Kal \ παρέσfs χε πηγὴν τῆaς
εἰς αὖ=θ ις εὐνοίUαy ς Kal \ δυνάμεως τοῖaς πράγμασιν.
αἰδοῦaς δὲ καὶ φιλίας καὶ βεβαιότ, ητος, ἣν eipyd-
σατο περὶ τοὺ\ς γάμους, ὁe χρόν, ος ἐστὶ μάρτυς.
ἐν yap ἔτεσι τριάκοντα Kal διακοσίο, ις οὔτε ἀνὴρ
ἐτό΄ λμησε γυναικὸς οὔ”τ ε γυνὴ\ κοινωνίiαd ν ἀνδρὸς
ἐγκαταλιπεῖνa, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσ΄σ περ ἐν 7 Ἑλλησιν οἱ σφόδρα
περιττοὶ τὸν πρῶaτ ον ἔχουσιν εἰ? πεῖaν πατροκτόνον
ἢ μητροφόνον, οὕς τω ς Ῥωμαῖοi ι πάντες ἴσασιν ὅτι
Καρβίλιος Σπόρ/ ιος ἀπεπέ/μ ψατο γυναῖaκ. α πρῶ-fal
4 τος, ἀπαιδίαν αἰτιασάμενος. τῷ δὲ τοσούτῳ
χρόνῳ συμμαρτυρεῖ a Kal τὰN X ἔργα. καὶ yap ἀρχῆaςn
ἐκοινώνησαν οἱ βασιλεῖςa, καὶ πολιτείας τὰ\ γένη
διὰ τὴν ἐ’ πιγαμίαν ἐκείν, ην": ἀπὸ δὲ τῶAν Θησέως γά-
μων > ᾿Αθηναίο/ ις φιλικὸ\ν μὲ\ν οὐ3δ ὲ\ν οὐ>δ ὲ\ κοινωνικὸνΝ
ὑπῆρξε πρὸς οὐδένα συμβόλαιον, ἔχθραι δὲ καὶ
πόλεμοι καὶ φόνοι πολιτῶν καὶ τέλος ᾿Αφίδνας
ἀ» πολέσ/ αι καὶM N μόfλ ις Uδ T ᾽ οἰΜ κτου τῶaν πολεμίω, ν,
προσκυνήσαντας καὶ θεοὺς ἀνειπόν, τας, μὴ πα-
5 θεῖν ἃ Τρῶες ἔπαθον δι’ ᾿Αλέξανδρον. ἡ μέντοι
μήτ/ ηρ ἡ(3 Θησέω/ ς οὐ?κ ἐ> κινδύ4ν ευσεν, ἀ»λ λ᾽ 3) ἔδ΄ παθε
τὰ τῆς “Ἑκάβης, ἐγκαταλιπόντος καὶ προεμένου
τοῦ παιδός, εἴγε μὴ πέπλασται τὰ τῆς αἰχμα-
λωσία,ὔς , ὡΘς ἔ” δει γε καὶ \ τοῦaτ ο ψεῦAδ ος εἶ3 ναι καὶ ι
τὰἈ Ν πλεῖaσ τα τῶaν ἄovλ λων. ἐ>π εὶ \ καὶ \ TA\ περὶ \ τοῦa
θείου μυθολογούμενα πολλὴν ποιεῖ διαφοράν.
198
THESEUS AND ROMULUS, νι. 2-5
deed of violence and injustice was a most honourable
achievement, and one most adapted to promote
political partnership. In this way he intermixed
and blended the two peoples with one another, and
supplied his state with a flowing fountain of strength
and good will for the time to come. And to the
modesty, tenderness, and stability which he imparted
to the marriage relation, time is witness. For
in two hundred and thirty years no man ventured
to leave his wife, nor any woman her husband; but,
just as the very curious among the Greeks can name
the first parricide or matricide, so the Romans all
know that Spurius Carvilius was the first to put away
his wife, accusing her of barrenness. And the
immediate results of his act, as well as the long
lapse of time, witness in favour of Romulus. For
the two kings shared the government in common,
and the two peoples the rights and duties of citizen-
ship, because of that intermarriage ; whereas from
the marriages of Theseus the Athenians got no new
friends at all, nor even any community of enter-
prise whatsoever, but enmities, wars, slaughters of
citizens, and at last the loss of Aphidnae, and an
escape from the fate which Troy suffered by reason
of Alexander, only because their enemies took
compassion on them when they called upon them
worshipfully as gods. However, the mother of
Theseus was not only in danger, but actually suf-
fered the fate of Hecuba when she was deserted
and abandoned by her son, unless, indeed, the tale
of her captivity is fictitious, and it may well be
false, as well as most of the other stories. For
example, the tales told of divine intervention in
their lives are in great contrast; for Romulus was
199
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
“Ῥωμύλῳ μὲν yap ἡ σωτηρία μετὰ πολλῆς ὑπῆρξε
θεῶν εὐμενείας, ὁ δ᾽ Αὐγεῖ δοθεὶς χρησμός, ἀπέ-
χεσθαι γυναικὸς ἐπὶ ξένης, ἔοικεν ἀποφαίνειν
παρὰ γνώμην θεῶν γεγονέναι. τὴν Θησέως
τέκνωσιν.
200
THESEUS AND ROMULUS, v1. 5
preserved by the signal favour of the gods, while
the oracle given to Aegeus, forbidding him to ap-
proach a woman while in a toreign land, seems to
indicate that the birth of Theseus was not agreeable
to the will of the gods.
20]
Stree
ae a
czt ae A,
at ‘ue.
γῇ th ‘o eyt (0, a ἐδ or a oie
Pa Many Sy ΓΝ iH ip ia, eau 5
AAS, a iO eN theV i bl i le rain γι Wh
ir. ie
LYCURGUS
ΛΥΚΟΥΡΓῸΣ
I. ἸΠερὶ\ Λυκούρeeγ ου τοῦn νομοθέτου καθόλου μὲν
οὐδὲν ἔστιν εἰπεῖν ἀναμφισβήτητον, οὗ γε καὶ
γένος Kal ἀποδημία/ Kal τελευτὴ καὶ πρὸς ἅπασιν
ἡ περὶ τοὺς νό, μους αὐτοῦl a) Kal τὴν πολιτείαν
πραγματεία διαφόρους ἔσχηκεν ἱστορία/ ς, ἥκιστα
δὲ οἱ χρόνοι καθ᾽ ’ odἃ s γέγονεν ὁe ἀνὴA ρ ὁ€ μολογοῦνn ται.
οἱ μὲν yap ᾽ ᾿Ιφί“ τῳ συνακμάσαι καὶ συνδιαθεῖνa αι
τὴ\ν >)Ὀ ΟλυμπιακὴἊνν ἐ2 κεχειρί’α ν λέ/γ ουσιν αὐ>τ όν, , ὧΦν
ἐ2 στε καὶ \ , Αριστοτέλf ης ὁς φιλόσοφος, τεκμήρ/ ιον
πρροοσσφφέέρρ ων τὸν ᾿Ολυμμπ ίασι δίσκον ἐν ᾧ; τοὔνομμα
tovA ΛυκούρΨ γου διασώζ, εται καταγεγραμμένο/ ν" οἱ e
δὲ ταῖς διαδοχαῖς τῶν ἐν Σπάρτῃ βεβασιλευκό-
των ἀναλεγόμ/ ενοι TOV χρόν, ον, ὥefσ περ Epatocbévns
καὶ ᾿Απολλόδωρος, οὐκ ὀλίiγ οις ἔτεσι πρεσβύτερον
ἀ> ποφαίνI ουσι τῆnς πρώτ, ης 3 ᾿Οὐλυμπιάδ͵7ὕο ς. Τί,μ αιος
δὲ ὑπονοεῖ, δυεῖν ἐν Σπάρτῃ γεγονότων Λυκούργων
οὐ> κατὰ X TO\V αὐτὸ\ν χρόνfy ον, τῷA ἑ€ τέ/ ρῳ τὰ\ς ἀ> μφοῖνa
πράξ/ εις διὰ\ τὴ\ν δό, ξαν ἀ> νακεῖlσal θαι: Kal \ τόUνd ye
πρεσβύτερον ov πόρρω τῶ“ν € “Ὁμήρου γεγονέναι
χρόν, ων, ἔ” νιοι δὲ\ Kal \ κατ᾽ Ἄν, ὄ5) ψιν ἐ> ντυχεῖνa ς ‘Onn/p o.
204
LYCURGUS
I. Concernine Lycurgus the lawgiver, in general,
nothing can be said which is not disputed, since
indeed there are different accounts of his birth, his
travels, his death, and above all, of his work as law-
maker and statesman; and there is least agreement
among historians as to the times in which the man
lived. Some say that he flourished at the same time
with Iphitus, and in concert with him established
the Olympic truce. Among these is Aristotle the
philosopher, and he alleges as proof the discus at
Olympia on which an inscription preserves the name
of Lycurgus.! But those who compute the time by
the successions of kings at Sparta, like Eratosthenes
and Apollodorus, prove that Lycurgus was many years
earlier than the first Olympiad.?, And Timaeus con-
jectures that there were two Lycurgus at Sparta,
at different times, and that to one of them the
achievements of both were ascribed, owing to his
greater fame ; he thinks also that the elder of the
two lived not far from the times of Homer, and some
assert that he actually met Homer face to face.
1 As joining with Iphitus in founding, or reviving, the
Olympic games, in 776 B.c., the date assigned to the first
recorded victory. Cf. Pausanias, v. 4, 5f.; 20, 1. A stay
of hostilities was observed all over Greece during the festival.
2 776-73 B.O.
VOL. I. H 205
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 δίδωσι δὲ καὶ Ἐξνοφῶν ὑπόνοιαν ἀρχαιότητος ἐν 40
οἷς τὸν ἄνδρα λέγει γεγονέναι κατὰ τοὺς “Hpa-
κλείδας. γένει μὲν γὰρ Ἡρακλεῖδαι δήπουθεν
ἦσαν καὶ οἱ νεώτατοι τῶν ἐν Σπάρτῃ βασιλέων, ὁ
δὲ ἔοικε βουλομένῳ τοὺς πρώτους ἐκείνους καὶ
σύνεγγυς «Ἡρακλέους ὀνομάζειν Ἡρακλείδας.
Οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καίπερ οὕτως πεπλανημένης τῆς
ἱστορίας, πειρασόμεθα τοῖς βραχυτάτας ἔχουσιν
ἀντιλογίας ἢ γνωριμωτάτους μάρτυρας ἑπόμενοι
τῶν γεγραμμένων περὶ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀποδοῦναι τὴν
4 διήγησιν. ἐπεὶ καὶ! Σιμωνίδης ὁ ποιητὴς οὐκ
Εὐνόμου λέγει τὸν Λυκοῦργον πατρός, ἀλλὰ Πρυ-
τάνιδος καὶ τὸν Λυκοῦργον καὶ τὸν Εὔνομον, οἱ
δὲ πλεῖστοι σχεδὸν οὐχ οὕτω γενεαλογοῦσιν,
ἀλλὰ ἸΠΙροκλέους μὲν τοῦ ᾿Αριστοδήμου γενέσθαι
Σόον, Σόου δὲ Ἐὐρυπῶντα, τούτου δὲ Πρύτανιν,
ἐκ τούτου δὲ Εὔνομον, Εὐνόμου δὲ Πολυδέκτην ἐκ
προτέρας γυναικός, Λυκοῦργον δὲ νεώτερον ἐκ
Διωνάσσης, ὡς Διευτυχίδας ἱστόρηκεν, ἕκτον μὲν
ἀπὸ ἹΠΙροκλέους, ἑνδέκατον δὲ ad’ Ἡρακλέους.
II. Τῶν δὲ προγόνων αὐτοῦ μάλιστα μὲν ἐθαυ-
μάσθη Σόος, ἐφ᾽ οὗ καὶ τοὺς εἴλωτας ἐποιήσαντο
δούλους οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται καὶ χώραν προσεκτήσαντο
πολλὴν ᾿Αρκάδων ἀποτεμόμενοι. λέγεται δὲ τὸν
1 ἐπεὶ καὶ Sintenis would begin the second chapter here,
assuming also a lacuna in the text preceding.
2 of δὲ with Bekker: oi.
206
LYCURGUS, 1. 3-11. 1
Xenophon, also,! makes an impression of simplicity
in the passage where he says that Lycurgus lived in
the time of the Heracleidae. For in lineage, of
course, the latest of the Spartan kings were also
Heracleidae ; but Xenophon apparently wishes to use
the name Heracleidae of the first and more immedi-
ate descendants of Heracles, so famous in story.
However, although the history of these times is
such a maze, I shall try, in presenting my narrative,
to follow those authors who are least contradicted,
or who have the most notable witnesses for what
they have written about the man. For instance,
Simonides the poet says that Lycurgus was not the
son of Eunomus, but that both Lycurgus and
Eunomus were sons of Prytanis; whereas most writers
give a different genealogy, as follows: Aristodemus
begat Procles, Procles begat Soiis, Soiis begat
Eurypon, and he begat Prytanis, from whom sprang
Eunomus, and from Eunomus Polydectes by a first
wife, and Lycurgus, who was a younger son by a
second wife, Dionassa, as Dieutychidas has written,
making Lycurgus sixth from Procles, and eleventh
from Heracles.?
II. Of these ancestors of Lycurgus, Soiis was most
famous, under whom the Spartans made the Helots
their slaves, and acquired by conquest from the
Arcadians a large additional tract of land. It is also
1 Reip. Lac. x. 8. ‘* Lycurgus is said to have lived in the
times of the Heracleidae.”
? Aristodemus, from whose twin sons Eurysthenes and
Procles the elder and younger royal lines at Sparta (the
Agids and Eurypontids) were descended, was the son of
Aristomachus, the son of Cleodaeus, the son of Hyllus, the
son of Heracles. See Pausanias, iii. 1-10; Herodotus, vii.
204 and viii. 131.
207
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Σόον ἐν χωρίῳ χαλεπῷ καὶ ἀνύδρῳ πολιορκούμε-
νον ὑπὸ Κλειτορίων, ὁμολογῆσαι τὴν δορίκτητον
γῆν αὐτοῖς ἀφήσειν, εἰ πίοι καὶ αὐτὸς καὶ οἱ μετ᾽
αὐτοῦ πάντες ἀπὸ τῆς πλησίον πηγῆς. γενομένων
δὲ τῶν ὁρκίων; συναγαγόντα τοὺς μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ
διδόναι τῷ μὴ πιόντι τὴν βασιλείαν: οὐδενὸς δὲ
καρτερήσαντος, ἀλλὰ πάντων πιόντων, αὐτὸν ἐπὶ
πᾶσι καταβάντα καὶ περιρρανάμενον ἔτι τῶν πο-
λεμίων παρόντων ἀπελθεῖν καὶ τὴν χώραν κατα-
σχεῖν, ὡς μὴ πάντων πιόντων.
᾿Αλλὰ καίπερ ἐπὶ τούτοις θαυμάζοντες αὐτὸν
οὐκ ἀπὸ τούτου τὴν οἰκίαν, ἀλλὰ τοῦ παιδὸς
αὐτοῦ προσηγόρευσαν Ἑϊρυπωντίδας, ὅτι δοκεῖ
πρῶτος Εὐρυπῶν τὸ ἄγαν μοναρχικὸν ἀνεῖναι τῆς
βασιλείας, δημαγωγῶν καὶ χαριζόμενος τοῖς πολ-
λοῖς. ἐκ δὲ τῆς τοιαύτης ἀνέσεως τοῦ μὲν δήμου
θρασυνομένου, τῶν δ᾽ ὕστερον βασιλέων τὰ μὲν
ἀπεχθανομένων τῷ βιάξεσθαι τοὺς πολλούς, τὰ
δὲ πρὸς χάριν ἢ δι’ ἀσθένειαν ὑποφερομένων, ἀνο-
μία καὶ ἀταξία κατέσχε τὴν Σπάρτην ἐπὶ πολὺν
χρόνον: ὑφ᾽ ἧς καὶ τὸν πατέρα τοῦ Λυκούργου
βασιλεύοντα συνέβη τελευτῆσαι. διερύκων γὰρ
ἁψιμαχίαν τινά, μαγειρικῇ κοπίδι πληγεὶς ἀπέ-
θανε, τῷ πρεσβυτέρῳ παιδὶ ἸΠολυδέκτῃ κατα-
λιπὼν τὴν βασιλείαν.
III. ᾿Αποθανόντος δὲ καὶ τούτον pet ὀλίγον
χρόνον ἔδει βασιλεύειν, ὡς πάντες ᾧοντο, τὸν
Λυκοῦργον" καὶ πρίν γε τὴν γυναῖκα τοῦ ἀδελ-
φοῦ φανερὰν γενέσθαι κύουσαν ἐβασίλευεν. ἐπεὶ
1 ὁρκίων with Bekker and Cobet: ὁρκίων ὁμολογιῶν,
208
LYCURGUS, m. 1-111. 1
related of this Soiis that when he was besieged by
the Cleitorians in a rough and waterless place, he
agreed to surrender to them the land which he had
conquered if he himself and all his men with him
should drink from the adjacent spring. After the
oaths to this agreement were taken, he assembled
his men and offered his kingdom to the one who
should not drink; no one of them, however, could
forbear, but all of them drank, whereupon Soiis him-
self went down last of all to the water, sprinkled his
face merely, while the enemy were still at hand to
see, and then marched away and retained his ter-
ritory, on the plea that all had not drunk.
But although on these grounds he was held in
great admiration, his royal line was not named from
him, but were called Eurypontids from his son,
because Eurypon appears to have been the first king
to relax the excessive absolutism of his sway, seeking
favour and popularity with the multitude. But in
consequence of such relaxation the people grew bold,
and succeeding kings were some of them hated for
trying to force their way with the multitude, and
some were brought low by their desire for favour or
through weakness, so that lawlessness and confusion
prevailed at Sparta for a long time; and it was ow-
ing to this that the father of Lycurgus, a reigning
king, lost his life. For as he was trying to separate
some rioters, he was stabbed to death with a butcher's
knife, leaving the kingdom to his elder son,
Polydectes.
III. Polydectes also died soon afterwards, and
then, as was generally thought, the kingdom de-
volved upon Lycurgus; and until his brother’s wife
was known to be with child, he was king. Butas soon
209
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δὲ\ τοῦAτ ο τά7χ ιστα ἤ” σθετο, τὴ\ν μὲ\ν βασιλεία7) ν
ἀπέφηνε τοῦ παιδὸς οὖσαν, ἄνπερ ἄρρην γένηται,
τὴν δὲ ἀρχὴν αὐτὸς ὡς ἐπίIτi ροπος διεῖa πε. τοὺς
δὲx τῶAν ὀ’ ρφανῶAν βασιλέjωZ ν ἐ5 πιτρό4π ους Λακεδαι-
μόνιοι προδίκους' ὠνόμαζον. ws δὲ ἡ γυνὴ
προσέπεμπε κρύφα καὶ λόγους ἐποιεῖτο, βου-
λομέν’ η διαφθεῖaρ αι τὸ\ βρέ,φ ος ἐDiπ ὶ eX τῷA συνοικεῖνa
ἐ3 κείἌν ῳ B βασιNλiε ύ,ο ντι τῆAς > Σπά/ ρτης, τὸ\ μὲΝν ἦaθlο ς
αὐτῆnς ἐμίσησε, πρὸςΝ δὲ\ τὸΝν λό,γ ον αὐτὸν οὐκ
ἀντεῖπεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπαινεῖν καὶ δέχεσθαι προσποιού-
μενος, οὐ2κ ἔες φη δεῖa ν ἀ3 μβλίσ, κουσαν αὐ3τ ὴBνES καὶ \
φαρμακευομένην διαλυμαίνεσθαι τὸ σῶμα καὶ
κινδυνεύειν: αὐτῷ γὰρ μελήσειν ὅπως εὐθὺς ἐκ-
ποδὼν ἔσται τὸ γεννηθέν. οὕτω δὲ παραγαγὼν
ἄχρι τοῦ τόκου τὴν ἄνθρωπον, ὡς ἤσθετο τίκτου-
σαν, εἰσέπεμψε: παρέδρους ταῖς ὠδῖσιν αὐτῆς
καὶ φύλακας, οἷς ἣν προστεταγμένον, ἐὰν μὲν
θῆλυ τεχθῇ, παραδοῦναι, ταῖς γυναιξίν, ἐὰν δὲ
ἄρρεν, κομίσαι πρὸς ἑαυτὸν ὅ τι ἂν τύχῃ πράτ-
των. ἔτυχε δὲ δειπνοῦντος αὐτοῦ μετὰ τῶν 4]
ἀρχόντων ἀποκυηθὲν ἄaρ ρεν" καὶ παρῆσαν οἱ ὑπη-
ρέται τὸ παιδάριον αὐτῷ κομίζοντες. ὁ δὲ δεξά-
μενος, ὡς λέγεται, καὶ πρὸNς τοὺς παρόντας εἰπών,
“Βασιλεὺς ὑὑ μῖν γέγονεν, ὦ Σπαρτιᾶται," κατέκλι-
νεν ἐν τῇ βασιλικῇ χώρᾳ καὶ Χαρίλαον «ὠν όμασε
διὰ τὸ τοὺς πάντας εἶναι περιχαρεῖς, ἀγαμένους
αὐτοῦ τὸ φρόνημα καὶ τὴν δικαιοσύνην. ἐβασί-
λευσε δὲ μῆνας ὀκτὼ τὸ σύμπαν. ἣν δὲ καὶ
τά9 λλα περί, βλεπτος ὑe πὸ Ν τῶAν πολιτῶνa , καὶ \ πλείο7] -
1 προδίκους with most MSS. and edd.: προδίκως with A
(corrected), the Doric form.
210
LYCURGUS, 11. 1-4
as he learned of this, he declared that the kingdom
belonged to her offspring, if it should be wale,
and himself administered the government only as
guardian. Now the guardians of fatherless kings
are called “ prodikoi’”’ by the Lacedaemonians.
Presently, however, the woman made secret over-
tures to him, proposing to destroy her unborn babe
on condition that he would marry her when he was
a king of Sparta; and although he detested her
character, he did not reject her proposition, but
pretended to approve and accept it. He told her,
however, that she need not use drugs to produce a
miscarriage, thereby injuring her health and en-
dangering her life, for he would see to it himself
that as soon as her child was born it should be put
out of the way. In this manner he managed to
bring the woman to her full time, and when he
learned that she was in labour, he sent attendants
and watchers for her delivery, with orders, if a girl
should be born, to hand it over to the women, but
if a boy, to bring it to him, no matter what he was
doing. And it came to pass that as he was at supper
with the chief magistrates, a male child was born,
and his servants brought the little boy to him.
He took it in his arms, as we are told, and said to
those who were at table with him, “ A king is born
unto you, O men of Sparta;’’ then he laid it down
in the royal seat and named it Charilaiis, or People’s
Joy, because all present were filled with joy,
admiring as they did his lofty spirit and_ his
righteousness. And so he was king only eight
months in all. But on other accounts also he
was revered by his fellow-citizens, and more than
211
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ves ἐ. γέΝΕν, οντο τῶaν ὡeς ἐ2 πιτρό, πῳ βασιλέω/ ς Kal Ba-
σιλικὴ‘ν ἐ> ξουσί,α ν ἔ» χοντι πειθομέ[ν ων οἱ« δι 3."ἀ ρετὴ\ν
προσέχ, οντες αὐτῷA Kal ποιεῖaν ἐθέλοντες ἑτοίμως
τὸΝ προσταττόμενον.
3 Hy δέ τι καὶ τὸ\ φθονοῦaν καὶ πρὸς τὴν αὔξησιν
ὄYνj τι νέf ῳ πειρώμενον ἐνίστασθαι, μάλιστα μὲν
οἱe συγγενεῖς“Ὁ Kal οἰκεῖlοal ι τῆaς TODA βασιλέως μητρὸς
ὑβρί“σ θαι δοκούσης, ὁ δὲ ἀδελφὸς αὐτῆaς Λεωνίδ, ας
καὶ Ν θρασύτ“ ερόν΄ ποτε τῷa Λυκούiρf γῳ δλοιδορηθείς’ ,
ὑ« πεῖaπA εν ws εἰ᾽ δείη σαφῶaςn μέλλοντα βασιλεύεeeι ν
αὐτόν, , ὑπόνοιαν διδοὺς καὶ προκαταλαμβάνων
διαβολῇa τὸNνY Λυκοῦρa γον, εἴΕ Σ τι συμβαίη’ τῷa βασι-
λεῖ παθεῖν, ὡς ἐπιβεβουλευκότα. τοιοῦτοι δέ
τινες λόγοι καὶ παρὰ τῆς γυναικὸς ἐξεφοίτων'
ἐφ᾽ οἷς βαρέως φέρων καὶ δεδοικὼς τὸ ἄδηλον,
ἔBg γνω φυγεῖlνa) ἀ> ποδημίᾳ, τὴAν ὑς πόν, οιαν, Kal πλανη-
θῆaν αι μέ4χ ρις ἂἋ ν ὁC PPἀS δελφιδοῦςa ἐbνd ἡe λικί’ᾳ, γενόLμd ενος
τεκνώσῃ διάδοχον τῆς βασιλείας.
IV. Οὕτως ἀπάρας πρῶτον μὲν εἰς Κρήτην
ἀφίκετο: καὶ τὰς αὐτόθι πολιτείας κατανοήσας
καὶ συγγενόμενος τοῖς πρωτεύουσι κατὰ δόξαν
ἀ2 νδράσΨ ι, τὰ\ μὲ\ν ἐ5ῳ. ζήἢ λωσε Kal Ν παρέ,λ αβε τῶaν
νόμων, ὡς οἴκαδε μετοίσων καὶ χρησόμενος, ἔστι
δ᾽ ὧν κατεφρόνησεν. ἕνα δὲ τῶν νομιζομένων
ἐ3κ εῖA σοφῶaνn Kal πολιτικῶὉν χάρ’ὕι τε KalἈ Ν φιλί,ᾳ
πεί᾿σς ας ἀb]π έσ/ τειλεν εἰ>ς τὴἊ ν Σπάρ/ την, Θάλ/ ητα,
ποιητὴν μὲν δοκοῦντα λυρικῶν μελῶν καὶ πρό-
σχημα τὴν τέχνην ταύτην πεποιημένον, ἔργῳ δὲ
ἅπερ οἱ κράτιστοι τῶaν νομοθετῶaν διαπραττό-U
212
LYCURGUS, 11. 4-1v. 1
those who obeyed him because he was guardian of
the king and had royal power in his hands, were
those who clave to him for his virtues and were
ready and willing to do his bidding.
There was a party, however, which envied him and
sought to impede the growing power of so young a
man, especially the kinsmen and friends of the
queen-mother, who thought she had been treated
with insolence. Her brother, Leonidas, actually
railed at Lycurgus once quite boldly, assuring him
that he knew well that Lycurgus would one day
be king, thereby promoting suspicion and paving
the way for the accusation, in case any thing
happened to the king, that he had plotted against
his life. Some such talk was set in circulation by
the queen-mother also, in consequence of which
Lycurgus was sorely troubled and fearful of what
might be in store for him. He therefore determined
to avoid suspicion by travelling abroad, and to
continue his wanderings until his nephew should
come of age and beget a son to succeed him on the
throne.
IV. With this purpose, he set sail, and came first
to Crete. Here he studied the various forms of
government and made the acquaintance of their
most distinguished men. Of some things he heartily
approved, and adopted some of their laws, that he
might carry them home with him and put them in
use; for some things he had only contempt.
One of the men regarded there as wise statesmen
was Thales, whom Lycurgus persuaded, out of favour
and friendship, to go on a mission to Sparta. Now
Thales passed as a lyric poet, and screened himself
behind this art, but in reality he did the work of
213
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
2 μενον. λό,γ οι yap ἦσαν αἱ ὠδαὶ πρὸς εὐπείθειαν
καὶ ὁe μό,ν οιαν ἀνακλητικοί, διὰ μελῶAν ἅ© μα Kal
ῥυθμῶν πολὺ τὸ κόσμιον ἐχόντων καὶ καταστα-
TLKOV4 , ὧ2ν ἀκροώμενοι κατεπραὔνof οντο λεληθότως
τὰ\ ἤθη καὶ συνῳκειοῦνa το τῷa ζή΄ λῳ TOaY καλῶaν
ἐ>κ τῆnς ἐ> πιχωριαζούσ, ης τό,τ ε πρὸς\ ἀ> λλήλ/ ους
κακοθυμία“4ς , ὥ[χὰσ τε τρό, πον τινὰ\ τῷA Λυκού4ρ γῳ
προοδοποιεῖνA τὴν παίδευσιν αὐ>]τ ῶQνn ἐ’ κεῖrν ον.
3 » ‘AroΝ δὲ\ τῆaς Κρήτης ὁ ΛυκοῦρA γος ἐπὶ ᾿Ασία, ν
ἔ» πλευσε, βουλόμ, ενος, ὡςς λέ,γ εται, TALaSn Κρητικαῖςan
διαί,τ αις, εὐτελέσιν οὔσαις καὶ αὐστηραῖςa, τὰἊς
2 Iwvixa\s πολυτελεία, ς καὶ \ τρυφάςΤᾺ, ὥefσ περ ἰ> ατρὸἊςΝ
σώμασιν ὑγιεινοῖς ὕπουλα καὶ νοσώδη, παραβα-
λὼν ἀποθεωρῆσA αι τὴν διαφορὰν τῶ“ν βί,ω ν καὶ
4 TOAV πολιτειῶνa . ἐκεῖa δὲ Kal τοῖaς_ e¢ “Ομήρου ποιή-
μασιν ἐντυχὼν πρῶτον, ὡς ἔοικε, παρὰ τοῖς
ἐκγόνοις τοῖaς Κρεοφύλου διατηρουμέν/ο ις, καὶ
κατιδὼν ἐν αὐτοῖςa τῆaς πρὸς ἡδονὴ\ν Kal ἀκρασίαν
διατριβῆς τὸ πολιτικὸν καὶ παιδευτικὸν οὐκ
ἐλάττονος ἄξιον σπουδῆς ἀναμεμυγμένον, ἐγρά-
ψατο προθύμως καὶ συνήγαγεν ὡς δεῦρο κομιῶν.
ἦν yap τις ἤδη δό’ ξα τῶaν ἐπῶaν ἀμαυρὰ \ παρὰ
τοῖ“ς ΨΩ“ ἔλλησιν, ἐ5D κawέ 4κ τηντο δὲ\ οὐ> πολλοὶ \ μέ,ρ η τινά,΄
σποράδην τῆrςn ποιήσεως, ὡς ἔτυχε, διαφερομένleη ς"
γνωρίμην δὲ αὐτὴν Kal μάλιστα πρῶaτ ος ἐποίyη σε
Λυκοῦργος.
5 Αἰ3γ ύπ4 τιοι δὲ καὶ πρὸ\ς αὑτοὺς ἀφικέiσL θαι τὸ\ν
Λυκοῦaρn γον οἴονται, καὶ τὴν ἀπὸ τῶAν ἄ7λ λων γενῶlaνl
τοῦ“ μαχίμld ου διάκρισιν μάλιστα θαυμάσαντα
214
LYCURGUS; sv. 2=5
one of the mightiest lawgivers. For his odes were
so many exhortations to obedience and harmony,
and their measured rhythms were permeated with
ordered tranquillity, so that those who listened to
them were insensibly softened in their dispositions,
insomuch that they renounced the mutual hatreds
which were so rife at that time, and dwelt together
in a common pursuit of what was high and noble.
Thales, therefore, after a fashion, was a forerunner
in Sparta of Lycurgus and his discipline.
From Crete, Lycurgus sailed to Asia, with the
desire, as we are told, of comparing with the Cretan
civilization, which was simple and severe, that of
the Ionians, which was extravagant and luxurious,
just as a physician compares with healthy bodies
those which are unsound and sickly ; he could then
study the difference in their modes of life and forms
of government. There too, as it would appear, he
made his first acquaintance with the poems of
Homer, which were preserved among the posterity
of Creophylus; and when he saw that the political
and disciplinary lessons contained in them were
worthy of no less serious attention than the
incentives to pleasure and license which they
supplied, he eagerly copied and compiled them in
order to take them home with him. For these epics
already had a certain faint reputation among the
Greeks, and a few were in possession of certain
portions of them, as the poems were carried here
and there by chance; but Lycurgus was the very
first to make them really known.
The Aegyptians think that Lycurgus visited them
also, and so ardently admired their separation of the
military from the other classes of society that he
215
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μετενεγκεῖνa εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην, καὶ \ χωρί,σ αντα
τοὺς βαναύσους καὶ χειροτέχνας ἀστεῖον ὡς ἀλη-
θῶς τὸ πολίτευμα καὶ καθαρὸν ἀποδεῖξαι. ταῦτα
μὲ\ν οὖν Αἰ>γ υπτίο/ι ς ἔ” νιοι καὶ \ τῶlaνl ¢€᾿ Ελληνικῶnν
συγγραφέω/ ν μαρτυροῦσa ιν: ὅὩ τι δὲἪ , καὶ \ Λιβύη4 ν καὶ \ 42
Ἰβηρίαν ἐπῆλθεν ὁ Λυκοῦργος καὶ περὶ τὴν
Ἰνδικὴν πλανηθεὶς τοῖς Γυμνοσοφισταῖς ὡμίλη-
σεν, οὐδένα πλὴν ᾿Αριστοκράτη τὸν Ἱππάρχου
Σπαρτιάτην εἰρηκότα γινώσκομεν.
Υ. Οἱ δὲ Λακεδαιμόνιοι τὸν Λυκοῦργον ἐπό-
θουν ἀπόντα καὶ μετεπέμποντο πολλάκις, ὡς τοὺς
μὲν βασιλεῖς ὄνομα καὶ τιμήν, ἄλλο δὲ μηδὲν δια-
φέ7ρ ον τῶaν πολλῶνA ἔa χοντας, ἐ>ν ἐ> κείJν ῳ δὲ\ φύσκα ιν
ἡγεμονικὴν καὶ δύναμιν ἀνθρώπων ἀγωγὸν οὖσαν.
οὐ> μὴNν οὐ᾽δ ὲΝ τοῖaςn βασιλεῦlσal ιν ἣ5Sν ἀ> βούλ/ ητος ἡς
παρουσία, τοῦa ἀ2 νδρός΄ , ἀ>λ λ᾽ Δὲνἤ, λπιζον ἐ> κεί’ν ου συμ-
παρόντος ἧττον ὑβρίζουσι χρῆσθαι τοῖς πολλοῖς.
ἐπανελθὼν οὖν πρὸς οὕτω διακειμένους εὐθὺς
ἐπεχείρει τὰ παρόντα κινεῖν καὶ μεθιστάναι τὴν
πολιτείαν, ὡς τῶν κατὰ μέρος νόμων οὐδὲν ἔργον
οὐ9) δὲRUN ὄSF,φ ελος, εἰ2 μή / τις ὥee σπερ σώ,μ ατι πονηρῷa n καὶ \
γέμοντι παντοδαπῶν νοσημάτων τὴν ὑπάρχουσαν
ἐκτήξας καὶ μεταβαλὼν κρᾶσιν ὑπὸ φαρμάκων
καὶ καθαρμῶν ἑτέρας ἄρξεται καινῆς διαίτης.
διανοηθεὶς δὲ ταῦτα πρῶτον μὲν ἀπεδήμησεν εἰς
Δελφούς»: καὶ\ τῷan θεῷQn θύ/σ ας καὶ χρησάμενος
ἐ2)π ανῆaλn θε τὸν διαβόητον ἐ5 κεῖa νον χρησμὸν κομί-
Cov, ᾧΦ θεοφιλῆa n μὲ\ν αὐ>τ ὸνΝ ἡ€. Πυθία’, προσεῖaπn ε καὶ Q
θεὸἉν μᾶa λλον ἢA ἄ” νθρωπον, εὐ> νομία/ ς δὲ\ χρήζ, οντι
216
LYCURGUS, iv. 5-v. 3
transferred it to Sparta, and by removing mechanics
and artisans from participation in the government,
made his civil polity really refined and pure. At any
rate, this assertion of the Aegyptians is confirmed by
some Greek historians. But that Lycurgus visited
Libya and Iberia also, and that he wandered over
India and had conferences with the Gymnosophists,
no one has stated, so far as I know, except Aristo-
crates the son of Hipparchus, the Spartan.
V. The Lacedaemonians missed Lycurgus sorely,
and sent for him many times. They felt that their
kings were such in name and station merely, but
in everything else were nothing better than their
subjects, while in him there was a nature fitted to
lead, and a power to make men follow him. How-
ever, not even the kings were averse to having him
at home, but hoped that in his presence their
subjects would treat them with less insolence.
Returning, then, to a people thus disposed, he at
once undertook to change the existing order of
things and revolutionize the civil polity. He was
convinced that a partial change of the laws would be
of no avail whatsoever, but that he must proceed as
a physician would with a patient who was debilitated
and full of all sorts of diseases; he must reduce and
alter the existing temperament by means of drugs
and purges, and introduce a new and different
regimen. Full of this determination, he first made
a journey to Delphi, and after sacrificing to the god
and consulting the oracle, he returned with that
famous response in which the Pythian priestess
addressed him as “ beloved of the gods, and rather
god than man,” and said that the god had granted
217
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
διδόναι καὶ καταινεῖν ἔφη τὸν θεὸν ἣ πολὺ
κρατίστη τῶν ἄλλων ἔσται πολιτειῶν.
? Επαρθεθὶ ς\ δὲδὲ τούτἊὦο ις προσήγ/ ετο 1 τοὺ\ς aDpPi c-
Tous Kal \ συνεφάπ/ τεσθαι παρεκάλ/ε ι, κρύ,φ α διαλε-
γόμενος τοῖς φίλοις πρῶτον, εἶτα οὕτως κατὰ
μικρὸν ἁπτόμενος πλειόνων καὶ συνιστὰς ἐπὶ τὴν
πρᾶξa ιν. ὡς δ᾽ ὁe καιρὸς ἧκε, τριάκοντα TOUS πρώ-
Tous ἐΡκΖέ λευσε μετὰ\ τῶAν ὅ“ πλων ἕ«Ψω θεν εἰ2ς ἀ3 γορὰν\
προελθεῖνa ἐκπλήξεως ἕνεκα καὶ φόβου πρὸ\ς τοὺς
ἀντιπράττοντας. ὧν εἴκοσι τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους
a Ερμιππος ἀrνrέ γραψε: τὸNν δὲ\ μά/λ ιστα τῶaν
Λυκούργου ἔργων κοινωνήσαντα πάντων καὶ συμ-
πραγματευσάμενον τὰ περὶ τοὺς νόμους ᾿Αρθμιά-
δαν ὀνομάζουσιν. ἀρχομένης δὲ τῆς ταραχῆς ὁ
βασιλεὺς Χαρίλαος φοβηθεὶς ὡς ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ὅλης
τῆς πράξεως συνισταμένης, κατέφυγε πρὸς τὴν
Χαλκίο»ι κον: εἶ3 τα πεισθεὶς\ καὶ \ λαβὼ\ν ὅed ρκους
ἀνέ/σ τη Kal μετεῖAχ ε τῶAν πραττομένων, φύσει
πρᾷοA ς ὦν: ὥeς που Kal λέγεται συμβασιλεύοντα
τὸΝν ’ ᾿Αρχέfλ αον αὐ>τ ῷA πρὸς\ τοὺς\ ἐ2 γκωμιάξ/ οντας τὸxν
νεανί’σ, κον εἰalπ εῖν" acetal “Πῶa ς δ᾽a kἂ ν ei” n Χαρίλ, αος ἀaνnyὴ ρ
ἀ» γαθός/ , ὃa ς οὐIδOὲ\ τοῖaς πονηροῖςa χαλεπός/ ἐ3 στι; 29
ΠλειόνΙ͂ ων δὲ καινοτομουμένων ὑπὸ τοῦa Av-
κούργου πρῶτον ἣν καὶ μέγιστον ἡ κατάστασις
τῶAν γερό4ν των, ἥ“ ν φησιν ςὁ Πλάτἣ ων τῇA τῶanν βασι-
λέων ἀρχῇ φλεγμαινούσῃ μιχθεῖσαν καὶ γενομένην
ἰσόψηφον εἰς τὰ μέγιστα σωτηρίαν ἅμα καὶ
1 προσήγετο Cobet: προσῆγε.
21ὃ
LYCURGUS, v. 3-6
his prayer for good laws, and promised him a
constitution which should be the best in the world.
Thus encouraged, he tried to bring the chief men
of Sparta over to his side, and exhorted them to put
their hands to the work with him, explaining his
designs secretly to his friends at first, then little by
little engaging more and uniting them to attempt
the task. And when the time for action came, he
ordered thirty of the chief men to go armed into
the market-place at break of day, to strike conster-
nation and terror into those of the opposite party.
The names of twenty of the most eminent among
them have been recorded by Hermippus; but the
man who had the largest share in all the under-
takings of Lycurgus and co-operated with him in the
enactment of his laws, bore the name of Arthmiadas.
When the tumult began, King Charilaiis, fearing that
the whole affair was a conspiracy against himself, fled
for refuge to the Brazen House;! but he was soon
convinced of his error, and having exacted oaths
for his safety from the agitators, left his place of
refuge, and even joined them in their enterprise,
being of a gentle and yielding disposition, so much
so, indeed, that Archelaiis, his royal colleague, is said
to have remarked to those who were extolling the
young king, “ How can Charilaiis be a good man,
when he has no severity even for the bad?”
Among the many innovations which Lycurgus
made, the first and most important was his institu-
tion of a senate, or Council of Elders, which, as
Plato says,? by being blended with the “ feverish ”’
government of the kings, and by having an equal
vote with them in matters of the highest importance,
1 A temple of Athena. 3 Laws, p. 691 e.
219
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
σωφροσύνην παρασχεῖν. αἰωρουμένη yap ἡ
πολιτεία καὶ ἀποκλίνουσα νῦν μὲν ὡς τοὺς βασι-
λεῖς ἐπὶ τυραννίδα, νῦν δὲ ὡς τὸ πλῆθος ἐπὶ
δημοκρατίαν, οἷον ἕρμα τὴν τῶν γερόντων ἀρχὴν
ἐν μέσῳ θεμένη καὶ ἰσορροπήσασα τὴν ἀσφαλε-
στάτην τάξιν ἔσχε καὶ κατάστασιν, ἀεὶ τῶν ὀκτὼ
καὶ εἴκοσι γερόντων τοῖς μὲν βασιλεῦσι προστι-
θεμένων ὅσον ἀντιβῆναι πρὸς δημοκρατίαν,
αὖθις δὲ ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ γενέσθαι τυραννίδα τὸν
δῆμον ἀναρρωννύντων. τοσούτους δέ φησι κατα-
σταθῆναι. τοὺς γέροντας ᾿Αριστοτέλης, ὅτι
τριάκοντα τῶν πρώτων μετὰ Λυκούργου γενο-
μένων δύο τὴν πρᾶξιν ἐγκατέλιπον ἀποδειλιάσαν-
τες. ὁ δὲ Σφαῖρος ἐξ ἀρχῆς φησι τοσούτους
γενέσθαι τοὺς τῆς γνώμης μετασχόντας. εἴη δ᾽ ἄν
TL καὶ τὸ τοῦ ἀριθμοῦ δι’ ἑβδομάδος τετράδι
πολλαπλασιασθείσης ἀποτελούμενον, καὶ ὅτι τοῖς
αὑτοῦ μέρεσιν ἴσος ὧν μετὰ τὴν ἑξάδα τέλειός
ἐστιν. ἐμοὲ δὲ δοκεῖ μάλιστα τοσούτους ἀπο-
δεῖξαι τοὺς γέροντας ὅπως οἱ πάντες εἶεν τριά-
κοντα, τοῖς ὀκτὼ καὶ εἴκοσι τοῖν δυοῖν βασιλέοιν 43
προστιθεμένοιν.
VI. Οὕτω δὲ περὶ ταύτην ἐσπούδασε τὴν ἀρχὴν
ὁ Λυκοῦργος ὥστε μαντείαν ἐκ Δελφῶν κομίσαι
περὶ αὐτῆς, ἣν ῥήτραν καλοῦσιν. ἔχει δὲ οὕτως"
“ Διὸς Συλλανίου ' καὶ ᾿Αθανᾶς Συλλανίας 1 ἱερὸν
ἱδρυσάμενον, φυλὰς φυλάξαντα καὶ ὠβὰς ὠβά-
ἕαντα, τριάκοντα γερουσίαν σὺν ἀρχαγέταις
καταστήσαντα, ὥρας ἐξ ὥρας ἀπελλάξειν μεταξὺ
1 Συλλανίου, Συλλανίας Bekker adopts the corrections of
Bryan to ‘EAAaviov and Ἑλλανίας.
220
LYCURGUS, v. 6-v1. 1
brought safety and due moderation into counsels of
state. For before this the civil polity was veering
and unsteady, inclining at one time to follow the
kings towards tyranny, and at another to follow the
multitude towards democracy; but now, by making
the power of the senate a sort of ballast for the ship
of state and putting her on a steady keel, it achieved
the safest and the most orderly arrangement, since
the twenty-eight senators always took the side of the
kings when it was a question of curbing democracy,
and, on the other hand, always strengthened the
people to withstand the encroachments of tyranny.
The number of the senators was fixed at twenty-
eight because, according to Aristotle, two of the
thirty original associates of Lycurgus abandoned the
enterprise from lack of courage. But Sphaerus says
that this was originally the number of those who
shared the confidence of Lycurgus. Possibly there is
some virtue in this number being made up of seven
multiplied by four, apart from the fact that, being
equal to the sum of its own factors, it is the next
perfect number after six. But in my own opinion,
Lycurgus made the senators of just that number in
order that the total might be thirty when the two
kings were added to the eight and twenty.
VI. So eager was Lycurgus for the establishment
of this form of government, that he obtained an
oracle from Delphi about it, which they call a
“rhetra.” And this is the way it runs: “ When
thou hast built a temple to Zeus Syllanius and
Athena Syllania, divided the people into ‘ phylai’ and
into ‘obai, and established a senate of thirty mem-
bers, including the ‘ archagetai,’ then from time to
221
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Βαβύκας te καὶ Kvaxidvos, οὕτως εἰσφέρειν τε
καὶ ἀφίστασθαι: δάμῳ δὲ τὰν κυρίαν ἧμεν καὶ
κράτ/ ος. ΕΣ] ἐ>ν τούiτf οις TOΝ μὲΝν φυλὰςΝ φυλάξ/ αι καὶ \
ὠ»)β ὰςΝ ὠ᾽ βάξ/ αι διελεῖ“ν ἐ> στι καὶ \ κατανεῖaμ αι τὸΝ
πλῆθa ος εἰ3ς μερίδ/ ας, ὧ2ν Ta\s μὲ\ν φυλάς/, Ta\s δὲ\
ὠβὰς προσηγόρευκεν. ἀρχαγέται δὲ οἱ βασιλεῖς
λέγονται, τὸ δὲ ἀπελλάζειν ἐκκλησιάζειν" ὅτι τὴν
ἀρχὴν καὶ τὴν αἰτίαν τῆς πολιτείας εἰς τὸν Πύ-
θ tov ἀ᾽ νῆa ψε. τὴ\ν δὲδὲ Β ΒαβύΨ καν aXke ip/ appos,! 1 καὶ ᾿ τὸ\ν
Κνακιῶνα νῦν Οἰνοῦντα προσαγορεύουσιν" ᾿Αρι-
στοτέλης δὲ τὸν μὲν Κνακιῶνα ποταμόν, τὴν δὲ
Βαβύκαν γέφυραν. ἐν μέσῳ δὲ τούτων τὰς ἐκ-
κλησίας ἦγον, οὔτε παστάδων οὐσῶν οὔτε ἄλλης
τινὸς κατασκευῆς. οὐθὲν γὰρ ᾧετο ταῦτα πρὸς
εὐβουλίαν εἶναι, μᾶλλον δὲ βλάπτειν, φχυαρώδεις
ἀπεργαζόμενα καὶ χαύνους φρονήματι κενῷ τὰς
διανοίας τῶν συμπορευομένων, ὅταν εἰς ἀγάλματα
καὶ γραφὰς ἢ προσκήνια θεάτρων ἢἢ στέγας βου-
λευτηρίων ἠσκημένας περιττῶς ἐκκλησιάζοντες
ἀποβλέπωσι. τοῦ δὲ πλήθους ἀθροισθέντος εἰ-
πεῖaν μὲ\ν οὐbδ ενὶ \ γνώ΄μ ην τῶἴονν ἄ” λλων ἐ> φεῖaτ ο, τὴAν ὃ 2
ὑπὸ τῶν γερόντων καὶ τῶν βασιλέων προτεθεῖσαν
ἐπικρῖAν αι κύ/ρ ιος ἦν ὁ€ δῆa μος. ὕe στερον μέντοι τῶ“ν
πολλῶν ἀφαιρέσει καὶ προσθέσει τὰς γνώμας δια-
στρεφό/ν των καὶ\ παραβιαξομένfAω ν, Πολύδ4 ωρος καὶΝ
Θεόπομπος οἱ βασιλεῖς τάδε τῇ ῥήτρᾳ παρενέ-
γραψαν: “Αἱ δὲ σκολιὰν ὁ δᾶμος ἕλοιτο, τοὺς
πρεσβυγενέας καὶ ἀρχαγέτας ἀποστατῆρας ἧμεν,"
τοῦFiτgs eS ἐSeσ τι μὴ\ KUPOVY“ , ἀ> λλ > ὅ{ λως ἀ> φί/σ τασθαι καὶ ν
1 Χείμαρρος this, or some other later name, is thought to
have fallen from the text by Sintenis’, after KE. Curtius,
Peloponnesus, ii. p. 315; Coraés and Bekker have τὴν δὲ
Βαβύκαν καὶ τὸν Kvaxi@va, with the MSS.
222
LYCURGUS, v1. 1-4
time ‘appellazein’ between Babyca! and Cnacion,!
and there introduce and rescind measures; but the
people must have the deciding voice and the power.”
In these clauses, the “ phylai” and the “ obai” refer
to divisions and distributions of the people into clans
and phratries, or brotherhoods; by “ archagetai” the
kings are designated, and “apellazein ” means {to
assemble the people, with a reference to Apollo, the
Pythian god, who was the source and author of the
polity. The Babyca is now called Cheimarrus, and
the Cnacion Oenus; but Aristotle says that Cnacion
is a river, and Babyca a bridge. Between these they
held their assemblies, having neither halls nor any
other kind of building for the purpose. For by such
things Lycurgus thought good counsel was not
promoted, but rather discouraged, since the serious
purposes of an assembly were rendered foolish and
futile by vain thoughts, as they gazed upon statues
and paintings, or scenic embellishments, or extrava-
gantly decorated roofs of council halls. When
the multitude was thus assembled, no one of
them was permitted to make a motion, but the
motion laid before them by the senators and kings
could be accepted or rejected by the people. After-
wards, however, when the people by additions and
subtractions perverted and distorted the sense of
motions laid before them, Kings Polydorus and Theo-
pompus inserted this clause into the rhetra: “ But if
the people should adopt a distorted motion, the
senators and kings shall have power of adjourn-
ment”; that is, should not ratify the vote, but
dismiss outright and dissolve the session, on the
1 Probably names of small tributaries of the river Eurotas,
223
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
διαλύειν τὸν δῆμον, ὡς ἐκτρέποντα Kal μεταποι-
5 ovvTa τὴν γνώμην παρὰ τὸ βέλτιστον. ἔπεισαν
δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ τὴν πόλιν ὡς τοῦ θεοῦ ταῦτα προσ-
τάσσοντος, ὥς που Τυρταῖος ἐπιμέμνηται διὰ
τούτων"
Φοίβου ἀκούσαντες ΠΠυθωνόθεν οἴκαδ᾽ ἔνεικαν
μαντείας τε θεοῦ καὶ τελέεντ᾽ ἔπεα"
ἄρχειν μὲν βουλῆς θεοτιμήτους βασιλῆας,
οἷσι μέ/λ ει Σπάρ/ τας ἱὉ μερό/ εσσα πόλ, ις,
πρεσβύτας τε γέροντας, ἔπειτα δὲ δημότας
ἄνδρας,
εὐ> θεία/ ις ῥCO ήτsé ραις ἀ» νταπαμειβομένο/ υς.
VII. Οὕτω τὸΝ πολί,τ ευμα τοῦa Λυκούργου pi-
Eavtos, ὅμως ἄὔκ ρατον ἔ» τι τὴ\ν ὀλιγαρχίαν Kal
ἰσχυρὰδν οἱ ν μετ᾽ ΕῚ αὐτὸ\ν ὁ“Seρ ῶaν τες σπαργῶaσ αν Kal
θυμουμέν/ ην, ὥ“ς φησιν ὁς ἸΪλάτων, οἷον ψάλιον
ἐ3 μβάλ/ λουσιν αὐIτNῇ τὴ\ν τῶaν ἐ> φό,ρ ων δύ/ν αμιν, ἔ” τεσί /
που μάλιστα τριάκοντα Kal ἑκατὸ\ν μετὰ Λυκοῦρrn -
γον πρώτων τῶν περὶ “EXatov ἐφόρων καταστα-
2 θέντων ἐπὶ\ Θεοπό,μ που βασιλεύοντος" ὃν καί
φασιν ὑπὸδ ὴ τῆAς ἑαυτοῦa γυναικὸς\ ὀνειδιζόμενον ὡς
ἐ> λάΦτ τω παραδὃώ σ, οντα τοῖaς παισὶ Ν TH\Y βασιλείαΨ ν ἢBY
παρέλ/ αβε, “Meif᾽ w μὲν οὖν," 3» εἰπεῖνa , “ὅσῳ ypoviw -
Té/p av.” ” τῷA yaΝp ὄ” ντι TOx ἄ5 γαν ἀ> ποβBα λDοeῦ “σ α μετὰ \
τοῦa φθόν, ου διέ/ φυγε τὸ\ν κίofνf δυνον, ὥ“ στε μὴ\ παθεῖνa
224
LYCURGUS, νι. 4-vn. 2
ground that it was perverting and changing the
motion contrary to the best interests of the state.
And they were actually able to persuade the city
that the god authorized this addition to the rhetra,
as Tyrtaeus reminds us in these verses :—
“Phoebus Apollo’s the mandate was which they
brought from Pytho,
Voicing the will of the god, nor were his words
unfulfilled:
Sway in the council and honours divine belong to
the princes
Under whose care has been set Sparta’s city of
charm ; .
Second to them are the elders, and next come the
men of the people
Duly confirming by vote unperverted decrees.”
VII. Although Lycurgus thus tempered his civil
polity, nevertheless the oligarchical element in it
was still unmixed and dominant, and his successors,
seeing it “swelling and foaming,’ as Plato says,}
“imposed as it were a curb upon it, namely, the
power of the ephors.” It was about a hundred and
thirty years after Lycurgus that the first ephors,
Elatus and his colleagues, were appointed, in the
reign of Theopompus. This king, they say, on being
reviled by his wife because the royal power, when
he handed it over to his sons, would be less than
when he received it, said: “ Nay, but greater, in
that it will last longer.” And in fact, by renouncing
excessive claims and freeing itself from jealous hate,
royalty at Sparta escaped its perils, so that the
Spartan kings did not experience the fate which the
1 Laws, p. 692 a.
225
PLUTARCR’S LIVES
ἃ Μεσσήνιοι καὶ 3 ᾿ΑργεῖAο ι τοὺ\ς παρ᾽ ® αὐτοῖςaA Ba-
σιλεῖς ἔδρασαν, μηδὲν ἐνδοῦναι μηδὲ χαλάσαι
τῆAςn ἐb]ξ ουσί,α ς ἐieπ ὶB AN τὸ\ δημοτικὸ\ν ἐ> θελή4σ αντας. ὃa
καὶ Ν μά/λ ιστα τὴ\ν Λυκούρ/ γου σοφί’α ν καὶ Ν πρόν, οιαν
ἐ> ποί/η σε φανερὰἊν εἰ>ς τὰ\ς Μεσσηνίω4 ν καὶ Nees: ᾿Αργεί,ω ν,
συγγενῶAν καὶ γειτόνων, δήμων Kal βασιλέω, ν στά-
σεις καὶ κακοπολιτείας ἀφορῶσιν, οἱ τῶν ἴσων
ἀπὑ᾽ π᾽ ἀ» ρχῆςA τετυχηκότ,ε ς, ἐ5ν δὲδὲ τῷla l κλXrή /ρ ῳ καὶ \ πλλέέο ν
ἔ” χειν ἐ» κεί,ν ων δό,ξ αντες, οὐ>κ ἐ> πὶ πολὺν\ χρόν, ον
εὐδαιμό,ν ησαν, ἀλλ᾽ ’ ὕβρει μὲν TOAV βασιλέων, οὐκ
εὐπειθεί’ᾳ δὲ τAῶ ν 3 ὄχλων, TA καθεστῶAτ α συνταρά-
Eavtes ἔ» δειξαν ὅoeτ ι θεῖlaοl ν ἣ= ν ὡςς ἀ3 ληθῶςa εὐ> τύ, χημα 44
τοῖ-ς Σπαρτιάταις ὁe THY πολιτεί,α ν ἁρμοσάμενος
καὶ κεράσας Tap αὐτοῖς. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ὕστερον.
VIII. Δεύτερον δὲ τῶν Λυκούργου πολιτευμά-
των καὶ νεανικώτατον ὁ τῆAς γῆaς avadacpos, ἐστι.
δεινῆaAς yap οὔσης ἀνωμαλία,ὔς Kal πολλῶνfal ἀκτη-
μόνων καὶ ἀπόρων ἐπιφερομένων τῇ πόλει, τοῦ δὲ
πλούτου παντάπασιν εἰς ὀλίγους συνερρυηκότ/ο ς,
ὕ“ βριν καὶ \ φθόν, ον καὶ \ κακουργία, ν καὶ \ τρυφὴἪν καὶ Υ
τὰ τούτων ἔτι πρεσβύτερα καὶ μεί7ζ ω νοσήματα
πολιτεία» ς, πλοῦnτr ον Kal \ πενία, ν, ἐ2 ξελαύν4 ων, TUVE-/
πεισε τὴν χώραν ἅπασαν εἰς μέσον θέtdν τας ἐξ
ἀ> ρχῆςa ἀ> ναδάσΔ ασθαι, καὶ5 ‘ ζῆa ν μετ᾽ Ψζ9ἀ λλή/λ ων ἅ“ παν-
Tas ὁμαλεῖς“ Kal ἰσοκλήρους τοῖlςal βί/ο ις γενομένους,
TO δὲ πρωτεῖο- ν ἀρετῇn μετιόν/ τας, ὡς ἄ4λ λης ἑτέρῳ
πρὸς ἕτερον οὐκ οὔ> σης διαφορᾶaς οὐδὲ ἀνισότ, ητος,
226
LYCURGUS, vu. 2—vil. 2
Messenians and Argives inflicted upon their kings,
who were unwilling to yield at all or remit their
power in favour of the people. And this brings into
the clearest light the wisdom and foresight of
Lycurgus, when we contrast the factions and mis-
government of the peoples and kings of Messenia
and Argos, who were kinsmen and neighbours of the
Spartans. They were on an equality with the
Spartans in the beginning, and in the allotment of
territory were thought to be even better off than
they, and yet their prosperity did not last long,
but what with the insolent temper of their kings
and the unreasonableness of their peoples, their
established institutions were confounded, and they
made it clear that it was in very truth a divine
blessing which the Spartans had enjoyed in the
man who framed and tempered their civil polity
for them. These events, however, were of later
date.
VIII. A second, and a very bold political measure
of Lycurgus, in his redistribution of the land. For
there was a dreadful inequality in this regard, the
city was heavily burdened with indigent and help-
less people, and wealth was wholly concentrated in
the hands of a few. Determined, therefore, to
banish insolence and envy and crime and luxury,
and those yet more deep-seated and afflictive dis-
eases of the state, poverty and wealth, he persuaded
his fellow-citizens to make one parcel of all their
territory and divide it up anew, and to live with
one another on a basis of entire uniformity and
equality in the means of subsistence, seeking pre-
éminence through virtue alone, assured that there
was no other difference or inequality between man
224
PLUTARCH'’S LIVES
πλὴν ὅσην αἰσχρῶν ψόγος ὁρίζει καὶ καλῶν
ἔπαινος.
> Επάγiz ων δὲ τῷA λό,γ ῳ TO\ ἔ3 ργον ἔ»ἭνἬ ειμε τὴ4ν μὲ\ν
ἄλλην τοῖς περιοίκοις Λακωνικὴν τρισμυρίους
κλήρους, τὴν δὲ εἰς τὸ ἄστυ τὴν Σπάρτην συντε-
λοῦσαν ἐνακισχιλίους" τοσοῦτοι γὰρ ἐγένοντο
κλῆροι Σπαρτιατῶν: ἔνιοι δέ φασι τὸν μὲν Λυ-
κοῦργον ἑξακισχιλίους νεῖμαι, τρισχιλίους δὲ
μετὰ ταῦτα προσθεῖναι Πολύδωρον: οἱ δὲ τοὺς
μὲν ἡμίσεις τῶν ἐνακισχιλίων τοῦτον, τοὺς δὲ
ἡμίσεις Λυκοῦργον. ὁ δὲ κλῆρος ἣν ἑκάστου
τοσοῦτος ὥστε ἀποφορὰν φέρειν ἀνδρὶ μὲν ἐβδο-
μήκοντα κριθῶν μεδίμνους, γυναικὶ δὲ δώδεκα,
καὶ τῶν ὑγρῶν καρπῶν ἀναλόγως τὸ πλῆθος.
ἀρκέσειν γὰρ ῴετο τοσοῦτον αὐτοῖς, τῆς τροφῆς
πρὸς εὐεξίαν καὶ ὑγείαν ἱκανῆς, ἄλλου δὲ μη-
δενὸς δεησομένοις. λέγεται δ᾽ αὐτὸν ὕστερόν
ποτε χρόνῳ τὴν χώραν διερχόμενον ἐξ ἀποδημίας
ἄρτι τεθερισμένην, ὁρῶντα τοὺς σωροὺς παραλ-
λήλους καὶ ὁμαλεῖς, μειδιᾶσαι, καὶ εἰπεῖν πρὸς
τοὺς παρόντας ὡς ἡ Λακωνικὴ φαίνεται πᾶσα
πολλῶν ἀδελφῶν εἶναι νεωστὶ νενεμημένων.
19.% ᾿Επιχειρήσας δὲ καὶ τὰ ἔπιπλα διαιρεῖν,
ὅπως παντάπασιν ἐξέλοι τὸ ἄνισον καὶ ave-
pardon, ἐπεὶ χαλεπῶς ἑώρα προσδεχομένους τὴν
ἄντικρυς ἀφαίρεσιν, ἑτέρᾳ περιῆλθεν ὁδῷ καὶ
κατεπολιτεύσατο τὴν ἐν τούτοις πλεονεξίαν.
πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ᾿ἀκυρώσας πᾶν νόμισμα χρυ-
σοῦν καὶ ἀργυροῦν μόνῳ χρῆσθαι τῷ σιδηρῷ
προσέταξε' καὶ τούτῳ δὲ ἀπὸ πολλοῦ σταθμοῦ
228
LYCURGUS, vis. 2-1x. 1
and man than that which was established by blame
for base actions and praise for good ones.
Suiting the deed to the word, he distributed the rest
of the Laconian land among the “ perioeci,” or free
provincials, in thirty thousand lots, and that which
belonged to the city of Sparta, in nine thousand
lots, to as many genuine Spartans. But some say
that Lycurgus distributed only six thousand lots
among the Spartans, and that three thousand were
afterwards added by Polydorus; others still, that
Polydorus added half of the nine thousand to the
half distributed by Lycurgus. The lot of each was
large enough to produce annually seventy bushels of
barley for a man and twelve for his wife, with a
proportionate amount of wine and oil. Lycurgus
thought that a lot of this size would be sufficient for
them, since they needed sustenance enough to pro-
mote vigour and health of body, and nothing else.
And it is said that on returning from a journey some
time afterwards, as he traversed the land just after
the harvest, and saw the heaps of grain standing
parallel and equal to one another, he smiled, and
said to them that were by: “ All Laconia looks
like a family estate newly divided among many
brothers.”
IX. Next, he undertook to divide up their movable
property also, in order that every vestige of uneven-
ness and inequality might be removed ; and when he
saw that they could not bear to have it taken from
them directly, he took another course, and overcame
their avarice by political devices. In the first place,
he withdrew all gold and silver money from currency,
and ordained the use of iron money only. Then to
a great weight and mass of this he gave a trifling
229
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ ὄγκου δύναμιν ὀλίγην ἔδωκεν, ὥστε δέκα
μνῶν ἀμοιβὴν ἀποθήκης τε μεγάλης ἐν οἰκίᾳ
δεῖσθαι καὶ ζεύγους ἄγοντος. τούτου δὲ κυρω-
θέντος ἐξέπεσεν ἀδικημάτων γένη πολλὰ τῆς
Λακεδαίμονος. τίς yap ἢ κλέπτειν ἔμελλεν ἢ
δωροδοκεῖν ἢ ἀποστερεῖν ἢ ἁρπάζειν ὃ μήτε
κατακρύψαι δυνατὸν ἦν μήτε κεκτῆσθαι ζηλωτόν,
ἀλλὰ μηδὲ κατακόψαι λυσιτελές" ὄξει γάρ, ὡς
λέγεται, διαπύρου σιδήρου τὸ στόμωμα κατα-
σβέσας ἀφείλετο τὴν εἰς τάλλα χρείαν καὶ δύ-
ναμιν, ἀδρανοῦς καὶ δυσέργου γενομένου.
Μετὰ δὲ τοῦτο τῶν ἀχρήστων καὶ περισσῶν
ἐποιεῖτο τεχνῶν ξενηλασίαν. ἔμελλον δέ που καὶ
μηδενὸς ἐξελαύνοντος αἱ πολλαὶ τῷ κοινῷ Vvopic-
ματι συνεκπεσεῖσθαι, διάθεσιν τῶν ἔργων οὐκ ἐχόν-
των. τὸ γὰρ σιδηροῦνἀ ἀγ ώγιμον οὐκ ἦν πρὸς τοὺς
ἄλλους *" Ἕλληνας οὐδ᾽ εἶχε τιμὴν καταγελώμενον,
ὥστε οὐδὲ πρίασθαί τι τῶν ξενικῶν καὶ ῥω-
πικῶν ὑπῆρχεν, οὐδ᾽ εἰσέπλει φόρτος ἐμπορικὸς
εἰς τοὺς λιμένας, οὐδὲ ἐπέβαινε τῆς Λακωνικῆς
οὐ σοφιστὴς λόγων, οὐ μάντις ἀγυρτικός, οὐχ
ἑταιρῶν τροφεύς, οὐ χρυσῶν τις, οὐκ ἀργυρῶν
καλλωπισμάτων δημιουργός, ἅτε δὴ νομίσματος
οὐκ ὄντος. ἀλλὰ οὕτως ἀπερημω eloa κατὰ μικρὸν
ἡ τρυφὴ τῶν ,ξωπυρούντων καὶ τρεφόντων αὐτὴ ov 45
αὑτῆς ἐμαραίνετο' καὶ πλεῖον οὐδὲν ἣν τοῖς πολλὰ
κεκτημένοις, ὁδὸν οὐκ ἐχούσης εἰς μέσον τῆς Ev-
πορίας, GAN ἐγκατῳκοδομημένης καὶ ἀργούσης.
διὸ καὶ τὰ πρόχειρα τῶν σκευῶν καὶ ἀναγκαῖα
ταῦτα, κλιντῆρες καὶ δίφροι καὶ τράπεζαι, βέλ-
τίστα Tap αὐτοῖς ἐδημιουργεῖτο, καὶ κώθων ὁ
230
LYCURGUS, 1x. 1-4
value, so that ten minas’ worth! required a large
store-room in the house, and a yoke of cattle to
transport it. When this money obtained currency,
many sorts of iniquity went into exile from
Lacedaemon. For who would steal, or receive as a
bribe, or rob, or plunder that which could neither be
concealed, nor possessed with satisfaction, nay, nor
even cut to pieces with any profit? For vinegar
was used, as we are told, to quench the red-hot iron,
robbing it of its temper and making it worthless for
any other purpose, when once it had become brittle
and hard to work.
In the next place, he banished the unnecessary
and superfluous arts. And even without such banish-
ment most of them would have departed with the
old coinage, since there was no sale for their pro-
ducts. For the iron money could not be carried into
the rest of Greece, nor had it any value there, but
was rather held in ridicule. It was not possible,
therefore, to buy any foreign wares or bric-a-brac;
no merchant-seamen brought freight into their
harbours; no rhetoric teacher set foot on Laconian
soil, no vagabond soothsayer, no keeper of harlots, no
gold- or silver-smith, since there was no money there.
But luxury, thus gradually deprived of that which
stimulated and supported it, died away of itself, and
men of large possessions had no advantage over the
poor, because their wealth found no public outlet,
but had to be stored up at home in idleness. In this
way it came about that such common and necessary
utensils as bedsteads, chairs, and tables were most
excellently made among them, and the Laconian
“kothon,’ or drinking-cup, was in very high repute
1 About £40, or $200.
231
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Λακωνικὸς εὐδοκίμει μάλιστα πρὸς τὰς στρατείας,
5 ὥς φησι Κριτίας. τὰ γὰρ ἀναγκαίως πινόμενα
τῶν ὑδάτων καὶ δυσωποῦντα τὴν ὄψιν ἀπεκρύπ-
TETO TH χρόᾳ, καὶ τοῦ θολεροῦ προσκόπτοντος
ἐντὸς καὶ προσισχομένου τοῖς ἄμβωσι, καθαρώ-
τερον ἐπλησίαξε τῷ στόματι τὸ πινόμενον. αἴτιος
δὲ καὶ τούτων ὁ νομοθέτης" ἀπηλλαγμένοι γὰρ οἱ
δημιουργοὶ τῶν ἀχρήστων ἐν τοῖς ἀναγκαίοις
ἐπεδείκνυντο τὴν καλλιτεχνίαν.
X. "Ere δὲ μᾶλλον ἐπιθέσθαι τῇ τρυφῇ καὶ
τὸν ζῆλον ἀφελέσθαι τοῦ πλούτου διανοηθείς, τὸ
τρίτον πολίτευμα καὶ κάλλιστον ἐπῆγε, τὴν τῶν
συσσιτίων κατασκευήν, ὥστε δειπνεῖν μετ᾽ ἀλλή-
λων συνιόντας ἐπὶ κοινοῖς καὶ τεταγμένοις ὄψοις
καὶ σιτίοις, οἴκοι δὲ μὴ διαιτᾶσθαι κατακλινέντας
εἰς στρωμνὰς πολυτελεῖς καὶ τραπέζας, χερσὶ
δημιουργῶν καὶ μαγείρων ὑπὸ “σκότος, ὥσπερ
2 ἀδηφάγα ζῷα, πιαινομένους, καὶ διαφθείροντας
ἅμα τοῖς ἤθεσι τὰ σώματα πρὸς πᾶσαν ἐπιθυμίαν
ἀνειμένα καὶ πλησμονήν, μακρῶν μὲν ὕπνων, θερ-
μῶν δὲ λουτρῶν, πολλῆς δὲ ἡσυχίας καὶ τρόπον
τινὰ νοσηλείας καθημερινῆς δεομένην. μέγα μὲν οὖν
καὶ τοῦτο ἦν, μεῖζον δὲ τὸ τὸν πλοῦτον ἄξηλον,
ὥς φησι Θεόφραστος, καὶ ἄπλουτον ἀπεργά-
σασθαι τῇ κοινότητι τῶν δείπνων καὶ τῇ περὶ
3 τὴν δίαιταν εὐτελείᾳ. χρῆσις γὰρ οὐκ ἣν οὐδὲ
ἀπόλαυσις οὐδὲ ὄψις ὅλως ἢἢ ἐπίδειξις τῆς πολλῆς
παρασκευῆς, ἐπὶ τὸ αὐτὸ δεῖπνον τῷ πένητι τοῦ
πλουσίου βαδίξοντος: ὥστε τοῦτο δὴ τὸ θρυλού-
μενον ἐν μόνῃ τῶν ὑπὸ τὸν ἥλιον πόλεων τῇ
Σπάρτῃ βλέπεσθαι, τυφλὸν ὄντα τὸν πλοῦτον καὶ
232
LYCURGUS, 1x. 4-x. 3
for usefulness among soldiers in active service, as
Critias tells us. For its colour concealed the dis-
agreeable appearance of the water which they were
often compelled to drink, and its curving lips caught
the muddy sediment and held it inside, so that only
the purer part reached the mouth of the drinker.
For all this they had to thank their lawgiver ; since
their artisans were now freed from useless tasks, and
displayed the beauty of their workmanship in objects
of constant and necessary use.
X. With a view to attack luxury still more and
remove the thirst for wealth, he introduced his third
and most exquisite political device, namely, the
institution of common messes, so that they might
eat with one another in companies, of common and
specified foods, and not take their meals at home,
reclining on costly couches at costly tables, deliver-
ing themselves into the hands of servants and
cooks to be fattened in the dark, like voracious
animals, and ruining not only their characters but
also their bodies, by surrendering them to every
desire and all sorts of surfeit, which call for long
sleeps, hot baths, abundant rest, and, as it were, daily
nursing and tending. This was surely a great
achievement, but it was a still greater one to make
wealth “an object of no desire,’ as Theophrastus
says, and even “unwealth,’? by this community of
meals and simplicity of diet. For the rich man could
neither use nor enjoy nor even see or display his
abundant means, when he went to the same meal
as the poor man; so that it was in Sparta alone, of
all the cities under the sun, that men could have that
far-famed sight, a Plutus blind, and lying as lifeless
1 Cf. Morals, p. 527 Ὁ.
233
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κείμενον ὥσπερ γραφὴν ἄψυχον καὶ ἀκίνητον.
οὐδὲ γὰρ οἴκοι προδειπνήσαντας ἐξῆν βαδίζειν
ἐπὶ τὰ συσσίτια πεπληρωμένους, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιμελῶς
οἱ λοιποὶ παραφυλάττοντες τὸν μὴ πίνοντα μηδὲ
ἐσθίοντα pet αὐτῶν ἐκάκιζον ὡς ἀκρατῆ καὶ
πρὸς τὴν κοινὴν ἀπομαλακιζόμενον δίαιταν.
ΧΙ. Διὸ καὶ μάλιστά φασι τῷ Λυκούργῳ πρὸς
τοῦτο τὸ πολίτευμα χαλεποὺς γενέσθαι τοὺς
εὐπόρους, καὶ συστάντας ἐπ᾽ αὐτὸν ἀθρόους κα-
ταβοᾶν καὶ ἀγανακτεῖν" τέλος δὲ βαλλόμενος
ὑπὸ πολλῶν ἐξέπεσε τῆς ἀγορᾶς δρόμῳ. καὶ
τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους ἔφθασεν εἰς ἱερὸν καταφυγών'
εἷς δέ τις νεανίσκος, ἄλλως μὲν οὐκ ἀφυής, ὀξὺς
δὲ καὶ θυμοειδής, ᾿Αλκανδρος, ἐπικείμενος καὶ
διώκων ἐπιστραφέντος αὐτοῦ τῇ βακτηρίᾳ πα-
τάξας τὸν ὀφθαλμὸν ἐξέκοψεν. ὁ μὲν οὖν Av-
κοῦργος οὐδὲν ἐνδοὺς πρὸς τὸ πάθος, ἀλλὰ «στὰς
ἐναντίος ἔδειξε τοῖς πολίταις τὸ πρόσωπον ἡμαγ-
μένον καὶ διεφθαρμένην τὴν ὄψιν' αἰδὼς δὲ πολλὴ
καὶ κατήφεια τοὺς ἰδόντας ἔσχεν, ὥστε παραδοῦ-
ναι τὸν "Αλκανδρον αὐτῷ καὶ προπέμψαι μέχρι
τῆς οἰκίας ᾿συναγανακτοῦντας. ὁ δὲ Λυκοῦργος
ἐκείνους μὲν ἐπαινέσας ἀφῆκε, τὸν δὲ "᾿Αλκανδρον
εἰσαγαγὼν οἴκαδε κακὸν μὲν οὐδὲν οὔτ᾽ ἐποίησεν
οὔτ᾽ εἶπεν, ἀπαλλάξας δὲ τοὺς συνήθεις ὑὑπ ηρέτας
καὶ θεραπευτῆρας ἐκεῖνον. ἐκέλευσεν ὑπηρετεῖν.
ὁ δὲ οὐκ ὧν ἀγεννὴς ἐποίει τὸ προσταττόμενον
σιωπῇ, καὶ παραμένων ἅμα τῷ Λυκούργῳ καὶ
συνδιαιτώμενος ἐν τῷ κατανοεῖν τὴν πρᾳότητα
καὶ τὸ ἀπαθὲς αὐτοῦ τῆς ψυχῆς καὶ τὸ περὶ
τὴν δίαιταν αὐστηρὸν καὶ τὸ πρὸς τοὺς πόνους
234
LYCURGUS, x. 3-x1. 3
and motionless as a picture. For the rich could not
even dine beforehand at home and then go to the
common mess with full stomachs, but the rest kept
careful watch of him who did not eat and drink with
them, and reviled him as a weakling, and one too
effeminate for the common diet.
XI. It was due, therefore, to this last political
device above all, that the wealthy citizens were
incensed against Lycurgus, and banding together
against him, denounced him publicly with angry
shouts and cries ; finally many pelted him with stones,
so that he ran from the market-place. He succeeded
in reaching sanctuary before the rest laid hands on
him; but one young man, Alcander, otherwise no
mean nature, but hasty and passionate, pressed hard
upon him, and as he turned about, smote him with
his staff and put out one of his eyes. Lycurgus,
however, was far from yielding in consequence of
this calamity, but confronted his countrymen, and
showed them his face besmeared with blood and his
eye destroyed. Whereupon they were so filled with
shame and sorrow at the sight, that they placed
Aleander in his hands, and conducted him to _ his
house with sympathetic indignation. Lycurgus com-
mended them for their conduct, and dismissed them,
but took Alcander into the house with him, where
he did the youth no harm by word or deed, but after
sending away his customary servants and attendants,
ordered him to minister to his wants. The youth,
who was of a noble disposition, did as he was com-
manded, without any words, and abiding thus with
Lycurgus, and sharing his daily life, he came to
know the gentleness of the man, the calmness of his
spirit, the rigid simplicity of his habits, and his
235
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἄΝ καμπτον, αὐ>τ όςUl τε δεινῶaς διετέleθ η περὶ \ τὸ\ν
ἄv νδρα, καὶ πρὸ\ς τοὺς\ συνήθ/ εις καὶ Ν φί,λ. ους ἔof.λ εγεν
ὡςς οὐ> σκληρὸςΝ οὐ»δΟ᾽᾽ αὐ9θ άδ») ης ὁe ΛυκοῦρA γος, ἀ> λλὰ \ 40
μόνος ἥμερος καὶ πρᾷός ἐστι τοῖς ἄλλοις. οὕτω
μὲν οὖν οὗτος ἐκεκόλαστο καὶ τοιαύτην ὑπεσχήκει
δίκην, ἐκ πονηροῦ νέου καὶ αὐθάδους ἐμμελέστα-
τος ἀνὴρ καὶ σωφρονικώτατος γενόμενος. τοῦ
δὲ πάθους ὑπόμνημα Λυκοῦργος ἱδρύσατο τῆς
> ΑθηνᾶςA ἱe ερόν, , ἣA ν 9 ΟπτιλῖτA ιν προσηγόρ/ε υσε" τοὺ\ς
γὰρ ὀφθαλμοὺς ὀπτίλους οἱ τῇδε Δωριεῖς καλοῦ-
σιν. ἔνιοι μέντοι τὸν Λυκοῦργον, ὧν καὶ Διο-
σκορίδης ἐστὶν ὁ συντεταγμένος τὴν Λακωνικὴν
πολιτεία[4ν , πληγῆνA αι μέ/ν φασιν, ov> τυφλωθῆνa αι
δὲ τὸν ὀφθαλμόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ ἱερὸν τῇ θεῷ τῆς
ἀ» κέ/σ εως χαριBσ τήρ,ι ον ἱe δρύo σασθαι. τ5 ὸ\ μ5έ ντο7ι
φέρειν βακτηρίαν ἐκκλησιάζοντες οἱ Σπαρτιᾶται
μετὰ τὴν συμφορὰν ἐκείνην ἀπέμαθον.
XII. Τὰ δὲ συσσίτια Κρῆτες μὲν ἀνδρεῖα,
Λακεδαιμόν4ι οι δὲ\ φιδίIτ, ια προσαγορεύοbυe σιν, εἴ» τε
ὡςς φιλί,α ς καὶ \ φιλοφροσύνlaη ς ὑe παρχόν/ των, ἀ>ν τὶ \
τοῦ“ ἃ τὸΝ ὃ λαμβάνἊοΝ ντες, εἴ»τ ε ὡeς πρὸς\ εὐ> τέ/λ ειαν
καὶ \ φειδὼ\ συνεθιζό/ν των. οὐSδENὲINν δὲ\ κωλύεteι Kal \
τὸν πρῶτον ἔξωθεν ἐπικεῖσθαι φθόγγον, ὥσπερ
ἔνιοί φασιν, ἐδιτίων παρὰ τὴν δίαιταν κα τὴν
ἐδωδὴν λεγομένων. συνήρχοντο δὲ ἀνὰ πεντεκαί-
δεκα καὶ βραχεῖ τούτων ἐλάττους ἢ πλείους.
ἔφερε δὲ ἕἕ καστος κατὰ μῆνα τῶν συσσίτων ἀλφί-
των μέδιμνον, οἴνου ,χόας ὀκτώ, τυροῦ πέντε μνᾶς,
σύκων ἡμιμναῖα πέντε, πρὸς δὲ τούτοις εἰς ὀψω-
νίαν μικρόν TL κομιδῇ νομίσματος. ἄλλως δὲ
236
LYCURGUS, x1. 3-x11. 2
unwearied industry. He thus became a devoted
follower of Lycurgus, and used to tell his intimates
and friends that the man was not harsh nor self-willed,
as he had supposed, but the mildest and gentlest of
them all. Such, then, was the chastisement of this
young man, and such the penalty laid upon him,
namely, to become, instead of a wild and impetuous
youth, a most decorous and discreet man. Lycurgus,
moreover, in memory of his misfortune, built a temple
to Athena Optilitis, so called from “ optilus,”’ which is
the local Doric word for eye. Some writers, however,
of whom one is Dioscorides, who wrote a treatise on
the Spartan civil polity, say that although Lycurgus
was struck in the eye, his eye was not blinded, but
he built the temple to the goddess as a thank-offering
for its healing. Be that as it may, the Spartan
practice of carrying staves into their assemblies was
abandoned after this unfortunate accident.
XII. As for the public messes, the Cretans call them
“andreia,’ but the Lacedaemonians, “ phiditia,”’
either because they are conducive to friendship and
friendliness, ‘“phiditia’’ being equivalent ἴο
“ philitia”’ ; or because they accustom men to sim-
plicity and thrift, for which their word is “ pheido.”
But it is quite possible, as some say, that the first
letter of the word “phiditia” has been added to
it, making “ phiditia” out of “ editia,’ which refers
merely to meals and eating. ‘They met in companies
of fifteen, a few more or less, and each one of the
mess-mates contributed monthly a bushel of barley-
meal, eight gallons of wine, five pounds of cheese,
two and a half pounds of figs, and in addition to this,
a very small sum of money for such relishes as flesh
and fish. Besides this, whenever any one made a
VOL. 1. 1 237
PLUTARCR’S LIVES
καὶ \ θύ4σ ας τις ἀ> παρχὴν\ καὶ θηρεύἉσ ας μέ[ρ2 ος
ἔπεμψεν εἰς τὸ συσσίτιον. ἐξῆν γὰρ οἴκοι δει-
πνεῖν ὁπότε θύσας τις ἢ κυνηγῶν ὀψίσειε, τοὺς
δὲe yἄ λλους ἔ» δει παρεῖνa αι. καὶ \ μέ»χ ρι γε πολλοῦ a
τὰς συσσιτήσεις ἀκριβῶς διεφύλαττον. Αγιδος
γοῦν τοῦ βασιλέως, ὡς ἐπανῆλθεν ἀπὸ τῆς στρα-
τεί΄α ς καταπεπολεμηκὼςΝ > ᾿Αθηναίο΄ υς, βουλομέν/ ου
παρὰ τῇ γυναικὶ δειπνεῖν καὶ μεταπεμπομένου
Tas μερίδας, οὐκ ἔπεμψαν οἱ πολέμ, αρχοι, τοῦa
δὲἐ μεθ᾽ ᾽ ἡς μέ/ρ αν ὑeπ ᾽ ᾽ ὀ’ ργῆrςn μὴA θύ4σ αντος ἣἃ ν ἔΜ δει
θυσία», ἐζημίωσαν αὐτόν.
Εἰς δὲ τὰ συσσίτ/ ια καὶ παῖδa ες ἐφοίτων, ὥσπερ
εἰ᾽ς διδασκαλεῖαA σωφροσύνifη ς ἀbγ όμ᾿ςε νοι, Kal \ λό,γ ων
ἠκροῶντο πολιτικῶν καὶ παιδευτὰς ἐλευθερίας
ἑώ, ρων, αὐτοί Te παίξ/ ειν εἰθίζοντο Kal σκώπτειν
ἄνευ βωμολοχίας καὶ σκωπτόμενοι μὴ\ δυσχεραί-
νειν. σφόδρα γὰρ ἐδόκει καὶ τοῦτο Λακωνικὸν
εἶναι, σκώμματος ἀνέχεσθαι" μὴ φέροντα δὲ ἐξῆν
παραιτεῖσθαι, καὶ ὁ σκώπτων ἐπέπαυτο. τῶν
iy}
δ᾽ εἰσιόντων ἑκάστῳ δείξας ὁ πρεσβύτατος τὰς
θύρας, “ Διὰ τούτων, 3) φησίν, “ἔξω λόγος οὐκ
ἐκπορεύεται. bb) δοκιμάiξif εσθαι δὲ\ τὸΝν βουλόμ/ ενον
τοῦ συσσιτίου μετασχεῖν οὕτω φασί. λαβὼν τῶν
συσσίτων ἕκαστος ἀπομαγδαλίαν. εἰς τὴν χεῖρα,
τοῦ διακόνου φέροντος ἀγγεῖον ἐπὶ τῆς κεφαλῆς,
ἔβαλλε σιωπῇ καθάπερ Ah aa ὁ μὲν δοκιμάζων
ce ὁ δ᾽ ἐκκρίνων σφόδ ρα τῇ χειρὶ πιέσας.
ἡ γὰρ πεπιεσμένη τὴν τῆς τετρημένης ἔχει δύ-
ναμιν. κἂν μίαν εὕρωσι τοιαύτην, οὐ προσδέ-
238
LYCURGUS, x11. 2-6
sacrifice of first fruits, or brought home game from
the hunt, he sent a portion to his mess. For when-
ever any one was belated by a sacrifice or the chase,
he was allowed to sup at home, but the rest had to be
at the mess. For a long time this custom of eating
at common mess-tables was rigidly observed. For
instance, when King Agis, on returning from an
expedition in which he had been victorious over the
Athenians, wished to sup at home with his wife, and
sent for his rations, the polemarchs! refused to send
them to him; and when on the following day his
anger led him to omit the customary sacrifice, they
laid a fine upon him.
Boys also used to come to these public messes, as if
they were attending schools of sobriety; there they
would listen to political discussions and see instructive
models of liberal breeding. There they themselves
also became accustomed to sport and jest without
scurrility, and to endure jesting without displeasure.
Indeed, it seems to have been especially characteristic
of a Spartan to endure jesting; but if any one could
not bear up under it, he had only to ask it, and the
jester ceased. As each one came in, the eldest of
the company pointed to the door and said to him:
“Through that door no word goes forth outside.”
And they say that a candidate for membership in one
of these messes underwent the following ordeal. Each
of the mess-mates took in his hand a bit of soft bread,
and when a servant came along with a bowl upon
his head, then they cast it into this without a word,
like a ballot, leaving it just as it was if he approved
of the candidate, but if he disapproved, squeezing
it tight in his hand first. For the flattened piece
1 At Sparta, military commanders under the kings.
239
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
χονται τὸδν ἐ2 πεισιόν, τα, βουλόμ8 ενοι πάν4 τας ἡς δο-
μέν/ ους ἀ> λλήλ/ οις συνεῖνa αι. τὸ\ν δὲΝ οὕ“ τως ἀ᾽ πο-
δοκιμασθένfe τα κεκαδδί’σ θαι λέ£γ ουσι" κά/δ διχος γὰ\ρ
καλεῖaτ αι TOο ὗ ἀγγεῖaο ν εἰς ὃ TaNs ἀπομαγδαλίας
ἐμβάλλουσι. τῶν δὲ ὄψων εὐδοκίμει μάλιστα
παρ᾽ αὐτοῖςA ὁ« μέλας ζωμός, , ὥστε μηδὲ κρεαδίου
δεῖ- σθαι τοὺς πρεσβυτέρ/ο υς, ἀλλὰ παραχωρεῖνa
τοῖς νεανίσκοις, αὐτοὺς δὲ τοῦ ζωμοῦ καταχεο-
μένους ἑστιᾶσθαι. λέγεται δέ τινα τῶν ἸΤοντικῶν
βασιλέων ἕνεκα τοῦa ζωμοῦa καὶ δ πρίασθαι Λακω-
νικὸν μάγειρον: εἶτα γευσάμενον δυσχερᾶναι" Kal
τὸ\ν μάγ/ ειρον εἰ᾽ πεῖaνe Ck 70, βασιλεῦ,a τοῦaτ ον 5 δεῖa τὸxν
aὠ μὸνΝ ἐ2ν τῷ“ EdΕ ὐρώ/ τᾳ λελ, ουμέν/ ουvς ἐ3 ποψᾶσ“ θαθι . 37
πιό“ν4 τες δὲ\ μετρί/ω ς ἀ> πία, σι δί, χα λαμπάδ7ο ς. οὐ
yaΝp ἔΜ ξεστι πρὸς\ φῶaς βαδίδζέε ιν, οὔ»τ ε ταύ΄τ ην οὔAτ ε
ἄ” λλην ὁLgδ ό,ν , ὅvA πως ἐ2θ7ί ζωνται σκόiτf ους Kal A νυκτὸς\
εὐθαρσῶfςal καὶ ἀδεῶ“ς ὁidδ εύεFh ιν. τὰ μὲν οὖν συσσί-
Tia τοιαύτην ἔχει τάξιν.
XIII. Νόμους δὲ γεγραμμένους ὁe Λυκοῦργος
47
οὐκ ἔθηκεν, ἀλλὰ μί,α τῶlaνl καλουμένων ῥητρῶQνn
ἐστιν αὕτη. τὰ μὲν γὰρ κυριώτατα καὶ μέγιστα
πρὸς εὐδαιμονία/ ν πόλεως καὶ ἀρετήν, ἐν τοῖaς
ἤθεσιν weto καὶ ταῖς ἀγωγαῖς τῶν πολιτῶν
ἐγκατεστοιχειωμένα, μένειν ἀκί7ν ητα καὶ Ν βέβαια,
ἔχοντα τὴν προαίρεσιν δεσμὸν ἰσχυρότ, ερον τῆnς
ἀνάγκης, ἣν ἡ παίδευσις ἐμποιεῖ τοῖς νέοις, νομο-
θέτου διάθεσιν ἀπεργαζομένη περὶ ἕκαστον αὐ-
TO“V . τὰ δὲ μικρὰ Kal χρηματικὰ \ συμβόλ/ αια Kal
240
LYCURGUS, xu. 6—xu1. 1
of bread had the force of a perforated, or negative,
ballot. And if one such is found in the bowl, the
candidate is not admitted to the mess, because they
wish all its members to be congenial. The candi-
date thus rejected is said to have been “ caddished,”
for “ caddichus’”’! is the name of the bow] into which
they cast the pieces of bread. Of their dishes, the
black broth is held in the highest esteem, so that the
elderly men do not even ask for a bit of meat, but leave
it for the young men, while they themselves have the
broth poured out for their meals. And it is said that
one of the kings of Pontus actually bought a Spartan
cook for the sake of having this broth, and then, when
he tasted it, disliked it; whereupon the cook said:
“0 King, those who relish this broth must first have
bathed in the river Eurotas.” After drinking mod-
erately, they go off home without a torch; for they
are not allowed to walk with a light, either on this
or any other occasion, that they may accustom them-
selves to marching boldly and without fear in the
darkness of night. Such, then, is the fashion of
their common messes.
XIII. None of his laws were put into writing by
Lycurgus, indeed, one of the so-called “rhetras”
forbids it. For he thought that if the most import-
ant and binding principles which conduce to the
prosperity and virtue of a city were implanted in the
habits and training of its citizens, they would remain
unchanged and secure, having a stronger bond than
compulsion in the fixed purposes imparted to the
young by education, which performs the office of a
law-giver for every one of them. And as for minor
1 Or ‘‘caddos,” from which the verb in the Greek text is
formed.
241
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μεταπίπτοντα ταῖς χρείαις ἄλλοτε ἄλλως, βέλτιον
ἣν μὴ καταλαμβάνειν ἐγγράφοις ἀνάγκαις μηδὲ
ἀκινήτοις ἔθεσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐᾶν ἐπὶ τῶν καιρῶν, προσ-
θέσεις λαμβάνοντα καὶ ἀφαιρέσεις, ἃς ἂν οἱ
πεπαιδευμένοι δοκιμάσωσι. τὸ γὰρ ὅλον καὶ
πᾶν τῆς νομοθεσίας ἔργον εἰς τὴν παιδείαν
ἀνῆψε.
Μία μὲν οὖν τῶν ῥητρῶν ἦν, ὥσπερ εἴρηται,
μὴ χρῆσθαι νόμοις ἐγγράφοις. ἑτέρα δὲ πάλιν
κατὰ τῆς πολυτελείας, ὅπως οἰκία πᾶσα τὴν μὲν
ὀροφὴν ἀπὸ πελέκεως εἰργασμένην. ἔχῃ, τὰς δὲ
θύρας ἀπὸ πρίονος μόνου καὶ μηδενὸς τῶν ἄλλων
ἐργαλείων. ὅπερ γὰρ ὕστερον ᾿Επαμεινώνδαν εἰ-
πεῖν λέγουσιν ἐπὶ τῆς ἑαυτοῦ τραπέξης, ὡς τὸ
τοιοῦτον ἄριστον οὐ χωρεῖ προδοσίαν, τοῦτο πρῶ-
τος ἐνόησε Λυκοῦργος, ὡς οἰκία τοιαύτη τρυφὴν
οὐ χωρεῖ καὶ πολυτέλειαν, οὐδ᾽ ἔστιν οὐδεὶς οὕτως
ἀπειρόκαλος καὶ ἀνόητος ὥστε εἰς οἰκίαν ἀφελῆ
καὶ δημοτικὴν εἰσφέρειν κλίνας ἀργυρόποδας καὶ
στρωμνὰς ἁλουργεῖς καὶ χρυσᾶς κύλικας καὶ τὴν
τούτοις ἑπομένην πολυτέλειαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνάγκη συν-
αρμόξεσθαι καὶ συνεξομοιοῦν τῇ μὲν οἰκίᾳ τὴν
κλίνην, τῇ δὲ κλίνῃ τὴν ἐσθῆτα, ταύτῃ δὲ τὴν
ἄλλην χορηγίαν καὶ κατασκευήν. ἐκ δὲ ταύτης
τῆς συνηθείας φασὶ καὶ Λεωτυχίδι, ν τὸν πρεσβύ-
τερον ἐν Κορίνθῳ δειπνοῦντα, καὶ θεασάμενον τῆς
στέγης τοῦ οἴκου τὴν κατασκευὴν πολυτελῆ καὶ
φατνωματικήν, ἐρωτῆσαι τὸν ξένον εἰ τετράγωνα
Tap αὐτοῖς τὰ ξύλα φύεται.
Τρίτην δὲ ῥῥ ήτραν διαμνημονεύουσι, τοῦ Λυκούρ-
γου, τὴν κωλύουσαν ἐπὶ τοὺς αὐτοὺς πολεμίους
242
LYCURGUS, xu. 2-5
matters, such as business contracts, and cases where
the needs vary from time to time, it was better, as he
thought, not to hamper them by written constraints
or fixed usages, but to suffer them, as occasion de-
manded, to receive such modifications as educated
men should determine. Indeed, he assigned the
function of law-making wholly and entirely to
education.
One of his rhetras accordingly, as I have said,
prohibited the use of written laws. Another was
directed against extravagance, ordaining that every
house should have its roof fashioned by the axe, and
its doors by the saw only, and by no other tool.
For, as in later times Epaminondas is reported to
have said at his own table, that such a meal did not
comport with treachery, so Lycurgus was the first to
see clearly that such a house does not comport with
luxury and extravagance. Nor is any man so vulgar
and senseless as to introduce into a simple and common
house silver-footed couches, purple coverlets, gold
drinking-cups, and all the extravagance which goes
along with these, but one must of necessity adapt and
proportion his couch to his house, his coverlets to his
couch, and to this the rest of his supplies and equip-
ment. It was because he was used to this simplicity
that Leotychides the Elder, as we are told, when he
was dining in Corinth, and saw the roof of the house
adorned with costly panellings, asked his host if trees
grew square in that country.
A third rhetra of Lycurgus is mentioned, which
forbids making frequent expeditions against the same
243
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πολλάκις στρατεύειν, ἵνα μὴ πολλάκις ἀμύνε-
σθαι συνεθιζόμενοι πολεμικοὶ γέ/ν ωνται. Kal τοῦa τό
γε μάλιστα κατηγοροῦσιν ᾿Αγησιλάου τοῦ βασι-
λέως ὕστερον, ὡς ταῖς συνεχέσι καὶ πυκναῖς εἰς
τὴ4ν Βοιωτία, ν ἐ5]μ βολαῖςa καὶ \ στρατεία/ ις τοὺ\ς On-
βαίους ἀντιπάλους τοῖς Λακεδαιμονίοις κατα-
σκευάzσx αντος. διὸ\ Kal \ τετρωμέν/ ον αὐ>τ ὸν\ ἰ’ δὼ\ ν.
᾿Ανταλκίδας, “ Καλά," ἔφη, “τὰ διδασκάλια παρὰ
Θηβαίων ἀπολαμβάνεις, μὴ βουλομένους αὐτοὺς
μηδὲW eεtἰaδ ότας μά΄χ εσθαι διδάξ΄ ας." » τὰπ ρο μὲψνοὶς οὖ5ν τοι-
αὗτα νομοθετήματα ῥήτρας ὠνόμασεν, ὡς παρὰ
τοῦ θεοῦ κομιζόμενα 3 καὶ χρησμοὺς ὄντα.
XIV. Τῆς δὲ παιδείας, ἣν μέγιστον ἡγεῖτο τοῦ
νομοθέτου καὶ κάλλιστον ἔργον εἶναι, πόρρωθεν
ἀρχόμενος εὐθὺς ἐπεσκόπει τὰ περὶ τοὺς γάμους
καὶ τὰς γενέσεις. οὐ γάρ, ὡς ᾿Αριστοτέλης φησίν,
ἐπιχειρήσας σωφρονίζειν τὰς γυναῖκας, ἐπαύσατο
μὴ κρατῶν τῆς πολλῆς ἀνέσεως καὶ γυναικοκρα-
τίας διὰ τὰς πολλὰς στρατείας τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ἐν
αἷς ἠναγκάζοντο κυρίας ἀπολείπειν ἐκείνας, καὶ
διὰ τοῦτο μᾶλλον τοῦ προσήκοντος αὐτὰς ἐθερά-
πευον καὶ δεσποίνας προσηγόρευον: ἀλλὰ καὶ
τούτων τὴν ἐνδεχομένην ἐπιμέλειαν ἐποιήσατο.
τὰ μέν γε σώματα τῶν παρθένων δρόμοις καὶ
πάλαις καὶ βολαῖς δίσκων καὶ ἀκοντίων διεπόνη-
σεν, ὡς ἥ τε τῶν γεννωμένων ῥίξζωσις ἰσχυρὰν ἐν
ἰσχυροῖς σώμασιν ἀρχὴν λαβοῦσα βλαστάνοι
1 πολλάκις inserted before στρατεύειν to agree with Morals,
p. 227c¢; πολεμίους στρατεύειν.
2 κομιζόμενα Cobet, adopting the conjecture of Sintenis?:
νομιζόμενα (were believed to come).
244
LYCURGUS, xin. 5—x1v. 2
enemies, in order not to accustom such enemies to
frequent defence of themselves, which would make
them warlike. And this was the special grievance
which they had against King Agesilaiis in later times,
namely, that by his continual and frequent incursions
and expeditions into Boeotia he rendered the Thebans
a match for the Lacedaemonians. And therefore,
when Antalcidas saw the king wounded, he said:
“This is a fine tuition-fee which thou art getting
from the Thebans, for teaching them how to fight,
when they did not wish to do it, and did not know
how.” Such ordinances as these were called “rhetras”’
by Lycurgus, implying that they came from the god
and were oracles.
XIV. In the matter of education, which he
regarded as the greatest and noblest task of the
law-giver, he began at the very source, by carefully
regulating marriages and births. For it is not true
that, as Aristotle says,! he tried to bring the women
under proper restraint, but desisted, because he
could not overcome the great licence and power
which the women enjoyed on account of the many
expeditions in which their husbands were engaged.
During these the men were indeed obliged to leave
their wives in sole control at home, and for this
reason paid them greater deference than was their
due, and gave them the title of Mistress. But even
to the women Lycurgus paid all possible atten-
tion. He made the maidens exercise their bodies in
running, wrestling, casting the discus, and hurling
the javelin, in order that the fruit of their wombs
might have vigorous root in vigorous bodies and
come to better maturity, and that they themselves
Δ Pol. ii. 6, 8.
245
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
βέλτιον, αὐταί τε μετὰ ῥώμης τοὺς τόκους ὑπο-
μένουσαι καλῶς ἅμα καὶ ῥᾳδίως ἀγωνίξοιντο πρὸς
τὰς ὠδῖνας. ἀφελὼν δὲ θρύψιν καὶ σκιατραφίαν
καὶ θηλύτητα πᾶσαν οὐδὲν ἧττον εἴθισε τῶν
κόρων τὰς κόρας γυμνάς τε πομπεύειν καὶ πρὸς 48
ἱεροῖς τισιν ὀρχεῖσθαι, καὶ ἄδειν τῶν νέων παρόν-
των καὶ θεωμένων. ἔστι δὲ ὅτε καὶ σκώμματα
λέγουσαι πρὸς ἕκαστον εὐχρήστως ἐπελαμβά-
νοντο τῶν ἁμαρτανομένων" καὶ πάλιν εἰς τοὺς
ἀξίους αὐτῶν ἐγκώμια μετ᾽᾿ φδῆς πεποιημένα διεξ-
ιοῦσαι, φιλοτιμίαν πολλὴν καὶ ζῆλον ἐνεποίουν
τοῖς νεανίσκοις. ὃ γὰρ ἐγκωμιασθεὶς ἐπ᾽ ἀνδρα-
γαθίᾳ καὶ κλεινὸς ἐν ταῖς παρθένοις γεγονὼς
amet μεγαλυνόμενος ὑπὸ τῶν ἐπαίνων: αἱ δὲ
μετὰ παιδιᾶς καὶ “σκωμμάτων δήξεις οὐδὲν ἀμ-
βλύτεραι τῶν “μετὰ σπουδῆς νουθετημάτων ἣἦ σαν,
ἅτε δὴ πρὸς τὴν θέαν ὁμοῦ τοῖς ἄλλοις πολίταις
καὶ τῶν βασιλέων καὶ τῶν γερόντων συμπορευο-
μένων.
Ἢ δὲ γύμνωσις τῶν παρθένων οὐδὲν αἰσχρὸν
εἶχεν, αἰδοῦς μὲν παρούσης, ἀκρασίας δὲ ἀπούσης,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐθισμὸν ἀφελῆ καὶ ζῆλον εὐεξίας ἐνειργάξετο,
καὶ φρονήματος τὸ θῆλυ παρέγευεν οὐκ ἀγεννοῦς,
ὡς μηδὲν ἧττον αὐτῷ καὶ ἀρετῆς καὶ φιλοτιμίας
μετουσίαν οὖσαν. ὅθεν αὐταῖς καὶ λέγειν ἐπήει
καὶ φρονεῖν οἷα καὶ περὶ Γοργοῦςἱ ἱἑσ τόρηται τῆς
Λεωνίδου γυναικός. εἰπούσης γάρ τίνος, ὡς ἔοικε,
ξένης πρὸς αὐτὴν ὡς “ Μόναι τῶν ἀνδρῶν ἄρχετε
ὑμεῖς αἱ Λάκαιναι," “ Movar yap,” ἔφη, “ τίκτομεν
ἄνδρας."
XV. Ἦν μὲν οὖν καὶ ταῦτα παρορμητικὰ πρὸς
γάμον: λέγω δὲ τὰς πομπὰς τῶν παρθένων καὶ
246
LYCURGUS; χιν. 2. ΧΟ I
might come with vigour to the fulness of their times,
and struggle successfully and easily with the pangs
of child-birth. He freed them from softness and
delicacy and all effeminacy by accustoming the
maidens no less than the youths to wear tunics only
in processions, and at certain festivals to dance and
sing when the young men were present as spectators.
There they sometimes even mocked and railed good-
naturedly at any youth who had misbehaved himself ;
and again they would sing the praises of those who
had shown themselves worthy, and so inspire the
young men with great ambition and ardour. For he
who was thus extolled for his valour and held in
honour among the maidens, went away exalted by
their praises; while the sting of their playful raillery
was no less sharp than that of serious admonitions,
especially as the kings and senators, together with
the rest of the citizens, were all present at the
spectacle.
Nor was there anything disgraceful in this scant
clothing of the maidens, for modesty attended them,
and wantonness was banished; nay, rather, it pro-
duced in them habits of simplicity and an ardent
desire for health and beauty of body. It gave also
to woman-kind a taste of lofty sentiment, for they
felt that they too had a place in the arena of bravery
and ambition. Wherefore they were led to think
and speak as Gorgo, the wife of Leonidas, is said to
have done. When some foreign woman, as it would
seem, said to her: “ You Spartan women are the
only ones who rule their men,” she answered: “ Yes,
we are the only ones that give birth to men.”
XV. Moreover, there were incentives to marriage
in these things,—I mean such things as the appear-
247
PLUTARCR’S LIVES
Ta\s ἀ᾽ ποδύσ4 εις Kal \ τοὺ\ς ἀ» γῶaν ας ἐ>ν ὄv ψει τῶAν“ νέ,ω ν,
ἀ> γομέν7 ων οὐ3 YEWMETPLKALS“,A G> AN ’ ἐδιρ ωτικαῖςA, ὡσ΄ς
φησιν ὁ Πλάτων, ἀνάγκαις" οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ
ἀτιμίαν τινὰ προσέθηκε τοῖς ἀγάμοις. εἴργοντο
yap ἐν ταῖς° γυμνοπαιδία/ ις τῆaς θέας" τοῦA δὲ yeu-
μῶAν ος οἱ e μὲ\ν ἄv ρχοντες αὐ2τ οὺς\ ἐew κέahλ ευον ἐ»ν κύ7 κλῳ
γυμνοὺς περιϊ«έwfν αι THY ἀγοράν, οἱ δὲ περιϊoόo ντες
ἦ> δον εἰ’ς αὑ«τ οὺς\ ὠ’δ ήν/ τινα πεποιημέν/η ν, ὡςς δίκαια
πάσχοιεν, ὅο τι τοῖaς νό,μ οις ἀπειθοῦσa ι" τιμῆAς δὲ Kal
θεραπείας ἣν νέοι πρεσβυτέροις παρεῖχον, ἐστέ-
ρηντο. ὅθεν καὶ τὸ πρὸς Δερκυλλίδαν ῥηθὲν οὐδεὶς
ἐμέμψατο, καίπερ εὐδόκιμον ὄντα στρατηγόν.
ἐ5»π ιόν‘ τι γὰ\ρ αὐ3 τῷn A τῶfaνl νεωτέ/ρ ων τις ἕ“ δρας οὐ» χ
ὑ€ πεῖκξα εν, εἰΣπΑώΣν , ἐ“π Οὐδὲδ γὰρ ἐδιμ οὶ σὺ τὸeν eὑπ είξοντα
γεγέννηκας."
᾿Ἔγάμουν δὲ δι’ ἁρπαγῆς, οὐ μικρὰς οὐδὲ
ἀ3ώ° ρους πρὸ\ς γάμ, ον, ἀ> λλὰ \ καὶ \ ἀ> κμαζούσ"ὦ ας Kal \
πεπείρ’ ους. τὴ\ν δὲ\ ἁ= ρπασθεῖaσ αν ἡe νυμφεύτ4 ρια
καλουμένη παραλαβοῦσA α, τὴ\ν μὲν κεφαλὴν ἐν
χρῷf al περιέκ/ ειρεν, ἱ€ ματί/ῳ δὲ\ ἀ> νδρεί/ῳ Kal AU,ὑ ποδήμ/ α-
σιν ἐ> νσκευάἐνσ ασα κατέκ΄ λινεν ἐ3 πὶ Ν στιβάδ/ α μό,ν ην
ἄνευ φωτός. ὁ δὲ νυμφίος οὐ μεθύων οὐδὲ θρυ-
πτόμενος, ἀλλὰ νήφων, ὥσπερ ἀεί, δεδειπνηκὼς ἐν
τοῖaς φιδιτίο/ ις, παρεισελθὼ\ν ἔ/-λ υε τὴ\ν ζώ,ν ην καὶ
248
LYCURGUS, xv. 1-3
ance of the maidens without much clothing in pro-
cessions and athletic contests where young men were
looking on, for these were drawn on by necessity, “ not
geometrical, but the sort of necessity which lovers
know,’ as Plato says. Nor was this all; Lycurgus
also put a kind of public stigma upon confirmed
bachelors. They were excluded from the sight of
the young men and maidens at their exercises, and
in winter the magistrates ordered them to march
round the market-place in their tunics only, and as
they marched, they sang a certain song about them-
selves, and its burden was that they were justly
punished for disobeying the laws. Besides this, they
were deprived of the honour and gracious attentions
which the young men habitually paid to their elders.
Therefore there was no one to find fault with what
was said to Dercyllidas, reputable general though he
was. As he entered a company, namely, one of the
younger men would not offer him his seat, but said :
“Indeed, thou hast begotten no son who will one
day give his seat to me.”
For their marriages the women were carried off
by force, not when they were small and unfit for
wedlock, but when they were in full bloom and
wholly ripe. After the woman was thus carried off,
the bride’s-maid, so called, took her in charge, cut
her hair off close to the head, put a man’s cloak and
sandals on her, and laid her down on a pallet, on the
floor, alone, in the dark. Then the bride-groom,
not flown with wine nor enfeebled by excesses, but
composed and sober, after supping at his public mess-
table as usual, slipped stealthily into the room where
the bride lay, loosed her virgin’s zone, and bore her
1 Republic, p. 458 d.
249
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 μετήν, εγκεν ἀ? ράμ’ ενος ἐ3 πὶ \ τὴ\ν κλίν, ην. συνδιατρί-,
was δὲ χρόν/ ον οὐ πολὺν ἀπήει κοσμίω, ς οὗπερ
εἰΨ ώΚΑθ ει TOΝ πρότ/ ερον, καθευδή,σὔ ων μετὰA τῶnν ἄA λλων
νέUAω ν. καὶ τὸ\ λοιπὸν οὕτως ἔπραττε, τοῖ-ς μὲν
ἡλικιώταις συνδιημερεύων καὶ συναναπαυύόμενος,
πρὸς\ δὲ\ τὴ\ν νύ/ μφην κρύᾺ φα μετ᾽ ’ εὐ>’λ αβεία’ὔς φοιτῶνa ,
αἰσχυνόμενος καὶ δεδοικὼς μή τις αἴσθοιτο τῶν
ἔνδον, ἅμα καὶ τῆς νύμφης ἐπιτεχνωμένης καὶ
συνευπορούσ7 ης ὅeC πως ἂ᾿ ν ἐν καιρῷn Kal λανθάνοντες
ἀλλήλ, οις συμπορεύοιντο. καὶ τοῦaAτ ο ἔπραττον οὐκ
ὀὅἘν λί“Ὁγ ον χρόν, ον, ἀ5λ λ᾽ ’ ὥὉ“σ τε καὶ \ παῖaδ ας γενέΨσ θαι
ἐνίΤᾺο ις πρὶν ἐς ἡμέραν θεάσασθαι τὰς ἑαυτῶanν
γυναῖκa ας. ἡ δὲ τοιαύτη σύνοδος οὐ μό/ν ον éyKpa-
τείας καὶ σωφροσύνης ἄσκησις ἣν, ἀλλὰ τοῖς τε
σώμασι γονίμους καὶ τῷ φιλεῖν ἀεὶ καινοὺς καὶ
προσφάτους ἦγεν ἐπὶ τὴν κοινωνίαὔ ν, οὐ διακορεῖςa
οὐδ50᾽27 ἐΡ]ξ ιτή/λ ους ταῖaς ἀ> νέ/δ ην κοινωνία/ ις, ἀ>λ λ᾽ ᾽ ἀἊεΜί
τι λεί7 ψανον καὶ ὑπέκκαυμα πό/θ ου Kal \ χάριτος
ἐ>?ν απολεί/π οντας ἀ᾽ λληὴλ/ οις.
Τοσαύτ΄ ην δὲ\ τοῖAς γάμ΄ οις ἐ9 πιστήσ, ας αἰIδNῶA Kal \ 49
τάξ/ ιν, οὐ>δ ὲ\ν ἧεςτ τον ἐ» ξέ/ βαλε τὴ\ ν κενὴἊνν καὶ \ γυ-
ναικώδη ξηλοτυπίαν, ἐἐν καλῷ καταστήσας ὕβριν
μὲν καὶ ἀναξίαν πᾶσαν εἴργειν ἀπὸ τοῦ γάμου,
παίδων δὲ καὶ τεκνώσεως κοινωνεῖν τοῖς ἀξίοις,
κατωγελῶντας τῶν ὡς ἄμικτα καὶ ἀκοινώνητα
ταῦaτ α μετιόντων σφαγαῖςal καὶ πολέμ/ οις. ἐξῆnrν
μὲν ya\p ἀνδρὶ πρεσβυτέρῳ νέας γυναικός,, εἰ δή
τινα τῶν καλῶν καὶ ἀγαθῶν ἀσπάσαιτο νέων καὶ
δοκιμάσειεν, εἰσαγαγεῖν παρ᾽ αὐτὴν καὶ πλή-
σαντα γενναίου σπέρματος ἴδιον αὑτοῖς ποιή-
250
LYCURGUS, ‘xv. 4-7
in his arms to the marriage-bed. Then, after spend-
ing a short time with his bride, he went away
composedly to his usual quarters, there to sleep with
the other young men. And so he continued to do
from that time on, spending his days with his com-
rades, and sleeping with them at night, but visiting
his bride by stealth and with every precaution, full
of dread and fear Jest any of her household should
be aware of his visits, his bride also contriving and
conspiring with him that they might have stolen
interviews as occasion offered. And this they did
not for a short time only, but long enough for some
of them to become fathers before they had looked
upon their own wives by daylight. Such interviews
not only brought into exercise self-restraint and
moderation, but united husbands and wives when
their bodies were full of creative energy and their
affections new and fresh, not when they were sated
and dulled by unrestricted intercourse; and there
was always left behind in their hearts some residual
spark of mutual longing and delight.
After giving marriage such traits of reserve and
decorum, he none the less freed men from the empty
and womanish passion of jealous possession, by mak-
ing it honourable for them, while keeping the
marriage relation free from all wanton irregularities,
to share with other worthy men in the begetting of
children, laughing to scorn those who regard such
common privileges as intolerable, and resort to
murder and war rather than grant them. For
example, an elderly man with a young wife, if he
looked with favour and esteem on some fair and
noble young man, might introduce him to her, and
adopt her offspring by such a noble father as his
251
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
σασθαι τὸ γεννηθέν. ἐξῆν δὲ πάλιν ἀνδρὶ χρη-
στῷ, τῶν εὐτέκνων τινὰ καὶ σωφρόνων θαυμά-
σαντι γυναικῶν ἑτέρῳ γεγαμημένην, πεῖσαι τὸν
ἄνδρα συνελθεῖν, ὥσπερ ἐν χώρᾳ καλλικάρπῳ
φυτερύ ο΄ ντα καὶ \ πο3 ιού7μ7 ενορν παῖX aδnx α ςp a ἀ᾽ γαθούς΄, aρ > y a-c
Galavl ὁe μαί,μ ους καὶ συγγενεῖςn ἐσομένους. πρῶlτal ον
μὲν γὰρ οὐκ ἰδίους ἡγεῖτο τῶν πατέρων τοὺς
παῖδa ας, ἀ> λλὰ \ κοινοὺς\ τῆaςn πό,λ εως ὁ« ΛυκοῦρA γος,
ὅ“ θεν οὐ>κ ἐ>κ τῶaν τυχόν, των, ἀ2λ λ᾽ ee!ἐ κ τῶaν ἀ> ρίψ στων
ἐ2 βού΄λ, ετο γεγονό4τ ας εἶ> ναι τοὺ\ς πολίτLsα ς. ἔΜ πειτα
πολλὴν\ ἀ3 βελτερία, ν Kal \ τῦa φον ἐ3 νεώ,ρ α τοῖaς περὶ \
ταῦτα τῶν ἄλλων νομοθετήμασιν, οἱ κύνας μὲν
καὶδ ὴ ἵππους ὑπὸ τοῖaς κρατίστοις τῶnaν ὀχείων
βιβάζ/ ουσι χάρ/ ιτι πεί/θ οντες ἢx μισθῷA τοὺ\ς κυ-
ρί/ο υς, Tas δὲ\ γυναῖaκ ας ἐγκλεισάμενοι φρουροῦσa ιν,
ἐξ αὐτῶnν μόνων τί,κ τειν ἀξιοῦaνA τες, κἂν ἄφρονες
ὦσι, κἂν παρήλικες, κἂν νοσώδεις, ὡς οὐχὶ πρώ-
τοις τοῖaς κεκτημέν/ο ις Kal τρέφουσι τῶaν παίiδe ων
γινομέfν ων πονηρῶν“ , ἐὰν ἐκ πονηρῶaν γένωνται,
καὶ τοὐναντίον χρηστῶν, ἂν τοιαύτης τύχωσι
γενέσεως. ταῦτα δὲ οὕτως πραττόμενα φυσικῶς
καὶ πολιτικῶlςal τό’τ ε τοσοῦlτal ον ἀπεῖlaχl ε τῆaςn ὕστερον
λεγομένης γενέ/σ θαι περὶ \ τὰς γυναῖvκa) ας εὐχερεί,α ς
ὥστε ὅλως ἄyπr ιστον εἶναι τὸ τῆAς μοιχεία͵ ς παρ᾽
10 αὐτοῖς“ . καὶ λόfγ ος ἀπομνημονεύεται Τεράδα τινὸΝς
Σπαρτιάτου τῶfaνl σφόTδy, ρα παλαιῶνa , ὃἃ ς ἐρωτηθεὶς
ὑπὸ ξέ7ν ου τί πάσ/ χουσιν οἱ μοιχοὶ παρ᾽ αὐτοῖςa ,
252
LYCURGUS, xv. 7-10
own. And again, a worthy man who admired some
woman for the fine children that she bore her
husband and the modesty of her behaviour as a wife,
might enjoy her favours, if her husband would con-
sent, thus planting, as it were, in a soil of beautiful
fruitage, and begetting for himself noble sons, who
would have the blood of noble men in their veins.
For in the first place, Lycurgus did not regard sons
as the peculiar property of their fathers, but rather as
the common property of the state, and therefore
would not have his citizens spring from random
parentage, but from the best there was. In the
second place, he saw much folly and vanity in what
other peoples enacted for the regulation of these
matters; in the breeding of dogs and horses they
insist on having the best sires which money or
favour can secure, but they keep their wives under
lock and key, demanding that they have children by
none but themselves, even though they be foolish, or
infirm, or diseased ; as though children of bad stock
did not show their badness to those first who
possessed and reared them, and children of good
stock, contrariwise, their goodness. The freedom
which thus prevailed at that time in marriage
relations was aimed at physical and political well-
being, and was far removed from the licentiousness
which was afterwards attributed to their women,
so much so that adultery was wholly unknown
among them. And a saying is reported of one
Geradas,! a Spartan of very ancient type, who, on
being asked by a stranger what the punishment
for adulterers was among them, answered: “ Stranger,
1 The name is Geradatas in Morals, p. 228 ο (Apophtheg.
Lacon, 20).
253
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
εἶ3 πεν A “FC ξέ,ν ε, οὐ)δε ὶς\ γίZν εται μοιχὸς\ παρ᾽ > ἡδμ ῖνaw . 9
ἐ> κεί,ν ου δὲδὲ ὑς πολαβόν/τ ος, oc? “Ka\ v οὖ-ν γέ/ν ηται; ”
“Tatpao v,”’ ἔφη ὁς Τεράδας, “ ἐκτίνει μέγαν, ὃ¢ ς
ὑ€ περκύ7ψ ας τὸΝ TavyA etov ἀ> πὸ \ τοῦa ύρbyω τ, α πίε, ται. 37
θαυμάσ/ αντος δδ᾽᾽ ἐb κεί/ν ου καὶ \ φήσ/ αντος" “ce “lalas) δὲδὲ
ἂA ν γέ/ν οιτο βοῦ“ς τηλικοῦrτad ος; 37) γελάἐσν ας ὁ€ Τεράδ͵7 ας,
“Πῶςan δ᾽ ἄν," ἔ5) φη, Sey Σπάρτῃ “μοιχὸΝς γένοιτο;
ταῦτα μὲν οὖν ἱστόρηται περὶ τῶν γάμων.
XVI. Τὸ δὲ γεννηθὲν οὐκ ἣν κύριος 0 γεννήσας
τρέφειν, GAN ἔφερε λαβὼν εἰς τόπον τινὰ λέ-
σχην καλούμενον, ἐν ᾧ καθήμενοι τῶν φυλετῶν
οἱ πρεσβύτατοι καταμαθόντες τὸ παιδάριον, εἰ
μὲν εὐπαγὲς εἴη καὶ ῥωμαλέον, τρέφειν ἐκέλευον,
κλῆaρ ον αὐτῷa n τῶnν ἐνακισχιλί,ω ν προσνείμ/ αντες"
εἰ δ᾽ ἀγεννὲς καὶ ἄμορφον, ἀπέπεμπον εἰς τὰς
λεγομένας ᾿Αποθέτας, παρὰ Ταὕὔγετον βαραθρώ-
δη τόπον, ὡς οὔτε αὐτῷ ζῆν ἄμεινον dv! οὔτε
τῇn a πόλ/ ει TO\ μὴ\ καλῶςa εὐ᾽ θὺ\ς ἐ3 ξ ἀ> ρχῆςa πρὸ\ς
εὐ» εξί/α ν καὶ \ ῥea ώSf,μ ην πεφυκός/ . ὅ“ θεν οὐ7δQ\ὲ ὕ“ δατι
τὰ βρέφη, ἀλλ᾽ οἴνῳ περιέλουον αἱ γυναῖκες,
ἄἀσανόν τινα ποιούμεναι τῆς κράσεως αὐτῶν.
λέγεται γὰρ ἐξίστασθαι τὰ ἐπιληπτικὰ καὶ νο-
σώδη πρὸς τὸν ἄκρατον ἀποσφακελίξοντα, τὰ δ
ὑγιεινὰ «μᾶλλον στομοῦσθαι καὶ κρατύνεσθαι τὴν
ἕξιν. ἦν δὲ περὶ τὰς τροφοὺς ἐπιμέλειά τις μετὰ
τέχνης, ὥστ᾽ ἄνευ σπαργάνων ἐκτρεφούσας τὰ
βρέφη τοῖς μέλεσι καὶ τοῖς εἴδεσιν ἐλευθέρια
ποιεῖν, ἔτι δὲ εὔκολα ταῖς διαίταις καὶ ἄσικχα
καὶ ἀθαμβῆ σκότου καὶ πρὸς ἐρημίαν ἄφοβα καὶ
1 ὃν supplied by van Herwerden: ἄμεινον οὔτε.
254
LYCURGUS, xv. ro-xv1. 3
there is no adulterer among us.” “Suppose, then,”
replied the stranger, “there should be one.” “A
bull,” said Geradas, “ would be his forfeit, a bull so
large that it could stretch over Mount Taygetus and
drink from the river Eurotas.”” Then the stranger was
astonished and said : “ But how could there be a bull
so large?” To which Geradas replied, with a smile:
“ But how could there be an adulterer in Sparta ?”’
Such, then, are the accounts we find of their marriages.
XVI. Offspring was not reared at the will of the
father, but was taken and carried by him to a place
called Lesche, where the elders of the _ tribes
officially examined the infant, and if it was well-
built and sturdy, they ordered the father to rear it,
and assigned it one of the nine thousand lots of
land; but if it was ill-born and deformed, they
sent it to the so-called Apothetae, a chasm-like
place at the foot of Mount Taygetus, in the conviction
that the life of that which nature had not well
equipped at the very beginning for health and
strength, was of no advantage either to itself or the
state. On the same principle, the women used to
bathe their new-born babes not with water, but
with wine, thus making a sort of test of their con-
stitutions. For it is said that epileptic and sickly
infants are thrown into convulsions by the strong
wine and loose their senses, while the healthy ones
are rather tempered by it, like steel, and given a
firm habit of body. Their nurses, too, exercised
great care and skill; they reared infants without
swaddling-bands, and thus left their limbs and figures
free to develop; besides, they taught them to be
contented and happy, not dainty about their food,
nor fearful of the dark, nor afraid to be left alone,
255
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἄπειρα δυσκολίας ἀγεννοῦς καὶ κλαυθμυρισμῶν.
διὸ καὶ τῶν ἔξωθεν ἔνιοι τοῖς τέκνοις Λακωνικὰς
ἐωνοῦντο τίτθας: καὶ τήν γε τὸν ᾿Αθηναῖον
᾿Αλκιβιάδην τιτθεύσασαν ᾿Αμύκλαν ἱστοροῦσι
γεγονέναι Λάκαιναν.
᾿Αλλὰ τούτῳ μέν, ὡς Πλάτων φησί, Ζώπυρον
ἐπέστησε παιδαγωγὸν Περικλῆς, οὐδέν τι τῶν
ἄλλων διαφέροντα δούλων: τοὺς δὲ Σπαρτιατῶν 50
παῖδας οὐκ ἐπὶ ὠνητοῖς οὐδὲ μισθίοις ἐποιήσατο
παιδαγωγοῖς ὁ Λυκοῦργος, οὐδ᾽ ἐξῆν ἑκάστῳ
τρέφειν οὐδὲ παιδεύειν ὡς ἐβούλετο τὸν υἱόν,
ἀλλὰ πάντας εὐθὺς ἑπταετεῖς γενομένους παρα-
λαμβάνων αὐτὸς εἰς ἀγέλας κατελόχιξε, καὶ
συννόμους ποιῶν καὶ συντρόφους μετ᾽ ἀλλήλων
εἴθιξε συμπαίξειν καὶ συσχολάζειν. ἄρχοντα δ᾽
αὐτοῖς παρίστατο τῆς ἀγέλης τὸν τῷ φρονεῖν
διαφέροντα καὶ θυμοειδέστατον ἐν τῷ μάχεσθαι:
καὶ πρὸς τοῦτον ἀφεώρων καὶ προστάττοντος
ἠκροῶντο καὶ κολάξοντος ἐκαρτέρουν, ὥστε τὴν
παιδείαν. εἶναι μελέτην εὐπειθείας. ἐπεσκόπουν
δὲ οἱ πρεσβύτεροι παίζοντας αὐτούς, καὶ τὰ
πολλιὰ μάχας τινὰς ἐμβάλλοντες ἀεὶ καὶ φιλο-
νεικίας, οὐ παρέργως κατεμάνθανον ὁποῖός ἐστι
τὴν φύσιν ἕκαστος αὐτῶν πρὸς τὸ τολμᾶν καὶ
μὴ φυγομαχεῖν. ἐν ταῖς ἁμίλλαις.
ράμματα μὲν οὖν ἕνεκα τῆς χρείας ἐμάνθανον"
ἡ δ᾽ ἄλλη πᾶσα παιδεία πρὸς τὸ ἄρχεσθαι καλῶς
ἐγίνετο καὶ καρτερεῖν πονοῦντα καὶ νικᾶν μαχό-
μενον. διὸ καὶ τῆς ἡλικίας. προερχομένης ἐπέ-
TELVOV αὐτῶν τὴν ἄσκησιν, ἐν χρῷ τε κείροντες
256
LYCURGUS, xvi. 3-6
nor given to contemptible peevishness and whim-
pering. This is the reason why foreigners sometimes
bought Spartan nurses for their children. Amycla,
for instance, the nurse of the Athenian Alcibiades,
is said to have been a Spartan.!
And yet Alcibiades, as Plato says,? had for a tutor,
set over him by Pericles, one Zopyrus, who was just
acommon slave. But Lycurgus would not put the sons
of Spartans in charge of purchased or hired tutors,
nor was it lawful for every father to rear or train his
son as he pleased, but as soon as they were seven
years old, Lycurgus ordered them all to be taken by
the state and enrolled in companies, where they were
put under the same discipline and nurture, and
so became accustomed to share one another’s sports
and studies. The boy who excelled in judgement
and was most courageous in fighting, was made
captain of his company; on him the rest all kept
their eyes, obeying his orders, and submitting to
his punishments, so that their boyish training was a
practice of obedience. Besides, the elderly men
used to watch their sports, and by ever and anon
egging them on to mimic battles and disputes, learned
accurately how each one of them was naturally dis-
posed when it was a question of boldness and aggres-
siveness in their struggles.
Of reading and writing, they learned only enough
to serve their turn; all the rest of their training was
calculated to make them obey commands well, en-
dure hardships, and conquer in battle. Therefore,
as they grew in age, their bodily exercise was
increased ; their heads were close-clipped, and they
1 Cf. Alcibiades, i. 2. 2 Alcibiades 1, Ὁ. 122 Ὁ.
257
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ βαδίζειν ἀνυποδήτους παίζειν τε γυμνοὺς ὡς
τὰ πολλὰ συνεθίξοντες. γενόμενοι δὲ δωδεκαετεῖς
ἄνευ χιτῶνος ἤδη διετέλουν, ἕν ἱμάτιον εἰς τὸν
ἐνιαυτὸν λαμβάνοντες, αὐχμηροὶ τὰ σώματα καὶ
λουτρῶν καὶ ἀλειμμάτων ἄπειροι: πλὴν ὀλίγας
ἡμέρας τινὰς τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ τῆς τοιαύτης φιίιλαν-
θρωπίας μετεῖχον. ἐκάθευδον δὲ ὁμοῦ κατ᾽ ἴλην
καὶ ἀγέλην ἐπὶ στιβάδων, ἃς αὑτοῖς συνεφόρουν,
τοῦ παρὰ τὸν Εὐρώταν πεφυκότος καλάμου τὰ
ἄκρα ταῖς χερσὶν ἄνευ σιδήρου κατακλάσαντες.
ἐν δὲ τῷ χειμῶνι τοὺς λεγομένους λυκόφονας
ὑπεβάλλοντο καὶ κατεμίγνυσαν ταῖς στιβάσι,
θερμαντικὸν ἔχειν τι τῆς ὕλης δοκούσης.
XVII. Ἤδη δὲ τοῖς τηλικούτοις ἐρασταὶ τῶν
εὐδοκίμων νέων συνανεστρέφοντο' καὶ προσεῖχον
οἱ πρεσβύτεροι, καὶ μᾶχλον ἐπιφοιτῶντες εἰς τὰ
γυμνάσια, καὶ μαχομένοις καὶ σκώπτουσιν ἀλλή-
λους παρατυγχάνοντες, οὐ παρέργως, ἀλλὰ τρό-
πον τινὰ πάντες οἰόμενοι πάντων καὶ πατέρες
εἶναι καὶ παιδαγωγοὶ καὶ ἄρχοντες, ὥστε μήτε
καιρὸν ἀπολείπεσθαι μήτε χωρίον ἔρημον τοῦ
νουθετοῦντος τὸν ἁμαρτάνοντα καὶ κολάζοντος.
οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ καὶ παιδονόμος ἐκ τῶν καλῶν καὶ
ἀγαθῶν ἀνδρῶν ἐτάττετο, καὶ κατ᾽ ἀγέλας αὐτοὶ
προΐσταντο τῶν “λεγομένων εἰρένων. ἀεὶ τὸν σω-
φρονέστατον. καὶ μαχιμώτατον. εἴρενας δὲ κα-
λοῦσι τοὺς ἔτος ἤδη δεύτερον ἐκ παίδων γεγονό-
τας, μελλείρενας͵ δὲ τῶν παίδων τοὺς πρεσβυτά-
τους. οὗτος οὖν ὁ εἴρην;, εἴκοσι ἔτη γεγονώς, ἄρχει
τε τῶν ὑποτεταγμένω: ἐν ταῖς μάχαις, καὶ κατ᾽
258
LYCURGUS, xvi. 6—xvil. 2
were accustomed to going bare-foot, and to playing
for the most part without clothes. When they were
twelve years old, they no longer had tunics to wear,
received one cloak a year, had hard, dry flesh, and
knew little of baths and ointments; only on certain
days of the year, and few at that, did they indulge
in such amenities. They slept together, in troops
and companies, on pallet-beds which they collected
for themselves, breaking off with their hands—no
knives allowed—the tops of the rushes which grew
along the river Eurotas. In the winter-time, they
added to the stuff of these pallets the so-called
“lycophon,” or thistle-down, which was thought to
have warmth in it.
XVII. When the boys reached this age, they were
favoured with the society of lovers from among the
reputable young men. The elderly men also kept
close watch of them, coming more frequently to their
places of exercise, and observing their contests of
strength and wit, not cursorily, but with the idea
that they were all in a sense the fathers and tutors
and governors of all the boys. In this way, at every fit-
ting time and in every place, the boy who went wrong
had someone to admonish and chastise him. Nor
was this all; one of the noblest and best men of the
city was appointed paedonome, or inspector of the
boys, and under his directions the boys, in their
several companies, put themselves under the com-
mand of the most prudent and warlike of the so-
called Eirens. This was the name given to those
who had been for two years out of the class of boys,
and Melleirens, or Would-be FEirens, was the name
for the oldest of the boys. This eiren, then, a youth
of twenty years, commands his subordinates in their
759
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 οἶκον ὑπηρέταις χρῆται πρὸς TO δεῖπνον. ἐπι-
τάσσει δὲ τοῖς μὲν ἁδροῖς ξύλα φέρειν, τοῖς δὲ
μικροτέροις λάχανα. καὶ φέρουσι κλέπτοντες,
οἱ μὲν ἐπὶ τοὺς κήπους βαδίζοντες, οἱ δὲ εἰς τὰ
τῶν ἀνδρῶν συσσίτια παρεισρέοντες εὖ μάλα
πανούργως καὶ πεφυλαγμένως" ἂν δ᾽ ἁλῷ, πολ-
λὰς λαμβάνει πληγὰς τῇ μάστιγι, ῥᾳθύμως δοκῶν
κλέπτειν. καὶ ἀτέχνως. κλέπτουσι δὲ καὶ τῶν
σιτίων ὅ τι ἂν δύνωνται, μανθάνοντες εὐφυῶς
ἐπιτίθεσθαι τοῖς καθεύδουσιν ἢ ῥᾳθύμως φυλάτ-
τουσι. τῷ δὲ ἁλόντι ξημία πληγαὶ καὶ τὸ πει-
νῆν. γλίσχρον. γὰρ αὐτοῖς ἐστι δεῖπνον, ὅπως
δι’ αὑτῶν ἀμυνόμενοι τὴν ἔνδειαν ἀναγκάζωνται
τολμᾶν καὶ πανουργεῖν.
Καὶ τοῦτο μὲν ἔργον τῆς ὀλιγοσιτίας" παρέργον
δέ φασι τὴν τῶν σωμάτων αὔξησιν. φέρεται
γὰρ εἰς μῆκος, ὅταν τὸ πνεῦμα μὴ πολλὴν σχῇ
διατριβὴν καὶ ἀσχολίαν ὑπὸ πλήθους τροφῆς
εἰς βάθος καὶ πλάτος πιεζόμενον, ἀλλ᾽ ἄνω βα- 51
δίζῃ διὰ κουφότητα, τοῦ σώματος ἐκλύτως καὶ
ῥᾳδίως ἐπιδιδόντος. τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ τοῦτο καὶ καλοὺς
δοκεῖ ποιεῖν" αἱ γὰρ ἰσχναὶ καὶ διάκενοι μᾶλλον
ἕξεις ὑπακούουσι πρὸς τὴν διάρθρωσιν, αἱ δὲ
ὀγκώδεις καὶ πολύτροφοι διὰ βάρος ἀντιβαί-
νουσιν, ὥσπερ ἀμέλει καὶ τῶν ἐν τῷ κύειν καθαι-
ρομένων γυναικῶν ἰσχνὰ μέν, εὐειδῆ δὲ καὶ γλα-
φυρὰ γίνεται τὰ βρέφη, διὰ τὴν ἐλαφρότητα τῆς
ὕλης κρατουμένης μᾶλλον ὑπὸ τοῦ τυποῦντος.
ἀλλὰ γὰρ ἡ μὲν αἰτία τοῦ συμβαίνοντος ἐν μέσῳ
προκείσθω σκοπεῖν.
XVIII. Οὕτω δὲ κλέπτουσι πεφροντισμένως
οἱ παῖδες, ὥστε λέγεταί τις ἤδη σκύμνον ἀλώ-
260
LYCURGUS, xvi. 3-xvu. 1
mimic battles, and in doors makes them serve him at
his meals. He commissions the larger ones to fetch
wood, and the smaller ones potherbs. And they steal
what they fetch, some of them entering the gardens,
and others creeping right slyly and cautiously into
the public messes of the men ; but if a boy is caught
stealing, he is soundly flogged, as a careless and un-
skilful thief. They steal, too, whatever food they
can, and learn to be adept in setting upon people
when asleep or off their guard. But the boy who
is caught gets a flogging and must go hungry.
For the meals allowed them are scanty, in order
that they may take into their own hands the fight
against hunger, and so be forced into boldness and
cunning.
This is the main object of their spare diet; a
secondary one is to make them grow tall. For it
contributes to height of stature when the vitality
is not impeded and hindered by a mass of nourish-
ment which forces it into thickness and width, but
ascends of its own lightness, and when the body
grows freely and easily. ‘The same thing seems also
to conduce to beauty of form; for lean and meagre
habits yield more readily to the force of articulation,
whereas the gross and over-fed are so heavy as to
resist it. Just so, we may be sure, women who take
physic while they are pregnant, bear children which
are lean, it may be, but well-shaped and fine, because
the lightness of the parent matter makes it more
susceptible to moulding. However, the reason for
this I must leave for others to investigate.
XVIII. The boys make such a serious matter of
their stealing, that one of them, as the story goes,
261
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
TEKOS κεκλοφὼς καὶ τῷ τριβωνίῳ περιστέλλων,
σπαρασσόμενος ὑπὸ τοῦ θηρίου τὴν γαστέρα τοῖς
ὄνυξι καὶ τοῖς ὀδοῦσιν,ὑ ὑ πὲρ τοῦ λαθεῖν ἐἐ γκαρτε-
ρῶν ἀποθανεῖν. καὶ τοῦτο μὲν οὐδὲ ἀπὸ τῶν
νῦν ἐφήβων ἄπιστόν ἐστιν, ὧν πολλοὺς ἐπὶ τοῦ
βωμοῦ τῆς ᾿Ορθίας ἑωράκαμεν ἐναποθνήσκοντας
ταῖς πληγαῖς.
Δειπνήσας δὲ ὁ εἴρην κατακείμενος τῷ μὲν
σαι προσέταξε τῶν παίδων, τῷ δὲ ἐρώτημά τι
προὔβαλε πεφροντισμένης δεόμενον ἀποκρίσεως"
οἷον, ὅστις ἄριστος ἐν τοῖς ἀνδράσιν, ἢ ποία τις
ἡ τοῦδε πρᾶξις. ἐκ τούτου δὲ καὶ κρίνειν τὰ
καλὰ καὶ πολυπραγμονεῖν εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς εἰθί-
ζοντο περὶ τῶν πολιτῶν. τὸ γὰρ ἐρωτηθέντα,
τίς πολίτης ἀγαθός, ἢ τίς οὐκ εὐδόκιμος, ἀπορεῖν
τοῦ ἀποκρίνασθαι, νωθρᾶς ἐποιοῦντο καὶ πρὸς
ἀρετὴν ἀφιλοτίμου ψυχῆς σημεῖον. ἔδει δὲ τὴν
ἀπόκρισιν Kal μετ᾽ αἰτίας εἶναι καὶ ἀποδείξεως
εἰς βραχύν τινα συνηγμένης λόγον καὶ σύντομον'
ὁ δὲ πλημμελῶς ἀποκρινάμενος ἐκολάζετο δῆγμα
λαμβάνων ὑπὸ τοῦ εἴρενος εἰς τὸν ἀντίχειρα.
πολλάκις δὲ καὶ πρεσβυτέρων παρόντων καὶ
ἀρχόντων ὃ εἴρην ἐκόλαξε τοὺς παῖδας, ἀπόδειξιν
διδοὺς εἰ μετὰ λόγου καὶ ὡς δεῖ κολάζει. καὶ
κολάζων μὲν οὐκ ἐκωλύετο, τῶν δὲ παίδων ἀπελ-
θόντων εὐθύνας ὑπεῖχεν, εἰ τραχύτερον τοῦ δέον-
τος ἐπετίμησεν ἢ τοὐναντίον ἐκλελυμένως καὶ
ἀτόνως.
᾿Εκοινώνουν δὲ οἱ ἐρασταὶ τοῖς παισὶ τῆς δόξης
ἐπ᾿ ἀμφότερα: καὶ λέγεταί ποτε παιδὸς ἐν τῷ
1 τὴν ἀπόκρισιν καὶ Coraés, Sintenis!, and Bekker, with
the MSS. : καὶ τὴν ἀπόκρισιν.
262
LYCURGUS, xvi. 1-4
who was carrying concealed under his cloak a young
fox which he had stolen, suffered the animal to tear
out his bowels with its teeth and claws, and died
rather than have his theft detected. And even this
story gains credence from what their youths now
endure, many of whom I have seen expiring under
the lash at the altar of Artemis Orthia.
The eiren, as he reclined after supper, would
order one of the boys to sing a song, and to another
would put a question requiring a careful and
deliberate answer, as, for instance, “ Who is the best
man in the city?” or, “ What thinkest thou of this
man’s conduct?” In this way the boys were
accustomed to pass right judgements and interest
themselves at the very outset in the conduct of the
citizens. For if one of them was asked who was a good
citizen, or who an infamous one, and had no answer
to make, he was judged to have a torpid spirit, and
one that would not aspire to excellence. And the
answer must not only have reasons and proof given
for it, but also be couched in very brief and concise
language, and the one who gave a faulty answer was
punished with a bite in the thumb from the eiren.
Often-times, too, the eiren punished the boys in the
presence of the elders and magistrates, thus show-
ing whether his punishments were reasonable and
proper or not. While he was punishing them,
he suffered no restraint, but after the boys were
gone, he was brought to an account if his punish-
ments were harsher than was necessary, or, on the
other hand, too mild and gentle.
The boys’ lovers also shared with them in their
honour or disgrace; and it is said that one of them
263
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μάχεσθαι φωνὴν ἀγεννῆ προεμένου ζημιωθῆναι
τὸν ἐραστὴν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρχόντων. οὕτω δὲ τοῦ
ἐρᾶν ἐγκεκριμένου παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς, ὥστε καὶ τῶν
παρθένων ἐρᾶν τὰς καλὰς καὶ ἀγαθὰς γυναῖκας,
τὸ ἀντερᾶν οὐκ ἦν, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ἀρχὴν ἐποιοῦντο
φιλίας πρὸς ἀλλήλους οἱ τῶν αὐτῶν ἐρασθέντες,
καὶ διετέλουν κοινῇ σπουδάζοντες ὅπως ἄριστον
ἀπεργάσαιντο τὸν ἐρώμενον.
XIX. ᾿Εδίδασκον δὲ τοὺς παῖδας καὶ λόγῳ
χρῆσθαι πικρίαν ἔχοντι μεμιγμένην χάριτι καὶ
πολλὴν ἀπὸ βραχείας λέξεως ἀναθεώρησιν. τὸ
μὲν γὰρ σιδηροῦν νόμισμα μικρὰν ἔχειν ἐποίησεν
ἀπὸ πολλοῦ σταθμοῦ δύναμιν ὁ Λυκοῦργος, ὡς
εἴρηται, τὸ δὲ τοῦ λόγου νόμισμα τοὐναντίον ἀπ᾽
εὐτελοῦς καὶ ὀλίγης λέξεως εἰς πολλὴν καὶ πε-
ριττὴν κατεσκεύασε διάνοιαν, τῇ πολλῇ σιωπῇ
τοὺς παῖδας ἀποφθεγματικοὺς καὶ πεπαιδευμέ-
vous πρὸς τὰς ἀποκρίσεις μηχανώμενος. ὡς γὰρ
τὸ σπέρμα τῶν πρὸς τὰς συνουσίας ἀκολάστων
ἄγονον ὡς τὰ πολλὰ καὶ ἄκαρπόν ἐστιν, οὕτως
ἡ πρὸς τὸ λαλεῖν ἀκρασία κενὸν τὸν λόγον ποιεῖ
καὶ ἀνόητον. ἾΑγις μὲν οὖν ὁ βασιλεύς, σκώ-
πτοντος ᾿Αττικοῦ τινος τὰς Λακωνικὰς μαχαίρας
εἰς τὴν μικρότητα, καὶ λέγοντος ὅτι ῥᾳδίως αὐτὰς
οἱ θαυματοποιοὺὴ καταπίνουσιν ἐν τοῖς θεάτροις,
“Καὶ μὴν μάλιστα," εἶπεν, “ἡμεῖς ἐφικνούμεθα
τοῖς ἐγχειριδίοις τῶν πολεμίων"" ἐγὼ δὲ καὶ τὸν
λόγον ὁρῶ τὸν Λακωνικὸν βραχὺν μὲν εἶναι δο-
κοῦντα, μάλιστα δὲ τῶν πραγμάτων ἐφικνούμενον,
καὶ τῆς διανοίας ἁπτόμενον τῶν ἀκροωμένων.
Καὶ γὰρ ὁ Δυκοῦργος αὐτὸς βραχυλόγος 52
264
LYCURGUS, xvii. 4—x1x. 3
was once fined by the magistrates because his favourite
boy had let an ungenerous cry escape him while he
was fighting. Moreover, though this sort of love
was so approved among them that even the maidens
found lovers in good and noble women, still, there
was no jealous rivalry in it, but those who fixed
their affections on the same boys made this rather a
foundation for friendship with one another, and
persevered in common efforts to make their loved one
as noble as possible.
XIX. The boys were also taught to use a discourse
which combined pungency with grace, and condensed
much observation into a few words. His iron money,
indeed, Lycurgus made of large weight and small
value, as I have observed,! but the current coin of
discourse he adapted to the expression of deep and
abundant meaning with simple and brief diction, by
contriving that the general habit of silence should
make the boys sententious and correct in their
answers. For as sexual incontinence generally pro-
duces unfruitfulness and sterility, so intemperance in
talking makes discourse empty and vapid. King Agis,
accordingly, when a certain Athenian decried the
Spartan swords for being so short, and said that
jugglers on the stage easily swallowed them, replied:
“ And yet we certainly reach our enemies with these
daggers.” And I observe that although the speech
also of the Spartans seems short, yet it certainly
reaches the point, and arrests the thought of the
listener.
And indeed Lycurgus himself seems to have been
1 Chapter ix. 1.
265
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Tis ἔοικε γενέσθαι καὶ ἀποφθεγματικός, εἰ δεῖ
τεκμαίρεσθαι τοῖς ἀπομνημονεύμασιν': οἷόν ἐστι
τὸ περὶ τὰς πολιτείας πρὸς τὸν ἀξιοῦντα ποιεῖν
δημοκρατίαν ἐἐν τῇ πόλει: “Σὺ γάρ, ᾿ ἔφη, “ πρῶτος
ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ σου ποίησον δημοκρατίαν." καὶ περὶ
τῶν θυσιῶν πρὸς τὸν πυθόμενον διὰ τί μικρὰς
οὕτω καὶ εὐτελεῖς ἔταξεν, “Ἵνα “μή ποτε,
ἔφη,“ τιμῶντες τὸ θεῖον διαλίπωμεν." καὶ περὶ
τῶν ἀθλημάτων, ταῦτα μόνα μὴ κωλύσαντος
ἀγωνίζεσθαι τοὺς πολίτας ἐν οἷς χεὶρ οὐκ ἀνα-
τείνεται. φέρονται δὲ αὐτοῦ καὶ ov ἐπιστολῶν
ἀποκρίσεις τοιαῦται πρὸς τοὺς πολίτας. πῶς ἂν
πολεμίων ἔφοδον ἀλεξοίμεθα; ““Av “πτωχοὶ μέ-
VTE καὶ μὴ μέσδων ἅἃ τερος θατέρω epare ἦμεν.
καὶ πάλιν περὶ τῶν τειχῶν" “ Οὐκ ἂν εἴη ἀτεί-
χίστος πόλις ἅτις ἄνδρεσσι," καὶ οὐ πλίνθοις
ἐστεφάνωται." περὶ μὲν οὖν τούτων καὶ τῶν
τοιούτων ἐπιστολῶν οὔτε ἀπιστῆσαι ῥάδιον οὔτε
πιστεῦσαι.
XX. Τῆς δὲ πρὸς τὰ “μήκη τῶν λόγων δια-
βολῆς δείγματα τοιαῦτα τῶν ἀποφθεγμάτων ἐἐ στί.
Λεωνίδας ὃ βασιλεὺς ἀκαίρως τινὸς περὶ πραγ-
μάτων οὐκ ἀχρήστων διαλεχθέντος, °O, ξένε,"
εἶπεν, “οὐκ ἐν δέοντι χρέῃ τῷ δέοντι." Χαρίλαος δὲ
ὁ ἀδελφιδοῦς ᾿τ οῦ Λυκούργου περὶ τῆς ὀλιγότητος
αὐτοῦ τῶν νόμων ἐρωτηθείς, εἶπεν ὡς οἱ λόγοις
μὴ χρώμενοι πολλοῖς οὐδὲ νόμων. δέονται πολλῶν.
᾿Αρχιδαμίδας δὲ μεμφομένων. τινῶν “Ἑκαταῖον τὸν
σοφιστὴν éὅτ ι παραληφθεὶς εἰς τὸ συσσίτιον οὐδὲν
ἔλεγεν, “ὋὉ εἰδώς," ἔφη, “λόγον καὶ καιρὸν οἶδεν.᾽
ἃ δὲ τῶν πικρῶν ἔφην ἀπομνημονευμάτων οὐκ
1 ἄνδρεσσι Cobet: ἀνδρείοις,
266
LYCURGUS, xix. 3—xx. 2
short and sententious in his speech, if we may judge
from his recorded sayings; that, for instance, on
forms of government, to one who demanded the
establishment of democracy in the city: “Go thou,”
said he, “and first establish democracy in thy house-
hold.” That, again, to one who inquired why he
ordained such small and inexpensive sacrifices:
“That we may never omit,” said he, “ to honour the
gods.” Again, in the matter of athletic contests, he
allowed the citizens to engage only in those where
there was no stretching forth of hands.! There
are also handed down similar answers which he made
by letter to his fellow-citizens. When they asked
how they could ward off an invasion of enemies, he
answered: “ By remaining poor, and by not desiring
to be greater the one than the other.” And when
they asked about fortifying their city, he answered:
« A city will be well fortified which is surrounded by
brave men and not by bricks.”” Now regarding these
and similar letters, belief and scepticism are alike
difficult.
XX. Of their aversion to long speeches, the
following apophthegms are proof. King Leonidas,
when a certain one discoursed with him out of all
season on matters of great concern, said: “ My
friend, the matter urges, but not the time.” = Char-
ilaiis, the nephew of Lycurgus, when asked why his
uncle had made so few laws, answered: “ Men of few
words need few laws.” Archidamidas, when certain
ones found fault with Hecataeus the Sophist for
saying nothing after being admitted to their public
mess, answered: “He who knows how, knows also
when to speak.”” Instances of the pungent sayings
1 After the manner of men begging their conquerors to
spare their lives.
267
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀμοιρεῖaν χάριτος, τοιαῦτa᾽? » ἐστί. Δημάρατος av-
θρώ΄π ου πονηροῦ a κόπτοντος αὐτὸΝν ἀκαίροις ἐρω-
τή/μ ασι καὶ \ Onδ ὴ τοῦωτ ο πολλάκ/ι ς ἐ> ρωτῶνa τος, ce Ti“ Τίς
ἄ” ριστος Σπαρτιατῶνn ; 2) ἔ»y φη: a“sὋ tl\y ἀ> νομοιότy ατος. ”
Go ιὁ Αγις δέ4, ἐ2 παινού΄νὔ των τινῶ“ν τοὺς\ 2 ᾿Ηλεί/ο υς ὡΦς
καλῶςA τὰ 3 ᾽᾿Ολύμπια Kal δικαίως ἄ,γ οντας, “ Kal \
τί / μέ/γ α, 99. ἔ» φη, ςς “᾿Ηλεῖnο ι ποιοῦaν τι 5 διb’ d ἐoh τῶEeνe! πένΨ τε
ἁμέ/ρ ᾳ μιᾷa χρώμενοι τᾷa δικαιοσύνᾳ;" 3 Θεό,π ομπος
δὲ ξέ΄ν ου τινὸς εὔνοιαν ἐνδεικνυμένου, καὶ φά-4
σκοντος ὡς παρὰ τοῖaς αὑτοῦa πολίτἪ αις φιλολάκων
καλεῖτanα ι, “ Κάλλιον 1 ἣν Tot,” εἶπεν, “ ὦ ξέ/ν ε, φίλο-
πολίτ7 αν καλεῖaσl θαι." ἹΤλειστῶA ναξ δὲ ὁe ΠαυσανίοlυA ,
ῥΟήΖ τορος 2 ᾿Αθηναίtοe υ τοὺ\ς Λακεδαιμονίο/ υς ἀ2 μαθεῖςa
ἀποκαλοῦνtaτl ος, “ Opbasn ,”5 3 ἔφη, “ λέγεις" μόνοι ya\p
“Ἑλλάνων ἄμμες οὐδὲν κακὸν “μεμαθήκαμεν παρ᾽
ὑμῶν." ᾿Αρχιδαμίδας δὲ πρὸς τὸν πυθόμενον
πόσοι εἰσὶ ᾿ Σπαρτιᾶται, “Ἵκανοΐ,᾽ εἶπεν, “ὦ ξένε,
τοὺς κακοὺς ἀπερύκειν."
"Ἔστι δὲ καὶ τοῖς μετὰ παιδιᾶς εἰρημένοις ὑπ᾽
ou
αὐτῶν τεκμήρασθαι τὸν ἐθισμόν. εἰθίζοντο γὰρ
μηδέποτε χρῆσθαι τῷ λόγῳ παρέργως, μηδὲ
ἀφιέναι φωνὴν ἥτις οὐκ ἁμῶς γέ πως εἶχέ τίνος
θεωρίας ἀξίαν διάνοιαν. ὁ μὲν γὰρ ἀκοῦσαι
τοῦ μιμουμένου τὴν ἀηδόνα παρακαλούμενος,
“Auras,” ἔφη, “ἄκουκα τήνας." ὁ δὲ ἀναγνοὺς
τὸ ἐπίγραμμα τοῦτο:
Σβεννύντας ποτὲ τούσδε τυραννίδα χάλκεος “Apns
εἷλε: Σελινοῦντος δ᾽ ἀμφὶ πύλας ἔθανον,
1 κάλλιον Cobet, van Herwerden; cf. κρεῖσσον Morals,
p. 22le: καλὸν (2 were well).
268
LYCURGUS, xx. 2-5
not devoid of grace, of which I spoke,! are the
following. Demaratus, when a troublesome fellow
was pestering him with ill-timed questions, and
especially with the oft repeated query who was the
best of the Spartans, answered at last: ‘“ He who is
least like thee.” And Agis, when certain ones were
praising the Eleians for their just and honourable
conduct of the Olympic games, said: “ And what
great matter is it for the Eleians to practise righte-
ousness one day in five years?”” And Theopompus,
when a stranger kept saying, as he showed him
kindness, that in his own city he was called a lover
of Sparta, remarked: “ My good Sir, it were better
for thee to be called a lover of thine own city.”
And Pleistoanax, the son of Pausanias, when an
Athenian orator declared that the Lacedaemonians
had no learning, said: “ True, we are indeed the only
Hellenes who have learned no evil from you.” And
Archidamus, when some one asked him how many
Spartans there were, replied : “ Enough, good Sir, to
keep evil men away.”
And even from their jests it is possible to judge of
their character. For it was their wont never to talk
at random, and to let slip no speech which did not
have some thought or other worth serious attention.
For instance, when one of them was invited to hear
a man imitate the nightingale, he said: “I have
heard the bird herself.” And another, on reading
the epitaph :—
“Tyranny’s fires they were trying to quench when
panoplied Ares
Slew them; Selinus looked down from her gates
on their death,”
1 Chapter xix. 1.
VOL, 1, K 269
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
“Δικαίως, ᾽ εἶπε, “ τεθνάκαντι τοὶ ἄνδρες" ἔδει yap
ἀeφarέn μεν ὅ“ λαν αὐSτIὰN ν κατακαᾶμεa ν." Υ νεανί,ὔσ κος δὲ
πρὸς\ τὸ\ν ἐ> παγγελλόμ4 ενον αὐ’ τῷA δώ,σ ειν ἀ8 λεκ-
τρυόQν ας ἀ᾽ ποθνήσ΄ κοντας ἐ2ν τῷa μάχ, εσθαι, ἐξ “ΜὴQ σύ ΄
” 5 ce SIDS re ͵ ἢ A
γε, εἴπεν, “AXA OOS μοι τῶν ATOKTELVOVTWY EV τῷ
μάχ, εσθαι." 3» ἕ“ τερος δέ, τις ἰIOδNὼ ν ἐbν) ἀ? ποχωρήσμὰε ι
θ axev΄oὕv tas ἐ5π) ὶ ripδ ίφρων ἀ᾽ νθθρ ώπ, ους, ““MΜ>ὴ γέLν οιτο, »
εἶ> πεν, oc?“ ἐνταῦaθ)α καθθίίσ αι ὅ5θ0ε ν οὐ>κ ἔ” στιν ὑς πεξανα-
στῆfνolα ι πρεσβυτέρῳ/ ." 3») τὸ\ μὲ\ν οὖ>ν τῶaν ἀ> ποφθεγ-
μάτων εἶδος ἦν τοιοῦκιτ ον ὥστε Kal λέ4γ ειν τινὰς
οὐκ ἀτό/ πως OeiT L μᾶa λλόν, ἐστι TOδ ῇ φιλοσοφεῖνA ἢ TO\
φιλογυμναστεῖν“ λακωνίζ/ε ιν.
XXI. ‘H δὲ περὶ τὰς wΩdΝa s καὶ τὰ μέλη παΐί- 53
δευσις οὐχ ἧττον ἐσπουδάζετο THas ἐν τοῖaς λό/γ οις
εὐζηλίας καὶ καθαριότ, ητος, ἀλλὰ \ Kal \ τὰ\ μέλη
κέντρον εἶχεν ἐγερτικὸΝν θυμοῦA Kal παραστατικὸν
ὁρμῆς ἐνθουσιώδους καὶ πραγματικῆς, καὶ ἡ λέξις
ἣν ἀφελὴς καὶ ἄθρυπτος ἐπὶ πράγμασι σεμνοῖς
καὶ ἠθοποιοῖςna. ἔπαινοι ya\p ἦσαν ὡς TA\ πολλὰ
τῶnνa τεθνηκότων ὑπὲρ τῆaς Σπάρ/ της εὐδαιμονιζο-
μένων, Kal ψόγοι τῶaν τρεσάν/ των, ὡς ἀλγεινὸν Kal
κακοδαίμ, ονα βιούiνd των βίο, ν, ἐπαγγελία, τε Kal
μεγαλαυχία πρὸς ἀρετὴ\ν πρέ/π ουσα ταῖaς ἡλικίαἐφ ις"
ὧν ἕνεκα δείῬ γματος ov χεῖwρeό ν ἐστιν ἕY ν τι προ-
ενέγκασθαι. τριῶaν γὰ\ρ χορῶlνa] κατὰ \ τὰ\ς τρεῖ-ς
ἡλικίας συνισταμέν/ ων ἐν ταῖaς ἑe ορταῖςa , ςὁ μὲ\ν τῶaν
γερόντων ἀρχόμενος ἤ3 δεν"
"Appes TOK Hues ἄλκιμοι νεανίαι.
270
LYCURGUS, xx. 5-xxI. 2
said: ‘The men deserved to die; they should have
let the fires burn out entirely.” And a youth, when
some one promised to give him game-cocks that
would die fighting, said, “Don’t do that, but give
me some of the kind that kill fighting.” Another,
seeing men seated on stools in a privy, said : “ May
I never sit where I cannot give place to an elder.”
The character of their apophthegms, then, was such as
to justify the remark that love of wisdom rather than
love of bodily exercise was the special characteristic
of a Spartan.
XXI. Nor was their training in music and poetry
any less serious a concern than the emulous purity of
their speech, nay, their very songs had a stimulus
that roused the spirit and awoke enthusiastic and
effectual effort; the style of them was simple
and unaffected, and their themes were serious
and edifying. They were for the most part praises
ot men who had died for Sparta, calling them blessed
and happy; censure of men who had played the
coward, picturing their grievous and ill-starred life;
and such promises and boasts of valour as befitted
the different ages. Ot the last, it may not be
amiss to cite one, by way of illustration. They
had three choirs at their festivals, corresponding to
the three ages, and the choir of old men would
sing first :—
“We once did deeds of prowess and were strong
young men.”
271
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὁ δὲ TOV ἀκμαζόντων ἀμειβόμενος ἔλεγεν"
Ἄμμες δέ γ᾽ εἰμέν" αἱ δὲ λῇς, αὐγάσδεο.1
ὁε δὲ\ τρί,τ ος ὁς τῶAν παίδ, ων"
“A ppes δέ γ᾽ ἐσσόμεσθα πολλῷ κάρρονες.
Ὅλως δὲ ἄν τις ἐπιστήσας τοῖς Λακωνικοῖς
ποιήμασιν, ὧν ἔτι καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἔνια διεσώξετο, καὶ
τοὺς ἐμβατηρίους ῥυθμοὺς ἀναλαβών, οἷς ἐχρῶντο
πρὸς τὸν αὐλὸν ἐπάγοντες τοῖς πολεμίοις, οὐ
κακῶς ἡγήσαιτο καὶ τὸν Τέρπανδρον καὶ τὸν
Πίνδαρον τὴν ἀνδρείαν τῇ μουσικῇ συνάπτειν.
ὁ μὲν γὰρ οὕτως πεποίηκε περὶ τῶν Λακεδαι-
μονίων'
"Ev? αἰχμά τε νέων θάλλει καὶ μοῦσα λίγεια
καὶ δίκα εὐρυάγυια --- —
Πίνδαρος δέ φησιν"
Ἔνθα βουλαὶ γερόντων
καὶ νέων ἀνδρῶν ἀἀ ριστεύοντι αἰχμαι
καὶ χοροὶ καὶ Μοῦσα καὶ ἀγλαΐα.
Μουσικωτάτους γὰρ ἅμα καὶ πολεμικωτάτους
ἀποφαίν/ ουσιν αὐτούςΑ͂"
idP é/r es? yap ἄντα τῶ σιδάρω TO καλῶς KI-
θαρίσδεν,
ὡς ὁ Λακωνικὸς ποιητὴς εἴρηκε. καὶ γὰρ ἐν ταῖς
μάχαις προεθύετο ταῖς Μούσαις ὁ βασιλεύς,
ἀναμιμνήσκων, ὡς ἔοικε, τῆς παιδείας καὶ τῶν
1 αὐγάσδεο Cobet, as in Morals, pp. 238 b, 544 e, and 5
(first hand): πεῖραν λαβέ (come take a try).
2 ‘Pere: Scaliger’s correction of ἕρπει. Cf. Bergk, Poet.
Τὰν. Gr. iii.‘ p. 51 (Aleman, Frag. 35).
272
LYCURGUS, xx1. 2-4
Then the choir of young men would respond :—
«‘ We are so now, and if you wish, behold and see.”
And then the third choir, that of the boys, would
sing :-—
“We shall be sometime mightier men by far than
both.”
In short, if one studies the poetry of Sparta, of
which some specimens were still extant in my time,
and makes himself familiar with the marching songs
which they used, to the accompaniment of the flute,
when charging upon their foes, he will conclude
that Terpander and Pindar were right in associating
valour with music. The former writes thus of the
Lacedaemonians :—
“ Flourish there both the spear of the brave and the
Muse’s clear message,
Justice, too, walks the broad streets :
And Pindar says :—1
“There are councils of Elders,
And young men’s conquering spears,
And dances, the Muse, and joyousness.”’
The Spartans are thus shown to be at the same time
most musical and most warlike ;
“In equal poise to match the sword hangs the sweet
art of the harpist,”
as their poet says. For just before their battles, the
king sacrificed to the Muses, reminding his warriors,
as it would seem, of their training, and of the firm
1 Fragment 199, Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Gr. i.4 Ὁ. 448.
273
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κρίσεων, ἵνα WoL πρόχειροι παρὰ τὰ δεινὰ Kal
λόγου τινὸς ἀξίας παρέχωσι τὰς πράξεις τῶν
μαχομένων.
XXII. Tote δε καὶ τοῖς νέοις τὰ σκληρότατα
τῆς ἀγωγῆς ἐπανιέντες, οὐκ ἐκώλυον καλλωπί-
ἕεσθαι περὶ κόμην καὶ κόσμον ὅπλων καὶ ἱματίων,
χαίροντες, ὥσπερ ἵπποις, γαυριῶσι, καὶ φρυαττο-
μένοις πρὸς τοὺς ἀγῶνας. διὸ κομῶντες εὐθὺς ἐκ
τῆς τῶν ἐφήβων ἡλικίας, μάλιστα περὶ τοὺς
κινδύνους ἐθεράπευον τὴν κόμην λιπαράν τε φαί-
νεσθαι καὶ διακεκριμένην, ἀπομνημονεύοντές τινα
καὶ Λυκούργου λόγον περὶ τῆς κόμης, ὅτι τοὺς
μὲν καλοὺς εὐπρεπεστέρους. ποιεῖ, τοὺς δὲ αἰσ-
χροὺς φοβερωτέρους. ἐχρῶντο δὲ καὶ γυμνα-
σίοις μαλακωτέροις παρὰ τὰς στρατείας, καὶ τὴν
ἄλλην δίαιταν οὐχ οὕτω κεκολασμένην οὐδ᾽ ὑπεύ-
θυνον τοῖς νέοις παρεῖχον, ὥστε μόνοις ἀνθρώπων
ἐκείνοις τῆς εἰς τὸν πόλεμον ἀσκήσεως ἀνάπαυσιν
εἶναι τὸν πόλεμον. ἤδη δὲ συντεταγμένης τῆς
φάλαγγος αὐτῶν καὶ τῶν πολεμίων παρόντων,"
ὁ βασιλεὺς ἅμα τήν τε χίμαιραν, ἐσφαγιάξετο
καὶ στεφανοῦσθαι παρήγγελλε πᾶσι καὶ τοὺς
αὐχητὰς αὐλεῖν ἐκέλευε τὸ Καστόρειον μέλος:
ἅμα δ᾽ ἐξῆρχεν ἐμβατηρίου παιᾶνος, ὥστε σεμνὴν
ἅμα καὶ καταπληκτικὴν τὴν ὄψιν εἶναι, ῥυθμῷ
τε πρὸς τὸν αὐλὸν ἐμβαινόντων καὶ μήτε διά-
σπάσμα ποιούντων ἐν τῇ φάλαγγι μήτε ταῖς
yu ais θορυβουμένων, ἀλλὰ πρᾷως καὶ ἱλαρῶς
ὑπὸ τοῦ μέλους ἀγομένων ἐπὶ τὸν κίνδυνον. οὔτε
γὰρ φόβον οὔτε θυμὸν ἐγγίνεσθαι πλεονάζοντα
1 παρόντων MSS., Coraés, Sintenis!, and Bekker: ὁρώντων
(in the sight of ), with Xenophon, Rep. Lac. xiii. 8.
274
LYCURGUS, xxi. 4—xxu. 3
decisions they had made, in order that they might be
prompt to face the dread issue, and might perform such
martial deeds as would be worthy of some record.1
XXII. In time of war, too, they relaxed the
severity of the young men’s discipline, and permitted
them to beautify their hair and ornament their arms
and clothing, rejoicing to see them, like horses,
prance and neigh for the contest. Therefore they
wore their hair long as soon as they ceased to be
youths, and particularly in times of danger they took
pains to have it glossy and well-combed, remember-
ing a certain saying of Lycurgus, that a fine head of
hair made the handsome more comely still, and the
ugly more terrible. Their bodily exercises, too, were
less rigorous during their campaigns, and in other
ways their young warriors were allowed a regimen
which was less curtailed and rigid, so that they were
the only men in the world with whom war brought
a respite in the training for war. And when at last
they were drawn up in battle array and the enemy
was at hand, the king sacrificed the customary she-
goat, commanded all the warriors to set garlands upon
their heads, and ordered the pipers to pipe the strains
of the hymn to Castor; then he himself led off in a
marching paean, and it was a sight equally grand
and terrifying when they marched in step with the
rhythm of the flute, without any gap in their line of
battle, and with no confusion in their souls, but
calmly and cheerfully moving with the strains of
their hymn into the deadly fight. Neither fear nor
excessive fury is likely to possess men so disposed,
1 The Greek of this sentence is obscure, and the translation
doubtful.
275
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τοῖς οὕτω διακειμένοις εἰκός ἐστιν, GAN εὐσταθὲς
φρόνημα μετ᾽ ἐλπίδος καὶ θράσους, ὡς τοῦ θεοῦ
συμπαρόντος.
᾿Βχώρει δὲ ὁ βασιλεὺς ἐπὶ τοὺς πολεμίους
ἔχων μεθ᾽ ἑαυτοῦ στεφανίτην ἀγῶνα νενικηκότα.
καί φασί γέ τινα “χρημάτων πολλῶν ἐν ᾽Ολυμ- 54
πίοις διδομένων αὐτῷ μὴ δεξάμενον, ἀλλὰ πολλῷ
πόνῳ καταπαλαίσαντα τὸν ἀνταγωνιστήν, ὥς τις
εἶπεν αὐτῷ, “Τί σοι πλέον, ὦ Λάκων, γέγονε διὰ
τῆς νίκης; ᾿ φάναι μειδιάσαντα, τ Πρὸ τοῦ βασι-
λέως τεταγμένος μαχοῦμαι τοῖς πολεμίοις." τρε-
ψάμενοι δὲ καὶ νικήσαντες ἐδίωκον ὅσον ἐκβε-
βαιώσασθαι τὸ νίκημα τῇ φυγῇ τῶν πολεμίων, εἶτα
εὐθὺς ἀνεχώρουν, οὔτε γενναῖον οὔτε ᾿Βλληνικὸν
ἡγούμενοι κόπτειν καὶ φονεύειν ἀπολεγομένους
καὶ παρακεχωρηκότας. ἣν δὲ οὐ μόνον καλὸν τοῦτο
καὶ μεγαλόψυχον, ἀλλὰ καὶ χρήσι μον. εἰδότες γὰρ
οἱ μαχόμενοι πρὸς αὐτοὺς ὅτι τοὺς ὑφισταμένους
ἀναιροῦσι, φείδονται δὲ τῶν ἐνδιδόντων, τοῦ
μένειν τὸ φεύγειν ἡγοῦντο λυσιτελέστερον.
XXIII. Αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν Λυκοῦργον Ἱππίας μὲν
ο σοφιστὴς πολεμικώτατόν φησι γενέσθαι καὶ
πολλῶν ἔμπειρον στρατειῶν, Φιλοστέφανος δὲ
καὶ τὴν κατ᾽ οὐλαμοὺς τῶν ἱππέων διανομὴν
Λυκούργῳ προστίθησιν: εἶναι δὲ τὸν οὐλαμόν,
ὡς ἐκεῖνος συνέστησεν, ἱππέων πεντήκοντα πλῆς-
θος ἐν τετραγώνῳ σχήματι τεταγμένων. ὁ δὲ
Φαληρεὺς Δημήτριος, οὐδεμιᾶς ἁψάμενον πολε-
μικῆς πράξεως ἐἐν εἰρήνῃ καταστήσασθαι τὴν πο-
λιτείαν. ἔοικε δὲ καὶ τῆς ᾿Ολυμπιακῆς ἐἐ κεχειρίας
ἡ ἐπίνοια πράου καὶ πρὸς εἰρήνην οἰκείως ἔἐ χοντος
ἀνδρὸς εἶναι. καίτοι φασί τινες, ὡς “Ερμιππος
276
LYCURGUS, xxi. 3-xxul. 2
but rather a firm purpose full of hope and courage,
believing as they do that Heaven is their ally.
The king marched against the enemy in close
companionship with one who had been crowned
victor in the great games. And they tell of a
certain Spartan who refused to be bought off from a
contest at Olympia by large sums of money, and after
a long struggle outwrestled his antagonist. When
some one said to him then: “ What advantage, O
Spartan, hast thou got from thy victory?” he
answered, with a smile : “I shall stand in front of my
king when I fight our enemies.” When they had
conquered and routed an enemy, they pursued him
far enough to make their victory secure by his flight,
and then at once retired, thinking it ignoble and
unworthy of a Hellene to hew men to pieces who
had given up the fight and abandoned the field. And
this was not only a noble and magnanimous policy,
but it was also useful. For their antagonists, knowing
that they slew those who resisted them, but showed
mercy to those who yielded to them, were apt to think
flight more advantageous than resistance.
XXIII. Hippias the Sophist says that Lycurgus
himself was very well versed in war and took part in
many campaigns, and Philostephanus attributes to
him the arrangement of the Spartan cavalry by
“oulamoi,’ explaining that the “oulamos,” as con-
stituted by him, was a troop of fifty horsemen in a
square formation. But Demetrius the Phalerean
says he engaged in no warlike undertakings, and
established his constitution in a time of peace. And
indeed the design of the Olympic truce would seem
to bespeak a man of gentleness, and predisposed to
peace. And yet there are some who say, as
277
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μνημονεύει, τὸν Λυκοῦργον ov προσέχειν οὐδὲ
κοινωνεῖν ἐν ἀρχῇ τοῖς περὶ τὸν Ἴφιτον, ἀλλὰ
τυγχάνειν ἄλλως ἐπιδημοῦντα καὶ θεώμενον"
ἀκοῦσαι δὲ φωνὴν ὥσπερ ἀνθρώπου τινὸς ἐξό-
πισθεν ἐπιτιμῶντος αὐτῷ καὶ θαυμάζοντος ὅτι
τοὺς πολίτας οὐ προτρέπεται κοινωνεῖν τῆς πανη-
γύρεως" ὡς δὲ μεταστραφέντος οὐδαμοῦ φανερὸς
ὁ φθεγξάμενος ἦν, θεῖον ἡγησάμενον, οὕτω πρὸς
τὸν Ἴφιτον τραπέσθαι καὶ συνδιακοσμήσαντα
τὴν ἑορτὴν ἐνδοξοτέραν καὶ βεβαιοτέραν κατα-
στῆσαι.
XXIV. Ἡ δὲ παιδεία μέχρι τῶν ἐνηλίκων διέ-
τεινεν. οὐδεὶς γὰρ ἦν ἀφειμένος ὡς ἐβούλετο ζῆν,
ἀλλ᾽ οἷον ἐν στρατοπέδῳ τῇ πόλει καὶ δίαιταν
ἔχοντες ὡρισμένην καὶ διατριβὴν περὶ τὰ κοινά,
καὶ ὅλως νομίζοντες οὐχ αὑτῶν, ἀλλὰ τῆς πατρί-
δος εἶναι διετέλουν, εἰ μή τι πράττειν ἕτερον εἴη
προστεταγμένον, ἐπισκοποῦντες τοὺς παῖδας, καὶ
διδάσκοντες τι τῶν χρησίμων ἢ μανθάνοντες
αὐτοὶ παρὰ τῶν ,πρεσβυτέρων. καὶ γὰρ ἕν τι
τοῦτο τῶν καλῶν ἣν καὶ μακαρίων ἃ παρεσκεύασε
τοῖς ἑαυτοῦ πολίταις ὁ Λυκοῦργος, ἀφθονία σχο-
λῆς, οἷς τέχνης μὲν ἅψασθαι βαναύσου τὸ παρά-
παν οὐκ ἐφεῖτο, χρηματισμοῦ δὲ συναγωγὴν
ἔχοντος ἐργώδη καὶ πραγματείαν οὐδ᾽ ὁτιοῦν ἔδει,
διὰ τὸ κομιδῇ τὸν πλοῦτον ἄξηλον γεγονέναι καὶ
ἄτιμον. οἱ δὲ εἵλωτες αὐτοῖς εἰργάζοντο τὴν γῆν,
ἀποφορὰν τὴν εἰρημένην τελοῦντες. ἐπιδημῶν δέ
τις ᾿Αθήνησι δικαστηρίων ὄντων, καὶ πυθόμενός
τινα δίκην ἀργίας ὠφληκότα βαδίζειν ἀθυμοῦντα
278
LYCURGUS, xxl. 2—xxIv. 3
Hermippus reminds us, that at the outset Lycurgus
had nothing whatever to do with Iphitus and his
enterprise, but happened to come that way by
chance, and be a spectator at the games; that he
heard behind him, however, what seemed to be a
human voice, chiding him and expressing amazement
that he did not urge his fellow-citizens to take part
in the great festival ; and since, on turning round, he
did not see the speaker anywhere, he concluded that
the voice was from heaven, and therefore betook
himself to Iphitus, and assisted him in giving the
festival a more notable arrangement and a more
enduring basis.
XXIV. The training of the Spartans lasted into
the years of full maturity. No man was allowed to
live as he pleased, but in their city, as in a military
encampment, they always had a prescribed regimen
and employment in public service, considering that
they belonged entirely to their country and not to
themselves, watching over the boys, if no other duty
was laid upon them, and either teaching them some
useful thing, or learning it themselves from their
elders. For one of the noble and blessed privileges
which Lycurgus provided for his fellow-citizens, was
abundance of leisure, since he forbade their engaging
in any mechenical art whatsoever, and as for money-
making, with its laborious efforts to amass wealth,
there was no need of it at all, since wealth awakened
no envy and brought no honour. Besides, the Helots
tilled their ground for them, and paid them the
produce mentioned above. Therefore it was that
one of them who was sojourning at Athens when the
courts were in session, and learned that a certain
1 Chapter viii. 4.
279
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ προπεμπόμενον ὑπὸ τῶν φίλων συναχθομένων
καὶ βαρέως φερόντων, ἐδεῖτο δεῖξαι τοὺς συμπαρ-
ovTas αὐτῷ τίς ἐστιν ὁ τὴν ἐλευθερίας" ἑαλωκὼς
δίκην. οὕτω δουλοπρεπὲς ἡγοῦντο τὴν περὶ τὰς
τέχνας καὶ τὸν χρηματισμὸν ἀσχολίαν. δίκαι
δέ, ὡς εἰκός, ἐξέλιπον ἅμα τῷ νομίσματι, μήτε
πλεονεξίας μήτε ἀπορίας αὐτοῖς παρούσης, ἰσό-
τητος δὲ ἐν εὐπορίᾳ καὶ ῥᾳστώνης δι εὐτέλειαν
γεγενημένης. χοροὶ δὲ καὶ θαλίαι καὶ “εὐωχίαι
καὶ διατριβαὶ περί τε θήρας καὶ γυμνάσια καὶ
λέσχας τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον ἐπεχωρίαζον, ὅτε μὴ
στρατευόμενοι τύχοιεν.
XXV. Οἱ μέν γε νεώτεροι τριάκοντα ἐτῶν τὸ
παράπαν οὐ κατέβαινον εἰς ἀγοράν, ἀλλὰ διὰ δῦ
τῶν συγγενῶν καὶ τῶν ἐραστῶν ἐποιοῦντο τὰς
ἀναγκαίας οἰκονομίας. τοῖς δὲ πρεσβυτέροις
αἰσχρὸν ἣν συνεχῶς ὁρᾶσθαι περὶ ταῦτα διατρί-
βουσιν, ἀλλὰ μὴ τὸ πλεῖστον τῆς ἡμέρας περὶ τὰ
γυμνάσια καὶ τὰς καλουμένας λέσχας ἀναστρέ-
φεσθαι. καὶ γὰρ εἰς ταύτας συνιόντες ἐπιεικῶς
ἐσχόλαξον μετ᾽ ἀλλήλων, οὐδενὸς μεμνημένοι τῶν
πρὸς χρηματισμὸν ἢ χρείαν ἀγοραῖον συντε-
λούντων" ἀχλὰ τὸ πλεῖστον ἦν τῆς τοιαύτης
διατριβῆς ἔργον ἐπαινεῖν TL τῶν καλῶν, ἢ τῶν
αἰσχρῶν ψέγειν, μετὰ παιδιᾶς καὶ γέλωτος, ἐλα-
φρῶς ὑποφέροντος εἰς νουθεσίαν καὶ διόρθωσιν.
οὐδὲ γὰρ αὐτὸς ἣν axpatws αὐστηρὸς ὁ Av-
κοῦργος" ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ τοῦ Γέλωτος ἀγαλμάτιον
ἐκεῖνον ἱδρύσασθαι Σωσίβιος ἱστορεῖ, τὴν παι-
διὰν ὥσπερ ἥδυσμα τοῦ πόνου καὶ τῆς διαίτης
1 ἐλευθερίας, Sintenis? with Coraés, after Bryan; ἐλευ-
θερίαν MSS., Sintenis!, and Bekker.
280
LYCURGUS, xxiv. 3-xxv. 2
Athenian had been fined for idleness and was going
home in great distress of mind and attended on his
way by sympathetic and sorrowing friends, begged
the bystanders to show him the man who had been
fined for living like a freeman. So servile a thing
did they regard the devotion to the mechanical arts
and to money-making. And law-suits, of course,
vanished from among them with their gold and silver
coinage, for they knew neither greed nor want, but
equality in well-being was established there, and
easy living based on simple wants. Choral dances and
feasts and festivals and hunting and bodily exercise
and social converse occupied their whole time, when
they were not on a military expedition.
XXV. Those who were under thirty years of age
did not go into the market-place at all, but had
their household wants supplied at the hands of
their kinsfolk and lovers. And it was disreputable
for the elderly men to be continually seen loitering
there, instead of spending the greater part of the
day in the places of exercise that are called
“Jeschai.”’1 For if they gathered in these, they
spent their time suitably with one another, making
no allusions to the problems of money-making or of
exchange, nay, they were chiefly occupied there in
praising some noble action or censuring some base
one, with jesting and laughter which made the path
to instruction and correction easy and natural. For
not even Lycurgus himself was immoderately severe;
indeed, Sosibius tells us that he actually dedicated
a little statue of Laughter, and introduced season-
able jesting into their drinking parties and like
1 Places where men assembled for conversation.
281
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐμβαλόντα κατὰ καιρὸν εἰς τὰ συμπύσια Kal τὰς
τοιαύτας διατριβάς.
Τὸ δὲ ὅλον εἴθιζε τοὺς πολίτας μὴ βούλεσθαι
μηδὲ ἐπίστασθαι κατ᾽ ἰδίαν ζῆν, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ τὰς
μελίττας τῷ κοινῷ συμφυεῖς ὄντας ἀεὶ καὶ μετ᾽
ἀλλήλων εἱλουμένους περὶ τὸν ἄρχοντα, μικροῦ
δεῖν ἐξεστῶτας ἑαυτῶν ὑπ᾽ ἐνθουσιασμοῦ καὶ
φιλοτιμίας, ὅλους εἶναι τῆς πατρίδος" ὡς ἔστι
καὶ φωναῖς τισιν αὐτῶν ἀποθεωρῆσαι τὴν διά-
νοιαν. ὁ μὲν γὰρ Παιδάρητος οὐκ ἐγκριθεὶς εἰς
τοὺς τριακοσίους ἀπῇει μάλα pardpos, ὥσπερ
χαίρων ὅτι βελτίονας αὐτοῦ τριακοσίους ἡ πόλις
ἔχει" Πολυκρατίδας δὲ ὁ πρεσβεύων πρὸς τοὺς
βασιλέως στρατηγοὺς μεθ᾽ ἑτέρων, ἐρομένων αὖ-
τῶν πότερον ἰδίᾳ πάρεισιν ἢ δημοσίᾳ πεμφθέντες,
εἶπεν, “Αἴκα τύχωμεν, δημοσίᾳ, αἴκα ἀποτύ-
χώμεν, ἰδία," 1) δὲ Βρασίδου μήτηρ ᾿Αργιλεωνίς,
ὡς ας τινες εἰς “Λακεδαίμονα τῶν ἐξ
᾿Αμφιπόλεως εἰσῆθλον πρὸς αὐτήν, ἡἠ ρώτησεν εἰ
καλῶς ὁ Βρασίδας ἀπέθανε καὶ τᾶς Σπάρτας
ἀξίως" μεγαλυνόντων δὲ ἐκείνων τὸν ἄνδρα καὶ
λεγόντων ὡς οὐκ ἔχει τοιοῦτον ἄλλον ἣ Σπάρτη"
“Μὴ λέγετε," εἶπεν, “ ὦ ξένοι: καλὸς μὲν γὰρ
ἦν καὶ ἀγαθὸς ὁ Bono τς πολλοὺς δὲ ἄνδρας
Λακεδαίμων ἔχει τήνου κάρρονας. 3
XXVI. Τοὺς δὲ “γέροντας αὐτὸς μέν, ὡς εἴρηται,
κατέστησε τὸ πρῶτον ἐκ τῶν μετασχόντων τοῦ
βουλεύματος" ὕστερον δὲ ἀντὶ τοῦ τελευτῶντος
ἔταξε καθιστάναι τὸν ἄριστον ἀρετῇ κριθέντα
τῶν ὑπὲρ ἑξήκοντα ἔτη γεγονότων. καὶ μέγιστος
282
LYCURGUS, xxv. 2—xxvi. I
diversions, to sweeten, as it were, their hardships
and meagre fare.
In a word, he trained his fellow-citizens to have
neither the wish nor the ability to live for them-
selves; but like bees they were to make themselves
always integral parts of the whole community,
clustering together about their leader, almost beside
themselves with enthusiasm and noble ambition, and
to belong wholly to their country. This idea can
be traced also in some of their utterances. For
instance, Paedaretus, when he failed to be chosen
among the three hundred best men, went away with
a very glad countenance, as if rejoicing that the
city had three hundred better men than himself.
And again, Polycratidas, one of an embassy to the
generals of the Persian king, on being asked by them
whether the embassy was there in a private or a
public capacity, replied: “ If we succeed, in a public
capacity ; if we fail, in a private.’ Again, Argileonis,
the mother of Brasidas, when some Amphipolitans
who had come to Sparta paid her a visit, asked them
if Brasidas had died nobly and in a manner worthy
of Sparta. Then they greatly extolled the man and
said that Sparta had not such another, to which she
answered: “Say not so, Strangers; Brasidas was
noble and brave, but Sparta has many better men
than he.”
XXVI. The senators were at first appointed by
Lycurgus himself, as I have said,! from those who
shared his counsels; but afterwards he arranged
that any vacancy caused by death should be filled by
the man elected as most deserving out of those
above sixty years of age. And of all the contests in
1Chapter v. 7 f£.
283
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐaδ7ό κει TOAV ἐ3ν ἀ’ νθρώπ, οις ἀ> γών/ ων οὗkaτ ος ε“ἶ.ν αι Kal \
περιμαχητότατος: οὐ yaAp ἐν ταχέσι τάχιστον
οὐδ» ᾽ ’ ἐ’ν ἰ» σχυροῖς΄- ἰ’ σχυρότΤᾺ ατον, a» dr » ἐ5ν ἀ» γαθοῖςA
καὶ σώφροσιν ἄριστον καὶ σωφρονέστατον ἔδει
κριθέντα νικητήριον ἔχειν τῆaς ἀρετῆAς διὰ βί,ο υ τὸἉ
σύμπαν, WS εἰπεῖlνal, κράτος ἐν THA πολιτείᾳ, , κύριον
ὄ᾿,ν τα καὶ θανάτου καὶ ἀτιμί/α ς καὶ ὅ© λως τῶlaν]
μεγίστων. ἐγί’νὔ ετο δὲΝ ἡ κρίAσ ις τό,ν δε τὸ\ν τρό,π ον.
ἐb]κ κλησίαfn ς ἀ> θροισθείσ’ ης ἄyyν δρες αἱςρ ετοὶ \ καθείρ͵ -
γνυντο πλησίο’ ν εἰ’ς οἴyy κημα, τὴἉν μὲΝν ὄv ψιν οὐ» χ
ὁρῶanν τες οὐδὲ ὁς ρώμ4 ενοι, τὴν δὲ κραυγὴν\ μόν’ ον
ἀ᾽ κούο/ ντες ἐ3 κκλησιαζόνifτ ων. βοῇa ya\p ὡἙς Ta3 da
καὶ τοὺς ἁμιλλωμένους ἔκρινον, οὐχ ὁμοῦ πάντων,
ἀλλ᾽ ἑκάστου κατὰ κλῆρον εἰσαγομένου καὶ σιωπῇ
διαπορευομένου τὴν ἐκκλησία’ ν. ἔχοντες οὖν οἱ
κατάκλειστοι γραμματεῖα, καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐπεση-
μαίνοντο τῆAς κραυγῆςA τὸ\ μέγ, εθος, οὐκ εἰδό[2τ ες
ὅτῳ γένοιτο, πλὴν ὅτι πρῶτος ἢ δεύτερος ἢ τρίτος
ἢ ὁ«ςπ οστοσοῦνan εἴη τῶfaνl εἰσαγομένων. ὅτῳ δὲ
πλείστη γένοιτο καὶ μεγίστη, τοῦτον ἀνηγόρευνον.
ὁ δὲ στεφανωσάμενος περιήει τοὺς θεούς: εἵποντο
δὲ πολλοὶ νέοι ζηλοῦντες τὸν ἄνδρα καὶ μεγαλύ-
νοντες, πολλαί ’ὔ͵ TE γυναῖκA ες ἐγκωμιάζουσαι bv
ὠδδῆῆςς τὴντ ὴν ἀρἀερεττὴὴν καὶ τὸν βίον εὐδαιμἐομνοίνξίζιζ ουσαι.
τῶlaνl δὲ\ ἐ>)π ιτηδείtω ν ἕὉ“ καστος αὐ᾽τ ῷn a δεῖn πνον Tapa- 56
τιθεὶ\ς ἔo/-λ εγεν ὅὉ“ τι ἡς πό/λ ις ταύVτA ῃ τιμᾷra l τῇA τραπέζ7 ῃ.
περιελθὼν δὲ εἰς τὸ συσσίτιον ἀ» πήει" καὶ τὰ μὲν
ἄΜ λλα ἐ5»γ ίUν ετο συνήθ, ως, δευτέ,ρ ας δὲ\ μερίδ‘ ος αὐ>τ ῷ A
284
LYCURGUS, xxvi. 1-4
the world this would seem to have been the greatest
and the most hotly disputed. For it was not the
swiftest of the swift, nor the strongest of the strong,
but the best and wisest of the good and wise who
was to be elected, and have for the rest of his life,
as a victor’s prize for excellence, what I may call the
supreme power in the state, lord as he was of life
and death, honour and dishonour, and all the
greatest issues of life. The election was made in
the following manner. An assembly of the people
having been convened, chosen men were shut up in
a room near by so that they could neither see nor be
seen, but only hear the shouts of the assembly. For
as in other matters, so here, the cries of the assembly
decided between the competitors. These did not
appear in a body, but each one was introduced
separately, as the lot fel], and passed silently through
the assembly. Then the secluded judges, who had
writing-tablets with them, recorded in each case
the loudness of the shouting, not knowing for whom
it was given, but only that he was introduced first,
second, or third, and soon. Whoever was greeted
with the most and loudest shouting, him they
declared elected. The victor then set a wreath
upon his head and visited in order the temples of
the gods. He was followed by great numbers of
young men, who praised and extolled him, as well
as by many women, who celebrated his excellence in
songs, and dwelt on the happiness of his life. Each
of his relations and friends set a repast before him,
saying: “The city honours thee with this table.”
When he had finished his circuit, he went off to his
mess-table. Here he fared in other ways as usual,
but a second portion of food was set before him,
285
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
παρατεθείσ, ης ἐ? φύ4λ αττεν ἀ» ράμ/ ενος" Kal \ μετὰ TO\
δεῖa πνον ἐπὶ ταῖaς θύραις Tova φιδιτί4ο υ τῶ“ν οἰκεί, ων
παρουσῶν γυναικῶν, ἣν μάλιστα τυγχάνοι τιμῶν
προσεκαλεῖτaAο , Kal διδοὺ\ς τὴ\ν μοῖawρ αν ἔλεγεν ὅτι
ταύ/τ ην αὐEτEὸN ς λαβὼν\ ἀ? ριστεῖοa ν ἐ> κεί4ν ῃ δί/ δωσιν,
ὥ“ στε κἀ>κ είν/ ην ζηλουμένf ην ὑἡ πὸ \ τῶ“ν ἄBA λλων προ-
πέμπεσθαι γυναικῶν.
XXVII. Καὶ μὴν καὶ τὰ περὶ τὰς ταφὰς
ἄριστα διεκόσμησεν αὐτοῖς. πρῶτον μὲν yap
ἀνελὼν δεισιδαιμονία, ν ἅ© πασαν ἐν τῇio l πόλει
θάπτειν τοὺς νεκρούς/, καὶ \ πλησίο,ὔν ἔ5)χ ειν τὰ\ μνή-
ματα TOrVn ἱερῶa ν οὐκ ἐκώ΄λ υσε, συντρό/φ ους ποιῶaν
ταῖaς τοιαύταις ὄb) ψεσι καὶ \ συνήθZz εις τοὺς νέους,
ὥστε μὴ ταράττεσθαι μηδ᾽ ve ὀie ρρωδεῖν- τὸAν θάνατον
ὡς pulai7 vovTa τοὺς ἁψαμένους νεκροῦa σώματος ἢ
διὰ\ τάἊΣφ ων διελθόντας. ἔ” πειτα συνθάπ/ τειν οὐOδiὲ ν
εἴασεν, ἀλλὰ ἐν φοινικίδ/ ι καὶ φύλλοις ἐλαίας
θέ/ν τες TO᾿ ς σῶa μα περιέjdσ τελλον. ἐ5 πιγρά4 ψαι δὲ\
τοὔνομα θάψαντας οὐκ ἐξῆν τοῦ “νεκροῦ, πλὴν
ἀνδρὸς ἐν πολέμῳ καὶ γυναικὸς\ τῶν ἱερῶν ἀπο-
θανόντων. χρόνον. δὲ πένθους ὀλίγον προσώρισεν,
ἡμέρας ἕνδεκα: τῇ δὲ δωδεκάτῃ θύσαντας ἔδει
Δήμητρι λύειν τὸ πάθος. οὐδὲν γὰρ ἣν ἀργὸν
οὐδὲ a εἰμένον, ἀλλὰ πᾶσι κατεμίγνυε τοῖς
ἀναγκαίοις ἀρετῆς τινα ζῆλον ἢ κακίας δια βολήν'
καὶ κατεπύκ/ νου παραδευγμάτων πλήθει τὴν
πόλιν, οἷς ἀναγκαῖον ἣν ἐντυγχάνοντας ἀεὶ καὶ
συντρεφομένους ἄγεσθαι καὶ κατασχηματίζεσθαι
ἰόντας πρὸς τὸ καλόν.
1 αὐτοῖς Coraés and Bekker, after Bryan: αὐτός (himself).
286
LYCURGUS, xxvi. 4—-xxvi. 2
which he took and put by. After the supper was
over, the women who were related to him being now
assembled at the door of the mess-hall, he called to
him the one whom he most esteemed and gave her
the portion he had saved, saying that he had received
it as a meed of excellence, and as such gave it to
her. Upon this, she too was lauded by the rest of
the women and escorted by them to her home.
XXVII. Furthermore, Lycurgus made most ex-
cellent regulations in the matter of their burials.
To begin with, he did away with all superstitious
terror by allowing them to bury their dead within the
city, and to have memorials of them near the sacred
places, thus making the youth familiar with such
sights and accustomed to them, so that they were not
confounded by them, and had no horror of death as
polluting those who touched a corpse or walked
among graves. In the second place, he permitted
nothing to be buried with the dead; they simply
covered the body with a scarlet robe and olive leaves
when they laid it away. ‘To inscribe the name of
the dead upon the tomb was not allowed, unless it
were that of a man who had fallen in war, or that of
a woman who had died in sacred office. He set apart
only a short time for mourning, eleven days; on the
twelfth, they were to sacrifice to Demeter and cease
their sorrowing. Indeed, nothing was left untouched
and neglected, but with all the necessary details of
life he blended some commendation of virtue or
rebuke of vice; and he filled the city full of good
examples, whose continual presence and society must
of necessity exercise a controlling and moulding
influence upon those who were walking the path of
honour.
287
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Ὅθεν οὐδ᾽ ἀποδημεῖν ἔδωκε τοῖς βουλομένοις
καὶ πλανᾶσθαι, ξενικὰ συνάγοντας ἤθη καὶ μιμή-
ματα βίων ἀπαιδεύτων καὶ πολιτευμάτων δια-
φόρων. ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἀθροιξομένους ἐπ᾽ οὐδενὶ
χρησίμῳ καὶ “παρεισρέοντας εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἀπή-
λαυνεν, οὐχ, ὡς Θουκυδίδης φησί, δεδιὼς μὴ τῆς
πολιτείας μιμηταὶ γένωνται καὶ πρὸς ἀρετήν τι
χρήσιμον ἐκμάθωσιν, ἀλλὰ μᾶλλον ὅπως μὴ
διδάσκαλοι κακοῦ τινος ὑπάρξωσιν. ἅμα γὰρ
ξένοις σώμασιν ἀνάγκη λόγους ἐπεισιέναι ξένους"
λόγοι δὲ καινοὶ κρίσεις καινὰς ἐπιφέρουσιν. ἐξ
ὧν ἀνάγκη πάθη πολλὰ φύεσθαι καὶ προαιρέσεις
ἀπᾳδούσας πρὸς τὴν καθεστῶσαν πολιτείαν,
ὥσπερ ἁρμονίαν. διὸ μᾶλλον ᾧετο χρῆναι φυ-
λάττειν τὴν πόλιν ὅπως near OUK ἀναπλησθή-
σεται πονηρῶν ἢ σωμάτων νοσερῶν ἔξωθεν
ἐπεισιόντων.
XK VE, °Ep per’ ovv TOUTOLS οὐδέν ἐστιν
ἀδικίας ἴχνος οὐδὲ πλεονεξίας, ἣν ἐγκαλοῦσιν
ἔνιοι τοῖς Λυκούργου νόμοις, ὡς ἱκανῶς ἔχουσι
πρὸς ἀνδρείαν, ἐνδεῶς δὲ πρὸς δικαιοσύνην. ἡ
δὲ καλουμένη κρυπτεία παρ᾽ αὐτοῖς, εἴ γε δὴ
τοῦτο τῶν Λυκούργου πολιτευμάτων ἕν ἐστιν,
ὡς ᾿Αριστοτέλης ἱστόρηκε, ταύτην ἂν εἴη καὶ τῷ
Πλάτωνι “περὶ τῆς πολιτείας καὶ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς
ἐνειργασμένη δόξαν. ἣν δὲ τοιαύτη: τῶν νέων
οἱ ἄρχοντες διὰ χρόνου ποὺς μάλιστα νοῦν ἔχειν
δοκοῦντας εἰς τὴν χώραν ἄλλως ἐξέπεμπον,
ἔχοντας ἐγχειρίδια καὶ τροφὴν ἀναγκαίαν, ἄλλο
δὲ οὐδέν: οἱ δὲ μεθ᾽ ἡμέραν μὲν εἰς ἀσυνδήλους
διασπειρόμενοι τόπους, ἀπέκρυπτον ἑαυτοὺς καὶ
288
LYCURGUS, xxv. 3-xxviil. 2
This was the reason why he did not permit them
to live abroad at their pleasure and wander in strange
lands, assuming foreign habits and imitating the lives
of peoples who were without training and lived under
different forms of government. Nay more, he actually
drove away from the city the multitudes which
streamed in there for no useful purpose, not because
he feared they might become imitators of his form
of government and learn useful lessons in virtue, as
Thucydides says,! but rather that they might not
become in any wise teachers of evil. For along with
strange people, strange doctrines must come in; and
novel doctrines bring novel decisions, from which
there must arise many feelings and resolutions which
destroy the harmony of the existing political order.
Therefore he thought it more necessary to keep bad
manners and customs from invading and filling the
city than it was to keep out infectious diseases.
XXVIII. Now in all this there is no trace of
injustice or arrogance, which some attribute to the
laws of Lycurgus, declaring them efficacious in
producing valour, but defective in producing righte-
ousness. The so-called “krupteia,” or secret service, of
the Spartans, if this be really one of the institutions
of Lycurgus,a s Aristotle says it was, may have given
Plato also? this opinion of the man and his civil polity.
This secret service was of the following nature. The
magistrates from time to time sent out into the
country at large the most discreet of the young
warriors, equipped only with daggers and such
supplies as were necessary. In the day time they
scattered into obscure and out of the way places,
* In the Funeral Oration of Pericles, ii. 39, 1.
2 Laws, p. 630 d.
289
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀ᾽ νεπαύο΄ν, το, νύ΄ κτωρ δὲ\ κατιόνf τες εἰ>ς τὰ\ς ὁe δοὺ\ς
τῶaν εἱ¢. χώτων τὸΝν ἁλισκόμενον ἀπέσφαττον. πολ-
λάκις δὲ καὶ τοῖς ἀγροῖς ἐπιπορευόμενοι τοὺς
ῥωμαλεωτάτους καὶ κρατίστους αὐτῶν ἀνήρουν.
ὥΨ σπερ καὶ \ Θουκυδίδ/ ης ἐ>ν τοῖωςν ]Πελοποννησιακοῖςa
ἱστορεῖn τοὺς ἐπ᾽ > ἀνδρείiᾳ προκριθέντας ὑπὸ τῶnν
Σπαρτιατῶν στεφανώσασθαι μὲν ὡς ἐλευθέρους 57
γεγονό,τ ας καὶ περιελθεῖνr τὰ\ τῶAν θεῶa ν ἱερά,
μικρὸν δὲ ὕστερον ἅπαντας ἀφανεῖς γενέσθαι,
πλείονας ἢ δισχιλίο/ υς ὄντας, WS μήτε παραχρῆaμn α
μήτε ὕστερον ἔχειν τινὰ\ λέ/γ ειν ὅτῳ" τρόπῳ
διεφθάρησαν. ’ ᾿Αριστοτέfλ ης δὲ μάλιστά φησι
καὶ τοὺς ἐφόρUd ους, ὅδ ταν εἰ?ς TH\Y ἀρχὴ\ν καταστῶσa ι
πρῶτa ον, τοῖaς εἵ¢/-λ ωσι καταγγέλ, λειν πόλεμον,
ὅπως εὐαγὲς ἢ τὸ ἀνελεῖν.
Kal τἄ3 λλα δὲ τραχέως προσεφέρ/ οντο καὶ
σκληρῶἊςΝ αὐτοῖς“ , ὥστε καὶ πίν’ ειν ἀναγκάζοντες
πολὺν ἄκρατον εἰς τὰ συσσίτια παρεισῆγον, ἐπι-
δεικνύμενοι TOΝ μεθύε/ ιν οἷόν ἐστι τοῖaς νέοις. καὶ
ὠδὰ\ς ἐκέλευον ἄδειν καὶ \ χορεί/α ς χορεύεa ιν ἀγεννεῖς-
καὶ Ν καταγελάσ΄ τους, ἀ> πέ/χ εσθαι δὲ\ τῶaν ἐ» λευθέρ/ ων.
διὸΝ καί φασιν ὕeeσ τερον ἐ>ν τῇan Θηβαίω/ ν ei2s τὴ\ν
Λακωνικὴν στρατείᾳ τοὺς ἁλισκομένους εἵλωτας
κελευομέν, ους ἄojδ ειν τΕὰΝ Τερπάν΄,δ ρου καὶw ee ᾿Αλκμᾶaν ος
καὶ Σπένδοντος τοῦ Λάκωνος παραιτεῖσθαι, φά-
σκοντας οὐκ ἐθέλειν τοὺς δεσποσύνους. ὥστε τοὺς
λέ/γ οντας, ἐ5ν Λακεδαίμονι καὶ \ τὸ\ν ἐ> λεύ4θ ερον μά-΄
λιστα ἐλεύθερον εἶναι καὶ τὸΝν δοῦfalλ ον μάλιστα
1 τοῖς ἀγροῖς MSS. (incl. 5): τοὺς ἀγροὺς after Coraés,
2 ὅτῳ Cobet, cf. Thuc. iv. 80, 4: τῷ.
290
LYCURGUS, xxvitt. 2-5
where they hid themselves and lay quiet; but in the
night they came down into the highways and killed
every Helot whom they caught. Oftentimes, too,
they actually traversed the fields where Helots were
working and slew the sturdiest and best of them. So,
too, Thucydides, in his history of the Peloponnesian
war,! tells us that the Helots who had been judged
by the Spartans to be superior in bravery, set wreaths
upon their heads in token of their emancipation, and
visited the temples of the gods in procession, but a
little while afterwards all disappeared, more than
two thousand of them, in such a way that no man
was able to say, either then or afterwards, how they
came by their deaths. And Aristotle in particular
says also that the ephors, as soon as they came into
office, made formal declaration of war upon the
Helots, in order that there might be no impiety in
slaying them.
And in other ways also they were harsh and cruel
to the Helots. For instance, they would force them
to drink too much strong wine, and then introduce
them into their public messes, to show the young
men what a thing drunkenness was. They also
ordered them to sing songs and dance dances that
were low and ridiculous, but to let the nobler kind
alone. And therefore in later times, they say, when
the Thebans made their expedition into Laconia,?
they ordered the Helots whom they captured to sing
the songs of Terpander, Aleman, and Spendon the
Spartan ; but they declined to do so, on the plea
that their masters did not allow it, thus proving the
correctness of the saying: “In Sparta the freeman
is more a freeman than anywhere else in the world,
1 iv. 80. 2 Under Epaminondas, 369 B.c.
201
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δοῦλον, οὐ φαύλως τεθεωρηκέναι τὴν διαφορᾶν.
6 τὰς μὲν οὖν τοιαύτας χαλεπότητας ὕστερον ἐγ-
γενέσθαι τοῖς Σπαρτιάταις νομίζω, μάλιστα μετὰ
τὸν μέγαν σεισμόν, ᾧ συνεπιθέσθαι τοὺς εἵλωτας
μετὰ Μεσσηνίων ἱστοροῦσι, καὶ πλεῖστα κακὰ
τὴν χώραν ἐργάσασθαι καὶ μέγιστον τῇ πόλει
περιστῆσαι κίνδυνον. οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἔγωγε προσθείην
Λυκούργῳ μιαρὸν οὕτω τῆς κρυπτείας ἔργον ἀπὸ
τῆς ἄλλης αὐτοῦ πρᾳότητος καὶ δικαιοσύνης
τεκμαιρόμενος τὸν τρόπον, ᾧ καὶ τὸ δαιμόνιον
ἐπεμαρτύρησε.
XXIX. Κατειλημμένων δὲ τοῖς ἐθισμοῖς ἤδη
τῶν κυριωτάτων ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ, καὶ τῆς πολιτείας
ἐκτεθραμμένης ἱκανῶς καὶ δυναμένης φέρειν ἑαυ-
τὴν καὶ σώζειν δι’ ἑαυτῆς, ὥσπερ ὁ Πλάτων
φησὶν ἐπὶ τῷ κόσμῳ γενομένῳ καὶ κινηθέντι τὴν
πρώτην κίνησιν εὐφρανθῆναι τὸν θεόν, οὕτως
ἀγασθεὶς καὶ ἀγαπήσας τὸ τῆς νομοθεσίας κάλ-
λος καὶ μέγεθος ἐν ἔργῳ γενομένης καὶ ὁδῷ βαδι-
ζούσης, ἐπεθύμησεν, ὡς ἀνυστὸν ἐξ ἀνθρωπίνης
προνοίας, ἀθάνατον αὐτὴν ἀπολιπεῖν καὶ ἀκίνητον
2 εἰς τὸ μέλλον. συναγαγὼν οὖν ἅπαντας εἰς ἐκ-
κλησίαν, τὰ μὲν ἄλλα μετρίως ἔχειν ἔφη καὶ
ἱκανῶς πρὸς εὐδαιμονίαν καὶ “ἀρετὴν τῆς πόλεως,
ὃ δὲ κυριώτατόν ἐστι καὶ μέγιστον οὐκ ἂν Efe
νεγκεῖν πρότερον πρὸς αὐτοὺς ἢ χρήσασθαι TO
θεῷ. δεῖν. οὖν ἐκείνους ἐμμένειν τοῖς καθεστῶσι
νόμοις καὶ “μηδὲν ἀλλάσσειν μηδὲ μετακι"' εῖν ἕως
ἐπάνεισιν ἐκ Δελφῶν αὐτός" ἐπανελθὼν γὰρ ὅ τι
292
LYCURGUS, xxvim. 5—xx1x, 2
and the slave more a slave.’’ However, in my
opinion, such cruelties were first practised by the
Spartans in later times, particularly after the great
earthquake,! when the MHelots and Messenians
together rose up against them, wrought the widest
devastation in their territory, and brought their city
into the greatest peril. I certainly cannot ascribe
to Lycurgus so abominable a measure as the “ krup-
teia,’ judging of his character from his mildness and
justice in all other instances. To this the voice of
the god also bore witness.?
XXIX. When his principal institutions were at
last firmly fixed in the customs of the people, and
his civil polity had sufficient growth and strength
to support and preserve itself, just as Plato says?
that Deity was rejoiced to see His universe come
into being and make its first motion, so Lycurgus
was filled with joyful satisfaction in the magnitude
and beauty of his system of laws, now that it
was in operation and moving along its pathway.
He therefore ardently desired, so far as human
forethought could accomplish the task, to make it
immortal, and let it go down unchanged to future
ages. Accordingly, he assembled the whole people,
and told them that the provisions already made were
sufficiently adapted to promote the prosperity and
virtue of the state, but that something of the greatest
weight and importance remained, which he could
not lay before them until he had consulted the god
at Delphi. They must therefore abide by the
established laws and make no change nor alteration
in them until he came back from Delphi in person;
1464 B.c. Cf. Plutarch’s Cimon, xvi.
® See chapter v. 3. ὃ Timaeus, p. 37 ὁ.
293
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 ἂx ν τῷA θεῷa δοκῇA ποιήσ, ειν. ὁe μολογούν, των δὲ\ πάν, -
των καὶ κελευόντων βαδίζ,εὔ ιν, ὅρκους λαβὼν παρὰἊ
τῶaν βασιλέων καὶ τῶlaνl γερόiν των, ἔ, πειτα παρὰ \
τῶν ἄλλων πολιτῶν, ἐμμενεῖν καὶ χρήσεσθαι TH
κααθθεεσστώτσώῃ σῃ ποπλο ιτείᾳᾳ μέμχέχρριιςς ἂν ἐπανέλθῃ ῃ ὁ Λυ-
κοῦlaρ) γος, ἀπῆaρ εν εἰ2ς Δελφούςi.
Παραγενόμ, ενος δὲ\ πρὸ\ς τὸ\ μαντεῖaοA ν καὶ\ τῷA
θεῷ θύσας, ἠρώτησεν εἰ καλῶς οἱ νόμοι καὶ ἱκα-
νῶnς πρὸς εὐδαιμονί/α ν καὶ ἀρετὴ\ν πό,λ εως κείμενοι
τυγχάνουσιν. ἀποκριναμένου δὲ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ τοὺς
νό’ μους καλῶaςn κεῖa σθαι Kal \ τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν ἐ3 νδοξοτά4τ ην
διαμενεῖaν τῇa ΛυκούρiA γου χρωμένΑ ην πολιτείᾳ, TO\
μάντευμα γραψάμδε νος εἰς Σπάρif την ἀπέσ/ τειλεν.
αὐ8τ ὸςϑως δὲΝ τῷ“ θεῷan πάλ/ ιν θύ4σ ας καὶ \ τοὺ\ς φί,λ ους
ἀσπασάμενος Kal \ τὸ\ν υἱaόiνt , ἔγνω μηκέτ/ ι τοῖaς
πολίτ/ αις ἀφεῖ-ν αι τὸΝν ὅρκον, αὐτοῦa δὲδὴ καταλῦσa αι
ToΝv βί7ο ν ἑ« κουσίωihς , ἡidλ ικί,α ς γεγονὼ\ς ἐ>ν ἣὉ καὶ \ βιοῦlaνl
ἔτει καὶ πεπαῦσa θαι βουλομένοις ὡραῖaόlν ἐστι, καὶ
τῶnν περὶ αὐτὸ\ν ἱκανῶQςn πρὸς\ εὐδαιμονίαν ἔχειν δο-
κούντων. ἐτελεύτησεν οὖν ἀποκαρτερήσας, ἡγού-
μενος χρῆναι τῶν πολιτικῶν ἀνδρῶν μηδὲ τὸν
θάνατον ἀπi ολίτ, ευτον εἶ3 ναι μηδὲΝ ἀργὸν τὸ τοῦA
βίου τέλος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐν ἀρετῆaςn μερίδ[4 ι καὶ πράξεως
γενόμενον. αὑτῷA Te ya\p ἐξειργασμέfν ῳ τὰ\ κάλ-
λιστα τὴ\ν τελευτὴ\ν WeS ἀ> ληθῶ“ς ἐ3 πιτελεί/ω σιν εἶ> ναι
τῆaς εὐδαιμονίας, Kal τοῖaς πολίτ/ αις ὧΦν διὰ\ τοῦa A
βίου παρεσκεύα4 σε καλῶnν καὶ ἀγαθῶaν φύλακα τὸν
θάνατον ἀπολείψ/ ειν, ὀ? μωμοκοσ’ ι χρῆnσ θαι τῇa πο-
6 λιτείᾳᾧ ΜΈμΧέΡχΙρ ις ἂν ἐκεῖνος ἐπανέλθῃ. 7. καὶ οὐ διεψεύ-
294
LYCURGUS, xxix. 3-6
then he would do whatsoever the god thought best.
When they all agreed to this and bade him set out
on his journey, he exacted an oath from the kings
and the senators, and afterwards from the rest of
the citizens, that they would abide by the established
polity and observe it until Lycurgus should come
back ; then he set out for Delphi.
On reaching the oracle, he sacrificed to the god,
and asked if the laws which he had established were
good, and sufficient to promote acity’s prosperity and
virtue. Apollo answered that the laws which he had
established were good, and that the city would
continue to be held in highest honour while it kept
to the polity of Lycurgus. This oracle Lycurgus
wrote down, and sent it to Sparta. But for his own
part, he sacrificed again to the god, took affectionate
leave of his friends and of his son, and resolved
never to release his fellow-citizens from their oath,
but of his own accord to put an end to his life where
he was. He had reached an age in which life was not
yet a burden, and death no longer a terror; when he
and his friends, moreover, appeared to be sufficiently
prosperous and happy. He therefore abstained from
food till he died, considering that even the death of
a statesman should be of service to the state, and the
ending of his life not void of effect, but recognized
as a virtuous deed. As for himself, since he had
wrought out fully the noblest tasks, the end of life
would actually be a consummation of his good for-
tune and happiness ; and as for his fellow-citizens, he
would make his death the guardian, as it were, of
all the blessings he had secured for them during his
life, since they had sworn to observe and maintain
his polity until he should return. And he was not
295
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
σθη τῶν λογισμῶν" τοσοῦτον ἐπρώτευσεν ἡ πόλις
τῆς ᾿ΒῬλλάδος εὐνομίᾳ καὶ δόξῃ, χρόνον ἐτῶν
πεντακοσίων τοῖς Λυκούργου χρησαμένη νόμοις,
οὺς δεκατεσσάρων βασιλέων μετ᾽ ἐκεῖνον εἰς
“Ayu τὸν ᾿Αρχιδάμου γενομένων οὐδεὶς ἐἐκί νησεν.
ἡ γὰρ τῶν ἐφόρων κατάστασις οὐκ ἄνεσις ἦν,
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπίτασις τῆς πολιτείας, καὶ δοκοῦσα πρὸς
τοῦ δήμου “γεγονέναι σφοδροτέραν ἐποίησε τὴν
ἀριστοκρατίαν.
XXX. ΓΛγιδος δὲ βασιλεύοντος εἰσερρύη νό-
μισμα πρῶτον εἰς τὴν Σπάρτην, καὶ μετὰ τοῦ
νομίσματος πλεονεξία καὶ πλούτου ζῆλος ἐπέβη
διὰ Λύσανδρον, ὃς αὐτὸς ὧν ἀνάλωτος ὑπὸ xpn-
μάτων, ἐνέπλησε τὴν πατρίδα φιλοπλουτίας καὶ
τρυφῆς, χρυσὸν καὶ ἄργυρον ἐκ τοῦ πολέμου κατ-
αγαγὼν καὶ τοὺς Λυκούργου καταπολιτευσάμε-
νος νόμους. ὧν ἐπικρατούντων πρότερον οὐ πό-
News ἡ Σπάρτη πολιτείαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνδρὸς ἀσκητοῦ
καὶ σοφοῦ βίον ἔχουσα, μᾶλλον δ᾽, ὥσπερ οἱ
ποιηταὶ τὸν Ἡρακλέα μυθολογοῦσι δέρμα καὶ
ξύλον ἔχοντα τὴν οἰκουμένην ἐπιπορεύεσθαι, κο-
λάξοντα τοὺς παρανόμους καὶ θηριώδεις τυράν-
νους, οὕτως ἡ πόλις ἀπὸ σκυτάλης μιᾶς καὶ τρί-
βωνος ἄρχουσα τῆς “EXdddos ἑκούσης καὶ βου-
λομένης, κατέλυε τὰς ἀδίκους δυναστείας καὶ
τυραννίδας ἐν τοῖς πολιτεύμασι, καὶ πολέμους
ἐβράβευε καὶ στάσεις κατέπανε, πολλάκις οὐδ᾽
ἀσπίδα κινήσασα μίαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἕνα πέμψασα
πρεσβευτήν, ᾧ πάντες εὐθὺς ἐποίουν τὸ προσ-
τασσόμενον, ὥσπερ αἱ μέλισσαι φανέντος ἡγε-
μόνος, συντρέχοντες καὶ κατακοσμούμενοι. τοσ-
οῦτον περιῆν εὐνομίας τῇ πόλει καὶ δικαιοσύνης.
296
LYCURGUS, xxix. 6-xxx. 2
deceived in his expectations, so long did his city
have the first rank in Hellas for good government
and reputation, observing as she did for five hundred
years the laws of Lycurgus, in which no one of the
fourteen kings who followed him made any change,
down to Agis the son of Archidamus. For the
institution of the ephors did not weaken, but rather
strengthened the civil polity, and though it was
thought to have been done in the interests of
the people, it really made the aristocracy more
powerful.
XXX. But in the reign ot Agis, gold and silver
money first flowed into Sparta, and with money,
greed and a desire for wealth prevailed through the
agency of Lysander, who, though incorruptible him-
self, filled his country with the love of riches and
with luxury, by bringing home gold and silver from
the war, and thus subverting the laws of Lycurgus.
While these remained in force, Sparta led the life,
not of a city under a constitution, but of an individual
man under training and full of wisdom. Nay rather,
as the poets weave their tales of Heracles, how with
his club and lion’s skin he traversed the world chas-
tising lawless and savage tyrants, so we may say that
Sparta, simply with the dispatch-staff and cloak of
her envoys, kept Hellas in willing and glad obedience,
put down illegal oligarchies and tyrannies in the
different states, arbitrated wars, and quelled seditions,
often without so much as moving a single shield, but
merely sending one ambassador, whose commands
all at once obeyed, just as bees, when their leader
appears, swarm together and array themselves about
him. Such a surplus fund of good government and
justice did the city enjoy.
297
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 Ὅθεν ἔγωγε θαυμάξω τῶν “λεγόντων ὡς ἄρχε-
σθαι μὲν ἤδεσαν, ἄρχειν δὲ οὐκ ἠπίσταντο Λακε-
δαιμόνιοι, καὶ τὸν Θεοπόμπου τοῦ βασιλέως
ἐπαινούντων λόγον, ὅς, εἰπόντος τινὸς σώζεσθαι
τὴν Σπάρτην διὰ τοὺς βασιλεῖς ἀρχικοὺς γεγο-
νότας, “ Μᾶλλον," εἶπε, τε διὰ τοὺς πολίτας πει-
θαρχικοὺς ὁὄ ντας" οὐ wap ἀé κούειν ὑπομένουσι τῶν
προστατεῖν μὴ δυναμένων, ἀλλ᾽ ἡ πειθαρχία μάθη-
μα μέν ἐστιν τοῦ ἄρχοντος } (ἐμποιεῖ γὰρ ὁ καλῶς
ἄγων τὸ καλῶς ἕπεσθαι: καὶ καθάπερ ἱππικῆς
τέχνης ἀποτέλεσμα πρᾷον ἵππον καὶ πειθήνιον
παρασχεῖν, οὕτω βασιλικῆς ἐπιστήμης ἔργον
ἀνθρώποις εὐπείθειαν ἐνεργάσασθαι), Λακεδαι-
μόνιοι δὲ οὐκ εὐπείθειαν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιθυμίαν ἐνειργά-
ξοντο τοῖς ἄλλοις τοῦ ἄρχεσθαι καὶ ὑπακούειν
αὐτοῖς. ἤτουν γὰρ οὐ ναῦς οὐδὲ χρήματα παρ᾽
αὐτῶν οὐδὲ ὁπλίτας πέμποντες, ἀλλὰ ἕνα Σπαρ-
τιάτην ἡγεμόνα: καὶ λαβόντες ἐχρῶντο μετὰ
τιμῆς καὶ δέους, ὥσπερ Γυλίππῳ Σικελιῶται
καὶ Βρασίδᾳ Χαλκιδεῖς, Λυσάνδρῳ δὲ καὶ Καλλι-
κρατίδᾳ καὶ ᾿Αγησιλάῳ πάντες οἱ τὴν ᾿Ασίαν
οἰκοῦντες Ἕλληνες, τοὺς μὲν ἄνδρας ἁρμοστὰς
καὶ »σωφρονιστὰς τῶν ἑκασταχοῦ δήμων καὶ
ἀρχόντων ὀνομάζοντες, πρὸς δὲ σύμπασαν τὴν
τῶν παρτιατῶν πόλιν ὥσπερ παιδαγωγὸν ἢ
διδάσκαλον εὐσχήμονος βίου καὶ τεταγμένης
πολιτείας ἀποβλέποντες. εἰς ὃ καὶ Στρατόνικος
ἐπισκῶψαι δοκεῖ, μετὰ παιδιᾶς νομοθετῶν καὶ
κελεύων ᾿Αθηναίους ἄγειν μυστήρια καὶ πομπάς,
᾿Ηλείους δὲ ἀγωνοθετεῖν, ὡς κάλλιστα τοῦτο
ποιοῦντας, Λακεδαιμονίους δέ, ἂν ἁμαρτάνωσιν
1 rod ἄρχοντος With S: ἄρχοντος.
298
LYCURGUS, xxx. 3-6
Wherefore, 1 for one am amazed at those who
declare that the Lacedaemonians knew how to obey,
but did not understand how to command, and
quote with approval the story of King Theopompus,
who, when some one said that Sparta was safe and
secure because her kings knew how to command,
replied: “Nay, rather because her citizens know
how to obey.” For men will not consent to obey
those who have not the ability to rule, but obedience
is a lesson to be learned from a commander. For a
good leader makes good followers, and just as the
final attainment of the art of horsemanship is to
make a horse gentle and tractable, so it is the task
of the science of government to implant obedience
inmen. And the Lacedaemonians implanted in the
rest of the Greeks not only a willingness to obey,
but a desire to be their followers and _s ubjects.
People did not send requests to them for ships, or
money, or hoplites, but for a single Spartan com-
mander ; and when they got him, they treated him
with honour and reverence, as the Sicilians treated
Gylippus; the Chalcidians, Brasidas; and all the
Greeks resident in Asia, Lysander, Callicratidas, and
Agesilaiis. These men, wherever they came, were
styled regulators and chasteners of peoples and
magistrates, and the city of Sparta from which they
came was regarded as a teacher of well-ordered
private life and settled civil polity. To this position
of Sparta Stratonicus would seem to have mockingly
alluded when, in jest, he proposed a law that the
Athenians should conduct mysteries and processions,
and that the Eleians should preside at games, since
herein lay their special excellence, but that the
Lacedaemonians should be cudgelled if the others
299
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
οὗτοι, δέρεσθαι. καὶ τοῦaτ ο μὲν εἴρηται χάρ/ ιν
τοῦA γελοίου" ᾿Αντισθένης δὲ ὁ€ Στὸω κρατικὸςΝ ἀ> πὸ \
τῆaς ἐν Λεύκτροις μάχης ὁ€ ρῶAnν τοὺ\ς Θηβαίο, υς
μέ/γ α φρονοῦlνal τας, οὐἡδδὲὲν αὑ>τ’ οὺς\ e” dn ὃ διαφέρειν 59
παιδαρίων ἐπὶ τῷfo l συγκόLψd αι τὸΝν παιδαγωγὸνἮΝ
γαυριώντων.
XXXI. Ov > μὴ\ν τοῦalτee ο sd ye τῷa Λυκούρ, γῳ κεφά-if
λαιον ἣν τό/τ ε, πλεί/σ των ἡς γουμέν/ ην ἀ» πολιπεῖνa
τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν: Gb AN b ὥ“ σπερ ἑCaνrὸy ς ἀ? νδρὸΝς βί»ῳ Kal \
πόUλ εως ὅ7 λης νομί/ζ ων εὐ> δαιμονία/ ν a>m ’ ’ ἀb)ρ ετῆaς
ἐγγίνεσθαι καὶ ὁ€ μονοία’ ς τῆaς πρὸςΝ αὑτήνFi, πρὸς\
τοῦaτ ο συνέταξε καὶ συνήρμοσεν, ὅ¢ πως ἐλευθέρ/ ιοι
καὶ αὐτάρκεις γενόμενοι καὶ σωφρονοῦντες ἐπὶ
πλεῖ-σ τον χρόν, ον διατελῶlσalι . ταύ/τ ην καὶ \ ἸΪλά4τ ων
ἔ” λαβε τῆAς πολιτείαie ς ὑe πόθεσιν καὶs s ΔιογένLi ης καὶ \
Zivov καὶ πάντες ὅσοι τι περὶ τούτων ἐπιχειρή-
σαντες εἰπεῖν ἐπαινοῦνται, γράμματα καὶ λόγους
ἀπολιπόν/ τες μόν, ον. ὁ δὲ οὐ γράμματα Kal λό/γ ους,
ἀ’ λλ 33 ἔ"sf:ρ γῳ πολιτεί/α ν ἀμίμητον εἰς φῶLalς προενεγκά-
μενος, καὶ τοῖaς ἀΨ νύπαρκτον εἶναι τὴν λεγομένην
περὶ Ν ToΝv σοφὸxν διά/θ εσιν ὑe πολαμβάν/ο υσιν ἐ2 πιδεί-&
Eas ὅ© λην τὴ\ν πόλιν φιλοσοφοῦσlol αν, εἰκότως ὑπερ-
nrapl e τῇ“ δό, ξῃ τοὺς\ πώποτε πολιτευσαμένους ἐν
τοῖaA ς f “Βλλησι. δι’ ὅπερ καὶ » ᾿Αριστοτέλης ἐλάττο-
νας σχεῖν φησι τιμὰς ἢ προσῆκον ἦν αὐτὸν ἔχειν
ἐ?ν Λακεδαίμ“ο νι, καίπερ ἔχοντα τὰ\ς μεγίστας.
ἱc ερὸ,ν τε yap ἐστιν αὐτοῦ,~ Kal θύουσι καθ᾽ ἕA κα-
στον ἐ> νιαυτὸν\ wes θεῷa. λέ/γ εται δὲ\ Kal \ τῶaν λειψά-/
νων αὐ>τ οῦ “ κομισθέντων οἴ5) καδε κεραυνὸν\ εἰς TONV
300
LYCURGUS, xxx. 6—xxxI. 3
did amiss.!. This was a joke; but Antisthenes the
Socratic, when he saw the Thebans in high feather
after the battle of Leuctra,? said in all seriousness
that they were just like little boys strutting about
because they had thrashed their tutor.
XXXI._ It was not, however, the chief design of
Lycurgus then to leave his city in command over a
great many others, but he thought that the happiness
of an entire city, like that of a single individual,
depended on the prevalence of virtue and concord
within its own borders. The aim, therefore, of all
his arrangements and adjustments was to make his
people free-minded, self-sufficing, and moderate in
all their ways, and to keep them so as long as
possible. His design for a civil polity was adopted
by Plato, Diogenes, Zeno, and by all those who have
won approval for their treatises on this subject,
although they left behind them only writings and
words. Lycurgus, on the other hand, produced not
writings and words, but an actual polity which was
beyond imitation, and because he gave, to those who
maintain that the much talked of natural disposition
to wisdom exists only in theory, an example of an
entire city given to the love of wisdom, his fame
rightly transcended that of all who ever founded
polities among the Greeks. Therefore Aristotle
says that the honours paid him in Sparta were less
than he deserved, although he enjoys the highest
honours there. For he has a temple, and sacrifices
are offered to him yearly as to a god. It is also
said that when his remains were brought home, his
1 Cf. chapter xviii. 4.
2 In 371 B.c., when the Thebans under Epaminondas broke
the supremacy of Sparta.
VOL. 1 L 391
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τάφον κατασκῆψαι" τοῦτο δὲ ov ῥᾳδίως ἑτέρῳ
τινὶ τῶν ἐπιφανῶν πλὴν Εὐριπίδῃ συμπεσεῖν
ὕστερον, τελευτήσαντι καὶ ταφέντι τῆς Μακεδον-
ίας περὶ ᾿Αρέθουσαν. ὥστε ἀπολόγημα καὶ μαρ-
τύριον μέγα εἶναι τοῖς ἀγαπῶσι τὸν Εὐριπίδην τὸ
μόνῳ συμπεσεῖν αὐτῷ μετὰ τελευτὴν ᾿ ἃ τῷ
θεοφιλεστάτῳ καὶ ὁσιωτάτῳ πρότερον συνέπεσε.
Τελευτῆσαι δὲ τὸν Λυκοῦργον οἱ μὲν ἐν Κίρρᾳ
λέγουσιν, ᾿Απολλόθεμις δὲ εἰς Ἦλιν κομισθέντα,
Τίμαιος δὲ καὶ ᾿Αριστόξενος ἐν Κρήτῃ καταβιώ-
σαντα" καὶ τάφον ᾿Αριστόξενος αὐτοῦ δείκνυσθαί
φησιν ὑπὸ Κρητῶν τῆς Περγαμίας περὶ τὴν
ξενικὴν ὁδόν. υἱὸν δὲ λέγεται μονογενῆ καταλι-
πεῖν ᾿Αντίωρον' οὗ τελευτήσαντος ἀτέκνου τὸ γένος
ἐξέλιπεν. οἱ δ᾽ ἑταῖροι καὶ οἰκεῖοι διαδοχήν τινα
καὶ σύνοδον ἐπὶ πολλοὺς χρόνους διαμείνασαν
κατέστησαν, καὶ τὰς ,ἡ μέρας ἐν αἷς συνήρχοντο
Λυκουργίδας προσηγόρευσαν. ᾿Αριστοκράτης δὲ
δ Ἱππάρχου φησὶ τοὺς ξένους τοῦ Λυκούργου
τελευτήσαντος ἐν Κρήτῃ καῦσαι τὸ σῶμα καὶ
διασπεῖραι τὴν τέφραν εἰς τὴν θάλατταν, αὐτοῦ
δεηθέντος καὶ φυλαξαμένου μή ποτε ἄρα τῶν
λειψάνων εἰς Λακεδαίμονα κομισθέντων, ws ἐπαν-
NKOVTOS αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν ὅρκων λελυμένων, μετα-
βάλωσι τὴν πολιτείαν. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν περὶ τοῦ
Λυκούργου.
1 ΠῊ 5 words καὶ γενέσθαι following τελευτὴν are deleted
by Bekker and Sintenis? (in critical notes).
302
LYCURGUS, xxx. 3-5
tomb was struck by lightning, and that this hardly
happened to any other eminent man after him
except Euripides, who died and was buried at
Arethusa in Macedonia. The lovers of Euripides
therefore regard it as a great testimony in his
favour that he alone experienced after death what
had earlier befallen a man who was most holy and
beloved of the gods.
Some say that Lycurgus died in Cirrha; Apollo-
themis, that he was brought to Elis and died there;
Timaeus and Aristoxenus, that he ended his days in
Crete; and Aristoxenus adds that his tomb is shown
by the Cretans in the district of Pergamus, near the
public highway. It is also said that he left an only
son, Antiorus, on whose death without issue, the
family became extinct. His friends and relations,
however, instituted a periodical assembly in_ his
memory, which continued to be held for many
ages, and they called the days on which they came
together, Lycurgidae. Aristocrates the son of Hip-
parchus says that the friends of Lycurgus, after
his death in Crete, burned his body and scattered
the ashes into the sea, and that this was done at his
request, and because he wished to prevent his
remains from ever being carried to Sparta, lest the
people there should change his polity, on the plea
that he had come back, and that they were therefore
released from their oaths. This, then, is what I
have to say about Lycurgus.
303

NUMA
NOMA
I. Ἔστι δὲ καὶ περὶ τῶν Nowa τοῦ βασιλέως
χρόνων, καθ᾽ ods γέγονε, νεανικὴ διαφορά, καΐπερ
ἐξ ἀρχῆς εἰς τοῦτον κατώγεσθαι τῶν στεμμάτων
ἀκριβῶς δοκούντων. ἀλλὰ Κλώδιός τις ἐν ἐλέγχῳ
χρό,ν ων (οὕ“ τω ya΄p πως ἐ> πιγέ΄ γραπται TOΝ βιβλίο, ν)
ἰσχυρίζεται τὰς μὲν ἀρχαίας ἐκείνας ἀναγραφὰς
ἐ5ν] τοῖaςn ΚελτικοῖςA πάθ/ εσι τῆaς πό/λ εως ἠ2 φανίσ/ θαι,
τὰἊςς δὲ\ νῦa ν φαινομένl4 ας οὐ>κ ἀ5)λ ηθῶςa συγκεῖaσ θαι δι ᾽
ἀνδρῶν χαριζομένων τισὶν εἰς τὰ πρῶτα γένη καὶ
τοὺς ἐπιφανεστάτους οἴκους ἐξ οὐ προσηκόντων
εἰ’ σβιαζομέν,ο ις. λεγομέν, ου δ᾽> οὖκαν ὡeς Νομᾶςa γέ͵ν, οι- 60
το Πυθαγόρ, ου συνήθJ ης, οἱ e μὲ\ν ὅ[κέλ ως ἀ>’ξ ιοῦἴοσν ι
μηδὲν\ « Ἑλληνικῆςna παιδεύiσ? εως Νομᾷa μετεῖν- αι,
καθάπερ ἢ φύσει δυνατὸν καὶ αὐτάρκη γενέσθαι
πρὸς ἀρετὴν ἢ βελτίονι ἸΤυθαγόρ/ ου βαρβάρῳ τινὶ
τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως ἀποδοῦναι παίδευσιν: οἱ δὲ
Πυθαγόραν μὲν ὀψὲ γενέ/σ θαι, τῶ“ν Νομᾶa χρόνων
ὁ« μοῦA TL πέντε γενεαῖaςn ἀπολειπόμ, ενον, Πυθαγόραν
δὲ τὸν Σπαρτιάτην ᾿᾽᾿Ολύμπια νενικηκότα στάδιον
ἐb]π ὶ \ τῆ“ς ἑ« κκαιδεκάἊτΨ ης > ᾿Ολυμπιάδ/ο ς, ἧKaς ἔ» τει τρί/τ ῳ
Νομᾶς εἰς τὴν βασιλείαν κατέστη, πλανηθέντα
περὶ τὴν ᾿Ιταλίαν συγγενέσθαι τῷ Νομᾷ καὶ συν-
306
NUMA
I. Tuere is likewise! a vigorous dispute about the
time at which King Numa lived, although from the
beginning down to him the genealogies seem to be
made out accurately. But a certain Clodius, in a
book entitled “An Examination of Chronology,”
insists that the ancient records were lost when
the city was sacked by the Gauls,? and that those
which are now exhibited as such were forged, their
compilers wishing to gratify the pride of certain
persons by inserting their names among the first
families and the most illustrious houses, where they
had no cause to appear. Accordingly, when it is
said that Numa was an intimate friend of Pytha-
goras, some deny utterly that Numa had any
Greek culture, holding either that he was naturally
capable of attaining excellence by his own efforts, or
that the culture of the king was due to some
Barbarian superior to Pythagoras. Others say that
Pythagoras the philosopher lived as many as five
generations after Numa, but that there was another
Pythagoras, the Spartan, who was Olympic victor
in the foot-race for the sixteenth Olympiad 3 (in the
third year of which Numa was made king), and
that in his wanderings about Italy he made the ac-
quaintance of Numa, and helped him arrange the
1 Cf. Lycurgus, i. 1-3.
2 390 B.o. Cf. Camallus, xix.-xxix. 3 657-654 8.6.
997
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
διακοσμῆσαι τὴν πολιτείαν, ὅθεν οὐκ ὀλίγα τοῖς
Ῥωμαϊκοῖς ἐπιτηδεύμασι τῶν Λακωνικῶν ἀναμε-
μῖχθαι Πυθαγόρου διδάξαντος. ἄλλως δὲ Νομᾶς
γένος μὲν ἦν ἐκ Σαβίνων, Σαβῖνοι δὲ βούλονται
Λακεδαιμονίων ἑαυτοὺς ἀποίκους γεγονέναι. τοὺς
μὲν οὖν χρόνους ἐξακριβῶσαι χαλεπόν ἐστι, καὶ
μάλιστα τοὺς ἐκ τῶν ᾿Ολυμπιονικῶν ἀναγομένους,
ὧν τὴν ἀναγραφὴν ὀψέ φασιν Ἱππίαν ἐκδοῦναι
τὸν λεῖον, am’ οὐδενὸς ὁρμώμενον ἀναγκαίου
πρὸς πίστιν: ἃ δὲ παρειλήφαμεν ἡμεῖς ἄξια
λόγου περὶ Νομᾶ, διέξιμεν ἀρχὴν οἰκείαν λα-
βόντες.
II, “ERdopov ἐνιαυτὸν ἡ Ῥώμη καὶ τριακοστὸν
ἤδη Ῥωμύλου βασιλεύοντος φκεῖτο" πέμπτῃ δὲ
ἱσταμένου μηνός, ἣν νῦν ἡμέραν νώνας Καπρα-
τίνας καλοῦσι, θυσίαν τινὰ δημοτελῆ πρὸ τῆς
πόλεως ὁ Ῥωμύλος ἔθυε περὶ τὸ “καλούμενον
Αἰγὸς ἕλος, καὶ παρῆν ἥ τε βουλὴ καὶ τοῦ δήμου
τὸ πλεῖστον. , ἐξαίφνης δὲ μεγάλης περὶ τὸν ἀέρα
τροπῆς γενομένης καὶ νέφους ἐπὶ τὴν γῆν ἐρείσαν-
τος ἅμα πνεύματι καὶ ζάλῃ, τὸν μὲν ἄλλον ὅμιλον
ἐκπλαγέντα συνέβη φυγεῖν καὶ σκεδασθῆναι,
τὸν δὲ Ῥωμύλον ἀφανῆ γενέσθαι, καὶ μήτε
αὐτὸν ἔτι μήτε σῶμα τεθνηκότος εὑρεθῆναι, χᾶ-
λεπὴν δέ τιν᾽ ὑπόνοιαν ἅψασθαι τῶν πατρικίων,
καὶ ῥυῆναι λόγον ἐν τῷ δήμῳ κατ᾽ αὐτῶν ὡς
πάλαι βαρυνόμενοι τὸ βασιλεύεσθαι καὶ μετα-
στῆσαι τὸ κράτος εἰς αὑτοὺς θέλοντες ἀνέλοιεν
τὸν βασιλέα. καὶ γὰρ ἐδόκει τραχύτερον ἤδη
προσφέρεσθαι καὶ μοναρχικώτερον αὐτοῖς. ἀλλὰ
ταύτην μὲν τὴν ὑποψίαν ἐθεράπευον εἰς θεῶν
308
NUMA, 1. 3-11. 3
government of the city, whence it came about that
many Spartan customs were mingled with the
Roman, as Pythagoras taught them to Numa. And
at all events, Numa was of Sabine descent, and the
Sabines will have it that they were colonists from
Lacedaemon. Chronology, however, is hard to fix,
and especially that which is based on the names of
victors in the Olympic games, the list of which is
said to have been published at a late period by
Hippias of Elis, who had no fully authoritative basis
for his work. I shall therefore begin at a convenient
point, and relate the noteworthy facts which I have
found in the life of Numa.
II. For thirty-seven years, now, Rome had been
built and Romulus had been its king; and on the
fifth of the month of July, which day they now call
the Capratine Nones, Romulus was offering a public
sacrifice outside the city at the so-called Goat's
Marsh, in the presence of the senate and most of
the people. Suddenly there was a great commotion
in the air, and a cloud descended upon the earth
bringing with it blasts of wind and rain. The
throng of common folk were terrified and fled in all
directions, but Romulus disappeared, and was never
found again either alive or dead. Upon this a
grievous suspicion attached itself to the patricians,
and an accusing story was current among the people
to the effect that they had long been weary of
kingly rule, and desired to transfer the power to
themselves, and had therefore made away with the
king. And indeed it had been noticed for some
time that he treated them with greater harshness
and arrogance. This suspicion the patricians sought
to remove by ascribing divine honours to Romulus,
399
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τιμὰς ἀνάγοντες ὡς ov τεθνηκότα τὸν Ῥωμύλον,
ἀλλὰ κρείττονος ὄντα μοίρας" καὶ Ἰ]ρόκλος, ἀνὴρ
ἐπιφανής, διωμόσατο Ῥωμύλον ἰδεῖν εἰς οὐρανὸν
σὺν τοῖς ὅπλοις ἀναφερόμενον, καὶ φωνῆς ἀκοῦσαι
κελεύοντος αὐτὸν ὀνομάζεσθαι Kupivov.
Ἑτέρα δὲ ταραχὴ καὶ στάσις κατελάμβανε
τὴν πόλιν ὑπὲρ τοῦ μέλλοντος ἀποδειχθήσεσθαι
βασιλέως, οὔπω τῶν ἐπηλύδων κομιδῇ τοῖς πρώ-
τοις συγκεκραμένων πολίταις, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι τοῦ τε
δήμου πολλὰ κυμαίνοντος ἐν ἑαυτῷ καὶ τῶν
πατρικίων ἐν ὑποψίαις ἐκ τοῦ διαφόρου πρὸς
ἀλλήλους ὄντων. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ βασιλεύεσθαι
μὲν ἐδόκει πᾶσιν, ἤἤρ ισαν δὲ καὶ διέστησαν οὐχ
ὑπὲρ ἀνδρὸς “μόνον, ἀλλὰ καὶ γένους, ὁπότερον
παρέξει τὸν ἡγεμόνα. καὶ γὰρ οἱ μετὰ ᾿Ρωμύλου
πρῶτοι συνοικίσαντες τὴν πόλιν οὐκ ἀνασχετὸν
ἐποιοῦντο πόλεως καὶ χώρας τοὺς Σαβίνους με-
ταλαβόντας ἄρχειν Braker bar TOV ἐπὶ ταῦτα
δεξαμένων, καὶ τοῖς Σαβίνοις ἦν τις εὐγνώμων
λόγος, ἐπεὶ Τατίου τοῦ βασιλέως αὐτῶν ἀπο-
θανόντος οὐκ ἐστασίασαν πρὸς Ῥωμύλον, ἀλλ᾽
εἴασαν ἄρχειν μόνον, αὖθις ἀξιούντων τὸν ἄρ-
χοντα “γενέσθαι Tap αὑτῶν. ,οὔτε γὰρ ἐκ τα-
πεινοτέρων κρείττοσι προσγενέσθαι, καὶ προσγε-
νόμενον πλήθει τε ῥῶσαι καὶ προαγαγεῖν εἰς
ἀξίωμα πόλεως ἐκείνους μεθ᾽ ἑαυτῶν. ὑπὲρ μὲν
οὖν τούτων ἐστασίαζον.
Ὅπως δὲ μὴ σύγχυσιν ἐκ τῆς ἀναρχίας ἡ
στάσις ,ἀπεργάσεται, μετεώρου τοῦ πολετεύ-
ματος ὄντος, ἔταξαν οἱ πατρίκιοι, πεντήκοντα 6]
310
NUMA, π. 3-6
on the ground that he was not dead, but blessed
with a better lot. And Proculus, a man of eminence,
took oath that he had seen Romulus ascending to
heaven in full armour, and had heard his voice com-
manding that he be called Quirinus.}
The city was now beset with fresh disturbance and
faction over the king to be appointed in his stead,
for the new comers were not yet altogether blended
with the original citizens, but the commonalty was
still like a surging sea, and the patricians full of
jealousy towards one another on account of their
different nationalities. It is indeed true that it was
the pleasure of all to have a king, but they wrangled
and quarrelled, not only about the man who should
be their leader, but also about the tribe which
should furnish him. For those who had built the
city with Romulus at the outset thought it intolerable
that the Sabines, after getting a share in the city and
its territory, should insist on ruling those who had
received them into such privileges ; and the Sabines,
since on the death of their king Tatius they had
raised no faction against Romulus, but suffered him
to rule alone, had a reasonable ground for demanding
that now the ruler should come from them. They
would not admit that they had added themselves as
inferiors to superiors, but held rather that their
addition had brought the strength of numbers and
advanced both parties alike to the dignity of a city.
On these questions, then, they were divided into
factions.
But in order that their factions might not produce
utter confusion from the absence of all authority,
now that the administration of affairs was suspended,
1 Cf. Romulus, xxvii, 3—xxviii. 3.
311
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Kal ἑκατὸν ὄντων αὐτῶνa , ἕκαστον ἐν μέρ, ει τοῖaς
βασιλικοῖςa παρασήμοις κοσμούμ£ ενον θύειν τε τοῖaς
θεοῖaςl τὰ νενομισμένα καὶ χρηματίζ/ε ιν ἕξ μὲν ὥΨ ρας
τῆaς νυκτός,, EE δὲ τῆfaςl ἡμέρας. καὶ yap ἡ διανομὴ
TOfaVl καιρῶrνn ἑκατέρου πρὸς ἰσό/ τητα καλῶAς ἔχειν
ἐδόκει τοῖ-ς“ ἄρχουσι, Kal πρὸςΝ τὸΝν δῆa μον ἡ μετα-
Bornτ ὴ τῆaς ἐ> ξουσία/ ς ἀ» φαιρεῖνa τὸ\ν φθόν/ ον, ὁς ρῶA ντα
τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας καὶ νυκτὸς τὸν αὐτὸν ἰδιώτην
ἐκ βασιλέως γινόμενον. τὸ\ δὲ σχῆlaμl α τοῦlaτl ο τῆ“ς
ἀρχῆς μεσοβασιλείαν Ῥωμαῖοι καλοῦσιν.
III. ᾿Αλλὰ καίπερ οὕτω πολιτικῶς καὶ ἀνε-
παχθῶς ἀφηγεῖσθαι δοκοῦντες, ὑπονοίαις καὶ
θορύβοις περιέπιπτον, ὡς μεθιστάντες εἰς ὀλι-
yapxia’ v τὰ πράγματα καὶ διαπαιδαγωγοῦνaA τες
ἐ5ν σφίσ4 ιν αὐ>τ οῖςa τὴAYν πολιτεία, ν, βασιλεύε, σθαι
δὲ\ οὐ>κ ἐ9 θέ/λ οιεν. ἐ3κ τού4τ ου συνέ/ βησαν ἀ᾽ μφότf εραι
πρὸἊςΝ ἀ> λλήλ/ ας Al ς στάσ/ εις, W“ OTE τὴ\ν Eς TE/P AV E>K
τῆaς ἑ(ioe τέἢρ ας ἀΕΣπ οδεῖaξ αι βασιλέα/: μάλ, ιστα γὰ\ρ ἂἊ ν
οὕτως ἔν TE THa παρόν, τι παύσασθαι τὴν φιλο-
νεικί’αὔ ν, καὶ τὸΝν ἀποδειχθέν/ τα πρὸς\ ἀμφοτέρ͵ὕ ους
ἴσον γενέ,σ θαι, τοὺς μὲ\ν ὡς ἑλομέν/ ους ἀγαπῶνA τα,
τοῖaς δὲ εὔνουν ὄντα διὰ\ συγγέν/ε ιαν. ἐπιτρε-
ψάνtA των δὲ\ προτέρ,ὔο ις τοῖrςoy als Ρωμαίο/ι ς τῶAν Σαβίν’ ων
τὴν αἵρεσιν, ἔδοξε μᾶλλόν ἑλέσθαι Σαβῖνον αὐ-
τοὺς ἀποδείξαντας ἢXK παρασχεῖνa ¢ Ῥωμαῖο“ ν ἐκεί, νων
ἑe λομέν/ ων. καὶ \ βουλευσάμiεs νοι καθ᾽ ae:ἑ αυτοὺς\ ἀBJπ ο-
δεικνύουσιν ἐκ Σαβίνων Νομᾶν ἸΠομπίλιον, ἄνδρα
τῶaν μὲν εἰς « Ρώμην ἀπῳκισμέν/ ων οὐ γενόμενον,
212
NUMA, 1. 6-11. 3
it was arranged by the senators, who were one
hundred and fifty in number,! that each of them in
his turn should assume the insignia of royalty,
make the customary sacrifices to the gods, and
transact public business, for the space of six hours
by day and six hours by night. This distribution of
times seemed well adapted to secure equality
between the two factions, and the transfer of power
likely to remove all jealousy on the part of the
people, when they saw the same man, in the course
of a single day and night, become king and then a
private citizen again. This form of government the
Romans call “interregnum.”
III. But although in this way the senators were
thought to rule constitutionally and _ without
oppression, they roused suspicions and clamorous
charges that they had changed the form of govern-
ment toan oligarchy, and were holding the state in
tutelage among themselves, and were unwilling to
be ruled by a king. Therefore it was agreed by
both factions that one should appoint a king from
the other. This was thought the best way to end
their prevailing partisanship, and the king thus
appointed would be equally weli-disposed to both
parties, being gracious to the one as his electors,
and friendly to the other because of his kinship with
them. Then, as the Sabines gave the Romans their
option in the matter, it seemed to them better to
have a Sabine king of their own nomination, than to
have a Roman made king by the Sabines. They
took counsel, therefore, among themselves, and
nominated Numa Pompilius from among the Sabines,
a man who had not joined the emigrants to Rome,
1 Cf. Romulus, xx. 1.
313
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γνώριμον δ᾽ οὕτω δι’ ἀρετὴν ὄντα πᾶσιν ὥστε
τῶν ἑλομένων προθυμότερον ὀνομασθέντος αὐτοῦ
δέξασθαι τοὺς Σαβίνους. φράσαντες οὖν τῷ δήμῳ
τὰ δεδογμένα, πρέσβεις ἐκπέμπουσι πρὸς τὸν
ἄνδρα κοινῇ τοὺς πρωτεύοντας ἀπ᾽ ἀμφοτέρων,
ἥκειν δεησομένους καὶ παραλαβεῖν τὴν βασι-
λείαν.
Ἦν δὲ πόλεως μὲν ὁ Νομᾶς ἐπιφανοῦς ἐν
Σαβίνοις τῆς Κύρεων, ἀφ᾽ ἧς καὶ Κυρίτας
Ῥωμαῖοι σφᾶς αὐτοὺς ἅμα τοῖς ἀνακραθεῖσι
Σαβίνοις προσηγόρευσαν, υἱὸς δὲ Πόμπωνος,,
ἀνδρὸς εὐδοκίμου, τεσσάρων ἀδελφῶν νεώτατος"
ἡμέρᾳ δὲ γεγονὼς κατὰ δή τινᾶ θείαν τύχην ἐν
ἡ τὴν Ῥώμην ἐἔ κτισαν οἱ περὶ Ῥωμύλον" αὕτη δέ
ἐστι πρὸ δεκαμιᾶς καλανδῶν Μαΐων. φύσει δὲ
πρὸς πᾶσαν ἀρετὴν εὖ κεκραμένος τὸ ἦθος, ἔτι
μᾶλλον αὑτὸν ἐξημέρωσε διὰ παιδείας καὶ κακο-
παθείας καὶ φιλοσοφίας, οὐ μόνον τὰ λοιδορού-
μενα πάθη τῆς ψυχῆς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὴν εὐδοκι-
μοῦσαν ἐν τοῖς βαρβάροις βίαν καὶ πλεονεξίαν
ἐκποδὼν ποιησάμενος, ἀνδρείαν, δὲ ἀληθῆ τὴν ὑπὸ
λόγου τῶν ἐπιθυμιῶν ἐν αὑτῷ κάθειρξιν ἡγού-
μενος. ἐκ δὲ τούτου πᾶσαν οἴκοθεν ἅμα τρυφὴν
καὶ πολυτέλειαν ἐξελαύνων, παντὶ δὲ πολίτῃ καὶ
ξένῳ χρῆσθαι παρέχων ἑαυτὸν , ἄμεμπτον δικασ-
τὴν καὶ σύμβουλον, αὐτὸς δ᾽ ἑαυτῷ -σχολάξοντι
χρώμενος οὐδὲν πρὸς ἡδυπαθείας καὶ πορισμούς,
ἀλλὰ θεραπείαν θεῶν καὶ θεωρίαν διὰ λόγου
φύσεώς τε αὐτῶν καὶ δυνάμεως, ὄνομα μέγα καὶ
1 Πόμπωνος a correction of Πομπωνίου by Sintenis? (critical
notes), adopted by Bekker, and now confirmed by S.
2 καὶ φιλοσοφίας omitted by Bekker, with C.
314
NUMA, 111. 3-6
but was so universally celebrated for his virtues that,
when he was nominated, the Sabines accepted him
with even greater readiness than those who had
chosen him. Accordingly, after making their
decision known to the people, the leading senators
of both parties were sent as ambassadors to Numa,
begging him to come and assume the royal power.
Numa belonged to a conspicuous city of the
Sabines called Cures, from which the Romans,
together with the incorporated Sabines, took the
joint name of Quirites. He was a son of Pompon,
an illustrious man, and was the youngest of four
brothers. He was born, moreover, by some divine
felicity, on the very day when Rome was founded by
Romulus, that is, the twenty-first day of April.1 By
natural temperament he was inclined to the practice
of every virtue, and he had subdued himself still more
by discipline, endurance of hardships, and the study
of wisdom. He had thus put away from himself not
only the infamous passions of the soul, but also that
violence and rapacity which are in such high repute
among Barbarians, believing that true bravery consis-
ted in the subjugation of one’s passions by reason.
On this account he banished from his house all luxury
and extravagance, and while citizen and stranger
alike found in him a faultless judge and counsellor,
he devoted his hours of privacy and leisure, not to
enjoyments and money-making, but to the service of
the gods, and the rational contemplation of their
nature and power. In consequence he had a great
1 Cf. Romulus, xii. 1.
315
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δόξαν εἶχεν, ὥστε καὶ Τάτιον τὸΝν ἐν «ς Ῥώ’μ ῃ
συμβασιλεύiσ? αντα «ς' Ῥωμύ΄χ ῳ, μιᾶ“ς αὐ>τ ῷ A θυγατρὸς‘
οὔσης Τατίας, ποιήσασθαι γαμβρὸν\ ἐκεῖ-ν ον. οὐ
μὴν ἐπήρθη γε τῷA γάμῳ μετοικί“ σασθαι πρὸς τὸν
πενθερόν, ἀλλ᾽ αὐτοῦ περιέπων πατέρα γηραιὸν
ἐ5ν Σαβίν,ο ις ὑς πέμ/ ενεν, ἅ“ μα καὶ \ τῆaς Tatia/ s ἑς λομέ-Ζ
νης τὴν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἰδιωτεύοντος ἡσυχίαν πρὸ τῆς
ἐν Ρώμ, ῃ διὰ τὸν πατέρα τιμῆlςal καὶ \ δό/ξ ης. αὕτη
μὲν οὖν λέγεται τρί’τ, ῳ Kal δεκάτῳ μετὰ\ τὸ\ν
γάμον ἔτει τελευτῆσαι.
IV. ‘O δὲ Νομᾶς ἐκλείπων τὰς ἐν ἄστει δια-
τριβὰς ἀγραυλεῖνA τὰ πολλὰ καὶ πλανᾶ“σ θαι μό/ν ος
ἤ” θελεν, ἐ>ν ἄ” λσεσι θεῶlaνl Kal \ λειμῶaσ ιν ἱ« εροῖaςn Kal \
τόποις ἐρήμοις ποιούμενος τὴν δίαιταν. ὅθεν
οὐχ ἥκιστα τὴν ἀρχὴν ὁ περὶ τῆς θεᾶς ἔλαβε
λό/γ ος, ὡeς ἄ»ρ α Νομᾶ“ς ἐ» κεῖfalν ος οὐ> κ ἀ3 δημονί’ᾳ τινὶ
ψυχῆς καὶ πλάνῃ τὸν μετὰ ἀνθρώπων ἀπολέ-
λοιπε βίον, ἀλλὰ σεμνοτέρας γεγευμένος ὁμιλίας
καὶ Ν γά’μὔ ων θεί/ ων ἠ> ξιωμέν/ο ς, ᾽ ᾿ΗγερίἍᾳ)Ἅ δαί/μ ονι
συνὼν ἐρώσῃ καὶ συνδιαιτώμενος, εὐδαίμων ἀἀ νὴρ
καὶ τὰ θεῖα πεπνυμένος γέγονεν. ὅτι μὲν οὖν
ταῦτα πολλοῖς τῶν πάνυ παλαιῶν μύθων ἔοικεν,
οὺAς οἱ e Φρύγ΄ ες τε περὶἌ Ν Αττεω καὶ Ν Βιθυνοὶ \ περὶ \
Ἡροδότου καὶ περὶ ᾿Ενδυμίωνος ᾿Αρκάδες ἄλλοι
τε περὶ ἄλλων εὐδαιμόνων δή τινων καὶ θεοφιλῶν
γενέσθαι δοκούντων παραλαβόντες ἠγάπησαν,
οὐκ ἀδηλόν ἐστι. καί που λόγον ἔχει τὸν θεόν,
οὐ φίλιππον οὐδὲ φίλορνιν, ἀλλὰ φιλάνθρωπον
ὄντα, τοῖς διαφερόντως ἀγαθοῖς ἐθέλειν συνεῖναι,
καὶ \ μὴ δυσχεραίνειν μηδὲ ἀτιμάζειν ἀνδρὸς ὁσίον
316
NUMA, πι. 6-1v. 3
name and fame, so that Tatius, the royal colleague of
Romulus at Rome, made him the husband of his only
daughter, Tatia. He was not, however, so exalted
by his marriage as to go to dwell with his royal
father-in-law, but remained among the Sabines min-
istering to his aged father. Tatia, too, preferred the
quiet life which her husband led as a private citizen
to the honour and fame which she had enjoyed at
Rome because of her father. But she died, as we
are told, in the thirteenth year after her marriage.
IV. Then Numa, forsaking the ways of city folk,
determined to live for the most part in country
places, and to wander there alone, passing his days in
groves of the gods, sacred meadows, and solitudes.
This, more than anything else, gave rise to the story
about his goddess. It was not, so the story ran,
from any distress or aberration of spirit that he for-
sook the ways of men, but he had tasted the joy of
more august companionship and had been honoured
with a celestial marriage ; the goddess Egeria loved
him and bestowed herself upon him, and it was his
communion with her that gave him a life of blessed-
ness and a wisdom more than human. However, that
this story resembles many of the very ancient tales
which the Phrygians have received and cherished con-
cerning Attis, the Bithynians concerning Herodotus,
the Arcadians concerning Endymion, and other
peoples concerning other mortals who were thought
to have achieved a life of blessedness in the love of
the gods, is quite evident. And there issome reason
in supposing that Deity, who is not a lover of horses
or birds, but a lover of men, should be willing to
consort with men of superlative goodness, and should
uot dislike or disdain the company of a wise and holy
317
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ \ σώ,φ ρονος ὁς μιλία’ ν. ὡeς δὲ\ Kal σώμ, ατος
ἀνθρωπίν’ ου καὶ ὥρας ἐστί ’ὔ τις θεῷ“Ὁ καὶ δαίμονι
κοινωνία’ καὶ χάρις, ἔργον ἤδη καὶ τοῦrτn ο
πεισθῆναι.
Καίτ, οι δοκοῦσιν οὐκ ἀπιθάνως ΑἰγύπFs τιοι διαι-
ρεῖν ὡς γυναικὶ μὲν οὐκ ἀδύνατον πνεῦμα πλη-
σιάσαι θεοῦ καί τινας ἐντεκεῖν ἀρχὰς γενέσεως,
ἀ3 νδρὶ\ δὲ\ οὐ>κ ἔ” στι σύἊμΝ μιξις πρὸΝς θεὸ\ ν οὐIδOὲN ὁὉ μιλί’α,
σώματος. ἀγνοοῦAσ ι δὲ ὅτι τὸ\ μιγνύτμὰ ενον ᾧ
μίγνυται τὴν ἴσην ἀνταποδίδωσι κοινωνίαν. ov« >
μὴν ἀλλὰ\ φιλίαν ye πρὸς ἄνθρωπον εἶναι θεῷa
καὶ τὸν ἐπὶ ταύτῃ λεγόμενον ἔ» ρωτα Kal φυό,μ ενον
εἰς ἐπιμέλειαν ἤθους καὶ ἀρετῆς, πρέπον ἂν εἴη.
καὶ \ ov> πλημμελοῦσa ιν οἱ £ τὸ\ν Φό4ρ βαντα καὶ \ τὸ\ν
“Ὑάκινθον καὶ τὸXν “Aduntov ἐρωμένους ᾿Απόλ, -
λωνος γεγονέναι μυθολογοῦντες, ὥσπερ αὖ καὶ
τὸν Σικυώνιον Ἱππόλυτον, ᾧ δὴ\ καί / φασιν,
ὁe σάκ4 ις τύ/χ οι διαπλέfω ν ei>s Ki,p pav ἐbdκ Σικυῶνa ος,
τὴAν Πυθία, ν, οἷον αἰ3 σθανομένVAο υ tova θεοῦa καὶ \
χαίροντος, ἀποθεσπίζ“ε ιν τόδε TO ἡρῷaο ν'
Kal δ᾽ αὖθ᾽ € ἹἹππολύτοιο φίléλ ον κάρα εἰς ἅλα
βαΐίνει.
Πινδάρου δὲ καὶ τῶaν μελῶnν ἐραστὴ\ν γενέσθαι
τὸΝν Πᾶνa α μυθολογοῦσa ιν. ἀ3 πέδ, ωκε δέ, τινα τιμὴxν
καὶ ᾿Αρχιλόχῳ καὶ ᾿Ησιό/δ ῳ τελευτήσασι διὰ τὰς
Μούσας τὸ δαιμόν, ιον. Σοφοκλεῖ a δὲ καὶ ζῶa ντι
318
NUMA, τιν. 3-6
man. But that an immortal god should take carnal
pleasure in a mortal body and its beauty, this, surely,
is hard to believe.
And yet the Aegyptians make a distinction here
which is thought plausible, namely, that while a
woman can be approached by a divine spirit and
made pregnant, there is no such thing as carnal
intercourse and communion between a man and a
divinity. But they lose sight of the fact that in-
tercourse is a reciprocal matter, and that both parties
to it enter into a like communion. However, that
a god should have affection for a man, and a so-called
love which is based upon affection, and takes the
form of solicitude for his character and _ his virtue, is
fit and proper. And therefore it is no mistake
when the ancient poets tell their tales of the love
Apollo bore Phorbas, Hyacinthus, and Admetus, as
well as the Sicyonian Hippolytus also, of whom it is
said, that, as often as he set out to sail from Sicyon
to Cirrha, the Pythian priestess, as though the god
knew of his coming and rejoiced thereat, chanted
this prophetic verse :—
“Lo, once more doth beloved Hippolytus hither
make voyage.”
There is a legend, too, that Pan became enamoured
of Pindar and his verses. And the divine powers
bestowed signal honour on Archilochus and Hesiod
after their deaths, for the sake of the Muses.! Again,
1 The Delphian oracle pronounced a curse on the man who
killed Archilochus, because ‘‘ he had slain the servant of the
Muses.” And the same oracle told the people of Orcho-
menus, when a plague had fallen upon them, that ‘‘ the only
remedy was to bring back the bones of Hesiod from the land
of Naupactus to the land of Orchomenus.”
519
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τὸν Ασκληπιὸν\ ἐπιξενωθῆfνol αι λόγος ἐστὶ πολλὰ
μέχρι δεῦlalρ ο διασώ,ζ ων τεκμήρια, Kal τελευτήσαντι
τυχεῖcνr ταφῆς“ ἄ” λλος θεός, , ὡςς λέ/γ εται, παρέσ/ χεν.
dpa οὖν ἄξιό/ν ἐστι, ταῦLaτl α συγχωροῦνὉ τας ἐπὶ
τούτων, ἀπιστεῖν εἰ Ζαλεύκῳ καὶ Μίνῳ καὶ Ζω-
ροάστρῃ καὶ Nowaa n καὶ Λυκού,ρ γῳ βασιλείας
κυβερνῶlσal ι Kal πολιτεία/ ς διακοσμοῦσlal ιν εἰς τὸ
αὐτὸ ἐφοίτα τὸ δαιμόν. ιον, ἢ3 τούτοις μὲν εἰκός ἐστι
καὶ σπουδάζοντας θεοὺ\ς ὁ[ςμ ιλεῖaνn ἐπὶ διδασκαλίᾳ
καὶ παραινέσει τῶν βελτίστων, ποιηταῖς δὲ καὶ
λυρικοῖςan μινυρίζ/ ουσιν, εἴπερ ἄΜρ΄ α, χρῆaσ θαι παί-
ζοντας; εἰ δὲ λέγει τις ἄλλως, κατὰ Βακχυλίδην,
“Πλατεῖα κέλευθος." οὐδὲ γὰρ ἅτερος λόγος ἔχει
τι φαῦaλ ον, oἃ v περὶ \ Λυκούρ/ γου καὶ \ Nowaa καὶ \
τοιούτων ἄλλων ἀνδρῶν λέγουσιν, ὡς δυσκάθεκτα
καὶ δυσάρεστα πλήθη χειρούμενοι καὶ μεγάλας
ἐπιφέροντες ταῖaς πολιτεία/ ις καινοτομίας, προσε-
ποιήσαντο τὴν ἀπὸ τοῦ“ θεοῦA δό/ξ αν, αὐτοῖςa éxei-
vols πρὸς ods ἐσχηματίζοντο σωτήριον οὖσαν.
V. ᾽ ᾿Αλλὰ\ ya\p ἔ4 τος m” on διατελοῦνa τε τῷn Νομᾷ a
τεσσαρακοστὸν\ ἧa κον ἀἢ πὸ ς Ῥώ,μ ης οἱ € πρέ,σ βεις
παρακαλοῦνlaτl ες ἐ9 πὶ \ τὴ\ν βασιλεία’νὔ . τοὺς\ δὲ\ λό-/
yous ἐ? ποιή/σ ατο Tl IIp“ oxros καὶ \ Οὐέ4λ εσος, ὧΦν πρό-΄
τερον ἐ3 πί[δὃο ξος ἦ4 ν €ὁ δῆδ ῆμος αἱe ρή/σ εσθθα ι τὸΝν ἕ[χὰτ ερον
βασιλέα, Ipox/ rwm μὲν τῶaνA «ςῬ ωμύλου λαῶνlal ,
Οὐελέσῳ δὲ τῶ“ν Τατίο/ υ μάλιστα προσεχόν/ των.
οὗτοι μὲν οὖν βραχέα διελέχθησαν, οἰόμενοι τῷ
μ ρ X X : , igo i
320
NUMA, ιν. 6-v. 1
there is a story, still well attested, that Sophocles,
during his life, was blessed with the friendship of
Aesculapius, and that when he died, another deity
procured him fitting burial.1 Is it worth while, then,
if we concede these instances of divine favour, to dis-
believe that Zaleucus, Minos, Zoroaster, Numa, and
Lyeurgus, who piloted kingdoms and formulated
constitutions, had frequent audience of the Deity?
Is it not likely, rather, that the gods are in earnest
when they hold converse with such men as these, in
order to instruct and advise them in the highest and
best way, but use poets and warbling singers, if at all,
for their own diversion? However, if any one is
otherwise minded, I say with Bacchylides, “ Broad is
the way.” ? Indeed there is no absurdity in the
other account which is given of Lycurgus and Numa
and their like, namely, that since they were managing
headstrong and captious multitudes, and introducing
great innovations in modes of government, they
pretended to get a sanction from the god, which
sanction was the salvation of the very ones against
whom it was contrived.
V. But to resume the story, Numa was already
completing his fortieth year when the embassy came
from Rome inviting him to take the throne. The
speakers were Proculus and Velesus, one or the
other of whom the people was expected to choose
as their king, Proculus being the favourite of the
people of Romulus, and Velesus of the people of
Tatius, These speakers, then, were brief, supposing
1 Dionysus is said to have appeared to Lysander and
ordered him to allow Sophocles to be buried in the tomb of
his fathers, on the road to Deceleia, then occupied by the
Lacedaemonian army. See Pausanias, i. 21, 1, with Frazer’s
note, 2 Fragment 29 (Jebb, Bacchylides, p. 423).
321
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
2 Νομᾷ τὴν συντυχίαν ἀσπαζομένῳ γεγονέναι" ἦν
δ᾽ οὐ μικρόν, ὡς ἔοικεν, ἔργον, ἀλλὰ καὶ λόγων
πολλῶν καὶ δεήσεως τὸ πεῖσαι καὶ μεταστῆσαι
γνώμην ἀνδρὸς ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ καὶ εἰρήνῃ βεβιωκότος
εἰς ἀρχὴν πόλεως τρόπον τινὰ καὶ γεγενημένης 1
πολέμῳ καὶ συνηυξημένης. ἔλεγεν οὖν τοῦ τε 63
πατρὸς αὐτοῦ παρόντος καὶ Μαρκίου, τῶν συγ-
γενῶν ἑνός, ὡς “Πᾶσα μὲν ἀνθρωπίνου βίου μετα-
βολὴ σφαλερόν: ᾧ δὲ μήτ᾽ ἄπεστί τι τῶν ἱκανῶν
μήτε μεμπτόν ἐστι τῶν παρόντων, τοῦτον οὐδὲν
ἄλλο πλὴν ἄνοια μετακοσμεῖ καὶ μεθίστησιν
ἐκ τῶν συνήθων" οἷς κἂν εἰ μηδὲν ἕτερον προσείη,
3 τῷ βεβαιοτέρῳ διαφέρει τῶν ἀδήλων. GAN οὐδὲ
ἄδηλα τὰ τῆς βασιλείας τοῖς Ῥωμύλου τεκμαι-
ρομένῳ παθήμασιν, ὡς πονηρὰν μὲν αὐτὸς ἔλαβε
δόξαν ἐπιβουλεῦσαι τῷ συνάρχοντι Τατίῳ, πονη-
ρὰν δὲ τοῖς ὁμοτίμοις περιεποίησεν ὡς ἀνῃρη-
μένος ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν. καίτοι Ῥωμύλον μὲν οὗτοι
παῖδα θεῶν ὑμνοῦσι φήμαις, καὶ τροφήν τινα
δαιμόνιον αὐτοῦ καὶ σωτηρίαν ἄπιστον ἔτι νη-
πίου λέγουσιν" ἐμοὶ δὲ καὶ γένος θνητόν ἐστι καὶ
τροφὴ καὶ παίδευσις ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ὧν οὐκ
4 ἀγνοεῖτε γεγενημένη" τὰ δ᾽ ἐπαινούμενα τοῦ τρό-
που βασιλεύειν πόρρω μέλλοντος ἀνδρός, ἡἡσ υχία
τε πολλὴ καὶ διατριβὴ περὶ λόγους ἀπράγμονας,
ὅ τε δεινὸς οὗτος καὶ σύντροφος εἰρήνης ἔρως
καὶ πραγμάτων ἀπολέμων καὶ ἀνθρώπων ἐπὶ
τιμῇ θεῶν καὶ φιλοφροσύναις εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ συν-
abel Ta δὲ ἄλλα καθ᾽ ἑαυτοὺς γεωργούντων ἢ
1 γεγενημένης Bekker has γεγεννημένης (born), after Coraés,
322
NUMA, v. 2-4
that Numa would welcome his good fortune. It
was, however, no slight task, but one requiring much
argument and entreaty, to persuade and induce a
man who had lived in peace and quiet, to accept the
government of a city which owed its existence and
growth, in a fashion, to war. His reply, therefore,
in the presence of his father and one of his kinsmen
named Marcius, was as follows. ‘ Every change in
a man’s life is perilous; but when a man knows no
lack, and has no fault to find with his present lot,
nothing short of madness can change his purposes
and remove him from his wonted course of life, which,
even though it have no other advantage, is at least
fixed and secure, and therefore better than one
which is all uncertain. But the lot of one who
becomes your king cannot even be called uncertain,
judging from the experience of Romulus, since he
himself was accused of basely plotting against his
colleague Tatius, and involved the patricians in the
charge of having basely put their king out of the way.
And yet those who bring these accusations laud
Romulus as a child of the gods, and tell how he was
preserved in an incredible way and fed in a miraculous
manner when he was still an infant. But I am of
mortal birth, and I was nourished and trained by men
whom you know. Moreover, the very traits in my
disposition which are commended, are far from mark-
ing a man destined to be a king, namely, my great
love of retirement, my devotion to studies inconsistent
with the usual activities of men, and my well-known
strong and inveterate love of peace, of unwarlike
occupations, and of men who come together only
for the worship of the gods and for friendly inter-
course, but who otherwise live by themselves as
373
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
5 νεμόντων. ὑμῖAν dé, ὦ € Ῥωμαῖοaι , πολλοὺς μὲν ἴσως
ἀβουλήτους ἀπολέλουπε πολέμ,ὕο υς ς Ῥωμύλος, οἷς
G> VTEPEL/O OVTOS ἡ« ς πόλις ἐ3 μπείρ, ου ὃ δεA ῖται βασιλέω/ ς
καὶ \ ἀ> κμάζ/ οντος" πολλὴδ ὴ δὲ\ Kal \ συνήθ/ εια καὶ \
προθυμία ov εὐτυχίαν γέ,γ ονε TOA δή/μ ῳ, Kal οὐδέ4ν α
λέληθεν αὔξεσθαι καὶ κρατεῖLνal ἑτέρων βουλόμ, ενος,
ὥefσ τε καὶ \ γέ/ λως ἂKAν εἴ” η τἀ>μ ά,4 θ θεραπεύaοe ντος θ θεού,ὔςὕ ,
καὶ Ν δίδ ίκην τιμᾶaν , βί/α ν δὲδὲ καὶ N πό/λ εμον ἐνὴχ θθα ίρ’ ειν
διδάσκοντος πόλιν στρατηλάτου μᾶλλον ἢ βασι-
λέως δεομένην."’
VI. Τοιούτοις λόγοις ἀφοσιουμέν, ου τὴ\ν βασι-
λείαν TODa ἀνδρός[/, οἵ Te « Ῥωμαῖοo ι πᾶaσ αν ἐποιοῦaν το
σπουδὴν\ ἀb]ν τιβολοῦνa τες Kal \ δεόμμή ενοι μὴA σφᾶaς
αὖθις εἰς στάσιν ἐμβαλεῖνA καὶ πό/λ εμον ἐμφύλιον,
οὐκ ὄντος ἑτέρου πρὸς\ ὃν ἀμφότ, εραι συννεύ,σ ουσιν
αἱ στάσεις, ὅ τε πατὴρ\ καὶ ὁε Μάρκιος ἐκείνων
μεταστάντων ἰδί’ ᾳ προσκείμ, ενοι τὸ\ν Νομᾶν- ἔπει-
2 θον δέχεσθαι μέγα καὶ θεῖον δῶρον. “Εἰ δὲ αὐτὸς
οὔ”τ ε πλούτ, ου δέ/ ῃ δι ’ αὐ>τ άρ/ κειαν οὔowτ ε δό, ξαν a>p -
χῆAς καὶ δυναστείας ἐζήλωκας κρεί, σσονα τὴν ἀπ᾽
ἀ’ ρετῆaς ἔwwχ ων, ἀ>λ λ᾽ > ὑe πηρεσία/ ν ye θεοῦfe l τὸ\ βασι-
λεύεA ιν ἡ€ γούμ/ ενος, ὅ“ ς γε ἀἜνΡΩίΣ στησι καὶ\ οὐ>κ ἐb ᾷMal
κεῖn σθαι καὶ ἀ> ργεῖ“ν τὴν ἐ5ν σοὶ Ν τοσαύτην δικαιο-
σύrνe ην, μὴ\ φεῦaγ ε μηδδὲὲ ἀ> ποδδίίδδ ρασκε τὴ\ν ἀ» ρχήν/,
ἀ» νδρὶ\ φρονί/ μῳ πράξ/ εων καλῶ“ν καὶ \ μεγά7λ ων ov=-
σαν χώρ΄ αν, ἐν ἡ? καὶ θεραπεῖαa ι θεῶἴων μεγαλοπρε-
πεῖaς εἰσι καὶ πρὸ\ς εὐσέβειαν ἀνθρώπων ἡμερώ-
σεις ῥᾷστα καὶ τάχιστα μετακοσμουμένων ὑπὸ
324
NUMA, v. 5-v1. 2
tillers of the soil or herdsmen. Whereas, unto you,
O Romans, whether you want them or not, Romulus
has bequeathed many wars, and to make head against
these the city needs a king with a warrior’s experi-
ence and strength. Besides, the people has become
much accustomed to war, and eager for it because of
their successes, and no one is blind to their desire
for growth by conquest. I should therefore become
a laughing-stock if I sought to serve the gods, and
taught men to honour justice and hate violence and
war, in a city which desires a leader of its armies
rather than a king.”
VI. With such words did Numa decline the
kingdom. Then the Romans put forth every effort
to meet his objections, and begged him not to
plunge them again into faction and civil war, since
there was none other on whom both parties could
unite. His father also and Marcius, when the
envoys had withdrawn, beset him privately, and
tried to persuade him to accept so great a gift of
the gods. “Even though,” they said, “ thou neither
desirest wealth for thyself, because thou hast enough,
nor covetest the fame which comes from authority
and power, because thou hast the greater fame which
comes from virtue, yet consider that the work of a
true king is a service rendered to God, who now
rouses up and refuses to leave dormant and inactive
the great righteousness which is within thee. Do
not, therefore, avoid nor flee from this office, which
a wise man will regard as a field for great and noble
actions, where the gods are honoured with magnificent
worship, and the hearts of men are easily and
quickly softened and inclined towards piety, through
the moulding influence of their ruler. This people
925
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 τοῦA κρατοῦνa τος. οὗ2τ οι καὶ \ Τάτ΄ ιον ἔ” στερξαν ἔ” πη-
λυν ἡγεμόνα, καὶ τὴν ¢ Ῥωμύλου μνήμην ἀπο-
Geod“o t ταῖaς τιμαῖςal. Ti,s δὲ οἶδεν εἰ καὶ νικῶfaνl τι
δήμῳ πολέμου κόiρ ος ἐστί,/ Kal μεστοὶ θριάμβων
καὶ λαφύρων γεγονότμὰ ες ἡγεμόνα πρᾷοA ν καὶ δίκης
ἑταῖρον ἐπ᾽ εὐνομίᾳ καὶ εἰρήνῃ ποθοῦσιν; εἰ δὲ δὴ
καὶ παντάπασιν ἀκρατῶς ἔχουσι καὶ μανικῶς
πρὸ\ς πόλ, εμον, a9 p -9 οὐ>χ ὶ \ βέ/λ τιον ἀb]λ λαχόσ/ ε τὴ\ν
ὁρμὴν αὐτῶν τρέπειν, διὰ χειρὸς ἔχοντα τὰς
ἡopedν! ία¢ ς, THa δὲ\ πατρίδ/ ι Kal \ παντὶ \ τῷa Σαβίν, ων ἔ” θνει
σύ΄ν δεσμον εὐ=)ν οί’α ς καὶ \ φιλί/α ς πρὸς\ πόλ, ιν ἀ> κμά-,
ἕουσαν Kal δυνατὴν γενέ7σ, θαι; bd" τούτοις προσῆνa ,
ὡ΄ς λέγεται, σημεῖ“ά τε χρηστὰ \ καὶ σπουδὴ τῶAν
πολιτῶaν καὶ ζῆa λος, ὡeς ἐ> πύ4θ οντο τὴVν πρεσβεία’ ν,
δεομένων βαδίζειν καὶ παραλαμβάνειν τὴν βασι-
λείαν ἐπὶ κοινωνίᾳ/ Kal συγκράσει TOaV πολυτῶνa .1
VII. Ὡς οὖν ἐδέδοκτο, θύσας τοῖς θεοῖς προ-
ἣa γεν εἰ᾽ς τὴἉν Ῥ Ῥ,ώ μην. ἀ> πήν, τα δὲδὲ ἡe βουλὴδ καὶ Ν ὁe
δῆn μος ἔρωτι θαυμαστῷ“ τοῦa ἀνδρός, , εὐφημίαι τε
πρέπουσαι γυναικῶaν ἐγί7 νοντο καὶ θυσίαι πρὸς 64
ἱεροῖς καὶ χαρὰ πάντων, ὥσπερ οὐ βασιλέα τῆς
πόλεως, ἀλλὰ βασιλείαν «δεχομένης. ἐπεὶ δὲ εἰς
τὴν ἀγορὰν κατέστησαν, ὁ μὲν ταῖς ὥραις ἐκείναις
συνειληχὼς μεσοβασιλεὺς Σπόριος Οὐέττιος ψῆ-ς
φον ἐπέδωκε τοῖς πολίταις καὶ πάντες ἤνεγκαν,
προσφερομένων δ᾽ αὐτῷ τῶν βασιλικῶν παρα-
σήμων ἐπισχεῖν κελεύσας ἔφη δεῖσθαι καὶ θεοῦ
pe βασιλείαν ἐμπεδοῦντος αὐτῷ. παραλαβὼν
1 πολιτῶν MSS. and edd., including Sintenis’. Bekker
corrects to πόλεων (cities), and is followed by Sintenis?.
326
NUMA, νι. 3-vII. 2
loved Tatius, though he was a foreign prince, and
they pay divine honours to the memory of Romulus.
And who knows but that the people, even though
victorious, is sated with war, and, now that it is
glutted with triumphs and spoils, is desirous of a
gentle prince, who is a friend of justice, and will
lead them in the paths of order and peace? But if,
indeed, they are altogether intemperate and mad in
their desire for war, then were it not better that
thou, holding the reins of government in thy hand,
shouldst turn their eager course another way, and
that thy native city and the whole Sabine nation
should have in thee a bond of goodwill and friend-
ship with a vigorous and powerful city?” These
appeals were strengthened, we are told, by auspicious
omens and by the zealous ardour of his fellow-
citizens, who, when they learned of the embassy
from Rome, begged him to return with it and assume
the royal power there, in order to unite and blend
together the citizens.
VII. Numa therefore decided to yield, and after
sacrificing to the gods, set out for Rome. The
senate and people met him on his way, filled with
a wondrous love of the man; women welcomed him
with fitting cries of joy; sacrifices were offered in
the temples, and joy was universal, as if the city were
receiving, not a king, but a kingdom. When they
were come down into the forum, Spurius Vettius,
whose lot it was to be “interrex’’! at that hour,
called for a vote of the citizens, and all voted for
Numa. But when the insignia of royalty were
brought to him, he bade the people pause, and said
his authority must first be ratified by Heaven. Then
1 Cf. chapter ii. 7.
327
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δὲ\ μάνs τεις καὶ \ ἱμιε ρεῖaς ἀ> νέ/β αινεν εἰ3ς τὸἉ Καπι-
tod, wov' Ταρπήϊfοu ν αὐΜτΈὸΝ λό/φ ον ot « τό,τ ε « “ῬωμαῖοaA ι
προσηγόρευον. ἐνταῦθα τῶν μάντεων ὁ πρω-
τεύων τὸν μὲν εἰς μεσημβρίαν τρέψας ἐγκεκαλυμ-
μένον, αὐτὸς δὲ παραστὰς\ ἐξόπισθεν καὶ τῇa δεξιᾷA
τῆς κεφαλῆς ἐφαπτόμενος αὐτοῦ κατεύξατο, καὶ
περιεσκόπει τὰ παρὰ N τῶAν θεῶanν ἐν οἰωνοῖςlal ἢ
συμβόλοις προφαινόμ, ενα, πανταχόσs ε Ta\s ὄψεις
περιφέρ/ ων. σιγὴ δὲ\ ἄΝΥπ ιστος ἐν πλήθει τοσούτῳ
τὴν ἀγορὰν κατεῖχε καραδοκούντων καὶ συναιω-
ρουμένων τῷA μέ,λ λοντι, μέχρι οὗ προὐφάνησαν
ὄρνιθες ἀγαθοὶ καὶ δεξιοὶ ἐπέτρεψαν. οὕτω δὲ
τὴ\ν βασιλικὴν\ ἀ» ναλαβὼν\ ἐ> σθῆaτ α κατέβ/ αινε
ΝομᾶaςA εἰς TO\ πλῆaθn ος ἀπὸ\ τῆaς ἄκρας. τότε δὲ
καὶ Ν φωναὶ \ καὶ \ δεξιώ,σ εις ἦΦ σαν wes εὐ> σεβέ,σ τατον
καὶ θεοφιλέστατον δεχομένων.
Παραλαβὼxν δὲ\ τὴ\ν ἀ» ρχὴν\ πρῶτA ον μὲ\ν τὸ\ τῶAν
τριακοσίων σύστημα διέλυσεν, οὗς € Ῥωμύλος
ἔχων ἀεὶ περὶ τὸ σῶμα Κέλερας προσηγύρευσεν,
ὅπερ ἐστὶ ταχεῖς" οὔτε γὰ\ ρ ἀπιστεῖν πιστεύουσιν
οὔτε βασιλεύειν ἀπιστούντων ἠξέου. δεύτερον
δὲ τοῖς οὖσιν ἱερεῦσι Διὸς καὶ Ἄρεως τρίτον
Ῥωμύλου ,“προσκατέστησεν, ὃν Φλάμινα Κυρι-
νάλιον ὠνόμασεν. ἐκάλουν δὲ καὶ τοὺς προγενε-
στέρους Φλάμινας ἀπὸ τῶν περικρανίων πίλων
οὺς περὶ\ ταῖς κεφαλαῖς φοροῦσι, πιλαμένας
τινὰς ὄντας, ὡς ἱστοροῦσι, τῶν Ἑλληνικῶν ovo-
μάτων τότε μᾶλλον ἢ νῦν Tots Λατίνοις ἀνακεκρα-
μένων. καὶ γὰρ ἃς ἐφόρουν οἱ ἱερεῖς λαΐίνας ὁ
1 καὶ δεξιοὶ ἐπέτρεψαν with ὃ : καὶ δεξιοὶ καὶ ἐπέτρεψαν.
328
NUMA, vil. 2-5
taking with him the augurs and priests, he ascended
the Capitol, which the Romans of that time called the
Tarpeian Hill. There the chief of the augurs turned
the veiled head of Numa towards the south, while
he himself, standing behind him, and laying the
right hand on his head, prayed aloud, and turned
his eyes in all directions to observe whatever birds
or other omens might be sent from the gods. Then
an incredible silence fell upon the vast multitude in
the forum, who watched in eager suspense for the
issue, until at last auspicious birds appeared and
approached the scene on the right. Then Numa
put on his royal robes and went down from the
citadel to the multitude, where he was received with
glad cries of welcome as the most pious of men and
most beloved of the gods.
His first measure on assuming the government
was to disband the body of three hundred men
that Romulus always kept about his person, and
called “Celeres’’ (that is, swift ones); for he would
not consent to distrust those who trusted him, nor
to reign over those who distrusted him. His second
measure was to add to the two priests of Jupiter and
Mars a third priest of Romulus, whom he called
the Flamen Quirinalis. Now before this time the
Romans called their priests “flamines,”’ from the
close-fitting “ piloi,” or caps, which they wear upon
their heads, and which have the longer name of
“pilamenai,” as we are told, there being more Greek
words mingled with the Latin at that time than now.?
Thus also the name “laena,’ which the Romans
1 Cf. Romulus, xxvi. 2.
2 Cf. Romulus, xv. 3. Plutarch does not hesitate to derive
the Latin ‘‘ flamines” from the doubtful Greek “ pilamenai.”
329
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
᾿Ιόβας χλαίνας φησὶν εἶναι, καὶ τὸν ὑπηρετοῦντα
τῷ ἱερεῖ τοῦ Διὸς ἀμφιθαλῆ παῖδα λέγεσθαι
Κάμιλλον, ὡς καὶ τὸν Ἑρμῆν οὕτως ἔνιοι τῶν
Ἑλλήνων Κάμιλλον! ἀπὸ τῆς διακονίας προση-
γόρευον.
VIII. Ταῦτα δὲ ὁ Νομᾶς ἐπ᾽ εὐνοίᾳ καὶ χάριτι
τοῦ δήμου πολιτευσάμενος εὐθὺς ἐπεχείρει τὴν
πόλιν, ὥσπερ σίδηρον, ἐκ σκληρᾶς καὶ πολε-
μικῆς μαλακωτέραν ποιῆσαι καὶ δικαιοτέραν.
ἀτεχνῶς γὰρ ἣν Πλάτων ἀποκαλεῖ φλεγμαΐί-
νουσαν πόλιν ἐκείνη τότ᾽ ἦν, συστᾶσα μὲν εὐθὺς
ἐξ ἀρχῆς τόλμῃ τινὶ καὶ παραβόλῳ θρασύτητι
τῶν θρασυτάτων καὶ μαχιμωτάτων ἐκεῖ παντα-
χόθεν ὠσαμένων, ταῖς δὲ πολλαῖς στρατείαις καὶ
τοῖς συνεχέσι πολέμοις τροφῇ χρησαμένη καὶ
αὐξήσει τῆς δυνάμεως, καὶ καθάπερ τὰ καταπη-
γνύμενα τῷ σείεσθαι μᾶλλον ἑδράξεται, ῥών-
νυσθαι δοκοῦσα διὰ τῶν κινδύνων. οὕτω δὴ
μετέωρον καὶ τετραχυμένον δῆμον οὐ μικρᾶς οὐδὲ
φαύλης οἰόμενος εἶναι πραγματείας μεταχειρί-
σασθαι, καὶ μετακοσμῆσαι πρὸς εἰρήνην, ἐπηγά-
yeTO τὴν ἀπὸ τῶν θεῶν βοήθειαν, τὰ μὲν πολλὰ
θυσίαις καὶ πομπαῖς καὶ χορείαις, ἃς αὐτὸς
ὠργίασε καὶ κατέστησεν, ἅμα σεμνότητι δια-
yoynv ἐπίχαριν καὶ φιλάνθρωπον ἡδονὴν ἐχού-
σαις, ἡμαγωγῶν καὶ τιθασεύων τὸ θυμοειδὲς καὶ
φιλοπόλεμον" ἔστι δ᾽ ὅτε καὶ φόβους τινὰς ἀπαγ-
γέλλων παρὰ τοῦ θεοῦ καὶ φάσματα δαιμόνων
ἀλλόκοτα καὶ φωνὰς οὐκ εὐμενεῖς, ἐδούλου καὶ
1 Κάμιλλον deleted by Bekker; corrected to Καδμῖλον by
Sintenis2 ,
330
NUMA, vu. 5-vill. 3
give to the priestly mantle, Juba says is the same as
the Greek “chlaina” ; and that the name Camillus,
which the Romans give to the boy with both parents
living who attends upon the priest of Jupiter, is the
same as that which some of the Greeks give to
Hermes, from his office of attendant.
VIII. After taking such measures to secure the
goodwill and favour of the people, Numa straight-
way attempted to soften the city, as iron is softened
in the fire, and change its harsh and warlike temper
into one of greater gentleness and justice. For if a
city was ever in what Plato calls! a “ feverish ”’ state,
Rome certainly was at that time. It was brought
into being at the very outset by the excessive daring
and reckless courage of the boldest and most warlike
spirits, who forced their way thither from all parts,
and in its many expeditions and its continuous wars
it found nourishment and increase of its power; and
Just as what is planted in the earth gets a firmer
seat the more it is shaken, so Rome seemed to be made
strong by its very perils. And therefore Numa,
judging it to be no slight or trivial undertaking to
mollify and newly fashion for peace so presumptuous
and stubborn a people, called in the gods to aid and
assist him. It was for the most part by sacrifices,
processions, and religious dances, which he himself
appointed and conducted, and which mingled with
their solemnity a diversion full of charm and a
beneficent pleasure, that he won the people’s favour
and tamed their fieree and warlike tempers. At
times, also, by heralding to them vague terrors from
the god, strange apparitions of divine beings and
threatening voices, he would subdue and humble
1 Cf. Lycurgus, v. 6.
331
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ταπεινὴν\ E> TOLEL TH\Y διάfνi οιαν αὐΟΣτ ῶbνod ὑe πὸ \ δεισιδαι-
μονία/ ς. ἐ’ ξ ὧAν Kal \ μά4λ ιστα λό΄γ ον ἔΜ σχεν ἡ€
σοφῖα καὶ \ ἡe παίiδf ευσις τοῦl al ἀ> νδρόςf:, wes Πυθαγόρ“4 ᾳ
TUYYEYOVOTLOd S. μέ/γ α ya\p ἣν μέρf ος, ws ἐκεί/ νῳ τῆaς
φιλοσοφίας, καὶ τούτῳ τῆaς πολιτεία, ς ἡ περὶ TO
θεῖον ἁγιστεία ᾿ καὶ διατριβή. λέγεται δὲ καὶ
τὸν ἔξωθεν ὄγκον καὶ σχηματισμὸν ἀπὸ τῆς
αὐτῆς ΤΠυθαγόρᾳ διανοίας περιβαλέσθαι. καὶ 65
γὰρ ἐκεῖνος ἀετόν τε δοκεῖ πραῦναι, φωναῖς τισιν
ἐπιστήσας καὶ καταγαγὼν ὑπεριπτάμενον, τόν τε
μηρὸν ὑποφῆναι χρυσοῦν ᾿Ολυμπίασι διαπορευό-
μενος τὴν πανήγυριν: ἄλλας τε τερατώδεις μη-
χανὰςΝ αὐ,τ οῦ A καὶ N πράξ/ εις ἀ» ναγγέλ7 λουσιν, ἐ2φ4᾽? αἷeς
καὶ \omΤ/ί μων ὁς Φλιάσ/ ιος ἔ4 γραψε:
Πυθαγόρην δὲ γόητας ἀποκλίνοντ᾽ ἐπὶ δόξας
Onpn ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώ,π ων, σεμνηγορίη, ς ὀαριστήν"
τῷA δὲ‘ Νομᾷn δρᾶa μα θεᾶaς τινος ἢA νύ, μφης ὀ’ ρεί,α ς
ἔρως ἣ5 ν καὶ συνουσία͵ πρὸς αὐτὸν ἀπόρρητος,
ὥσπερ εἴρηται, καὶ κοιναὶ μετὰ Μουσῶν δια-
τριβαί., τὰΝ γὰNρe;en πλεῖLaσ] τα τῶaν μαντευμάτων εἰς
Μούσας ἀνῆγε, καὶ μίαν Μοῦσαν ἰδίως καὶ
διαφερό,ν τως ἐδί» δαξε σέβεσθαι τοὺς «ς“ Ῥωμαίο, υς,
Taxitav προσαγορεύσας, οἷον σιωπηλὴν ἢ ἐνεάν'
ὅπερ εἶναι δοκεῖ τὴν Πυθαγόρειον ἀπομνημονεύ-
οντος ἐχεμυθίαν καὶ τιμῶντος.
Μ ἔστι δὲ\ καὶ \ τὰ\ περὶ \ τῶaν ἀ5)φ ιδρυμάτ, ων νομο-
θετή7 ματα παντάπ, ασιν ἀ’ δελφὰ\ τῶ“ν Πυθαγόρ/ ου
1 ἁγιστεία Bryan’s correction, after Amyot, adopted by
Coraés and Bekker: ayxiorela (relationship).
332
NUMA, vil. 3-7
their minds by means of superstitious fears. This
was the chief reason why Numa’s wisdom and culture
were said to have been due to his intimacy with
Pythagoras ; for in the philosophy of the one, and in
the civil polity of the other, religious services and
occupations have a large place. It is said also that
the solemnity of his outward demeanour was adopted
by him because he shared the feelings of Pythagoras
about it. That philosopher, indeed, is thought to
have tamed an eagle, which he stopped by certain
cries of his, and brought down from his lofty flight;
also to have disclosed his golden thigh as he passed
through the assembled throngs at Olympia. And
we have reports of other devices and performances of
his which savoured of the marvellous, regarding
which Timon the Phliasian wrote :—
“ Down to a juggler’s level he sinks with his cheating
devices,
Laying his nets for men, Pythagoras, lover of
bombast.”
In like manner Numa’s fiction was the love which a
certain goddess or mountain nymph bore him, and
her secret meetings with him, as already mentioned,}
and. his familiar converse with the Muses. For he
ascribed the greater part of his oracular teachings to
the Muses, and he taught the Romans to pay especial
honours to one Muse in particular, whom he called
Tacita, that is, the silent, or speechless one; thereby
perhaps handing on and honouring the Pythagorean
precept of silence.
Furthermore, his ordinances concerning images
are altogether in harmony with the doctrines of
1 Chapter iv. 1-2.
VOL. χα M 3 3 3
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δογμάτ, ων. οὔaτ ε γὰΝρ ἐ» κεῖAν ος αἰ> σθθη τὸν\ ἢA παθθη τόν’,
ἀόρατον δὲ καὶ ἄκτιστον καὶ νοητὸν ὑπελάμ-
βανεν εἶναι τὸ πρῶτον, οὗτός τε διεκώλυσεν
ἀ> νθρωποειδῆ A καὶ A ἕῳό,μ ορφον εἰ3 κό4ν α θεοῦa A ¢ Ῥωμαί-7
ous νομίζειν. οὐδ᾽ ’ ἦν παρ᾽ ᾽ αὐτοῖςa οὔτε γραπτὸν
οὔ»τ ε πλαστὸνΝ εἶ3 δος θεοῦa ) πρότ, ερον, ἀ»λ λ’ b ἐΕῚν
ἑκατὸν ἑβδομήκοντα τοῖς πρώτοις ἔτεσι ναοὺς
μὲν οἰκοδομούμενοι καὶ καλιάδας ἱερὰς ἱστῶντες,
ἄγαλμα δὲ οὐδὲν ἔμμορφον ποιούμενοι διετέλουν,
ὡς οὔτε ὅσιον ἀφομοιοῦAν τὰἣ ν βελτίο, να τοῖrςn χείροσιν
οὔ”τ ε ἐ2 φά΄π τεσθαι θεοῦa ὃ δυνατὸ\ν ἄ5 λλως ἢx νοήσ/ ει.
κομιδῆa δὲ\ καὶ τὰ\ τῶa ν θυσιῶa ν ἔ» χεται τῆAς Πυθα-
γορικῆς ἁγιστείας" ἀναίμακτοι γὰρ ἦσαν αἵ γε
πολλαί, ov ἀλφίτου καὶ σπονδῆς καὶ τῶν εὐτε-
λεστάτων πεποιημέναι.
Χωρὶς δὲ τούτων ἑτέροις, ἔξωθεν ἐπαγωνίξονται
τεκμηρίοις οἱ τὸν ἄνδρα τῷ ἀνδρὶ συνοικειοῦντες.
ὧν ἕν μέν ἐστιν ὅτι Πυθαγόραν Ῥωμαῖοι τῇ
πολιτείᾳ προσέγραψαν, ὡς ἱστόρηκεν ᾿Επίχαρμος
ὁ κωμικὸς ἔν τινι λόγῳ πρὸς ᾿Αντήνορα γεγραμ-
μένῳ, παλαιὸς ἀνὴρ καὶ τῆς Πυθαγορικῆς δια-
τριβῆς μετεσχηκώς" ἕτερον. δὲὅ τι τεσσάρων υἱῶν
βασιλεῖ Νομᾷ γενομένων ἕνα Μάμερκον ἐπὶ τῷ
10 Πυθαγόρου παιδὶ προσηγόρευσεν. ἀπ’ ἐκείνου
δὲ καὶ τὸν Αἰμιλίων οἶκον ἀναμιχθέντα τοῖς
πατρικίους ὀνομασθῆναί φασιν, οὕτως ὑποκοριζο-
μένου τοῦ βασιλέως τὴν ἐν τοῖς λόγοις τοῦ ἀνδρὸς
αιἱ μυλίαν καὶ χάριν. αὐτοὶ δ᾽ ἀκηκόαμεν πολλῶν
ἐν Ῥώμῃ διεξιόντων ὅτε χρησμοῦ ποτε Ῥωμαίοις
1 ἄκτιστον Sintenis! with AC, followed by Bekker:
ἀκήρατον (unmixed).
334
NUMA, vin. 7-10
Pythagoras. For that philosopher maintained that
the first principle of being was beyond sense or
feeling, was invisible and uncreated, and discernible
only by the mind. And in like manner Numa
forbade the Romans to revere an image of God
which had the form of man or beast. Nor was
there among them in this earlier time any painted
or graven likeness of Deity, but while for the first
hundred and seventy years they were continually
building temples and establishing* sacred shrines,
they made no statues in bodily form for them, con-
vinced that it was impious to liken higher things to
lower, and that it was impossible to apprehend
Deity except by the intellect. Their sacrifices, too,
were altogether appropriate to the Pythagorean
worship ; for most of them involved no bloodshed,
but were made with flour, drink-offerings, and the
least costly gifts.
And apart from these things, other external proofs
are urged to show that the two men were acquainted
with each other. One of these is that Pythagoras
was enrolled as a citizen of Rome. This fact is
recorded by Epicharmus the comic poet, in a certain
treatise which he dedicated to Antenor ; and Epichar-
mus was an ancient, and belonged to the school of
Pythagoras. Another proof is that one of the four
sons born to king Numa was named Mamercus, after
the son of Pythagoras. And from him they say that
the patrician family of the Aemilii took its name,
Aemilius being the endearing name which the king
gave him for the grace and minsomeness of his speech.
Moreover, I myself have heard many people at Rome
recount how, when an oracle once commanded the
335
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γενομένου τὸν φρονιμώτατον καὶ x Tov ἀνδρειότατον
‘Rhλ λήν7 ων LfOe opvcadlθa l παρ > AUδT. OLSayy, ἔyor στησαν EaTilIy
τῆaς ἀ᾽ γορᾶCςal εἰ> κο/ν ας χαλκᾶς“Ὁ δύiοa , τὴ\ν μὲ\ν » Αλκι-
βιάδ΄ ου, τὴ\ν δὲN IlvOayop, ov. ταῦaτ α μὲ\ν οὗ=ν
ἀbyμ φισβητήσ/ε ις ἔ” χοντα πολλὰς\ καὶ \ τὸΝ κινεῖ-ν διὰΝ
μακροτέρων καὶ τὸ\ πιστοῦanσ θαι' μειρακιώδους
ἐστὶ φιλονεικίας.
IX.Γ΄ Nowaa 6é\ καὶ\ τὴ\ν τῶaν ἀρJ χιερέω/ ν, odἃs Ποντί-,
φικας καλοῦσla)ι , διάταξιν καὶ κατάσ΄ τασιν ἀ3 ποδιδό-,
act, καί φασιν αὐτὸ\ν ἕνα τούiτd ων τὸ\ν πρῶAτ ον γεγο-
νέἯν αι. κεκλῆaσ θαι δὲΝ τοὺς\ ἸΤοντί/ φικας οἱ e μὲ\ν ὅ“ τι
τοὺς θεοὺς θεραπεύουσι δυνατοὺς\ Kal κυρίους ἁπάν-
των ὄντας" ὁ γὰ. ρ δυνατὸς\ ὑπὸ Ρωμαίων ὀνομάζ΄ εται
πότηνς" ἕτεροι δέ/ φασι πρὸ\ς ὑπεξαίρ/ εσιν yeyo-
vévat τοὔνομα τῶν δυνατῶν, ὡς τοῦ νομοθέτου τὰς
δυνατὰς ἐπιτελεῖνa ἱ« ερουργίας τοὺς ἱερεῖalς κελεύ-
ovtos, ἂν δὲ ἢ> TL κώ/ λυμα μεῖcaζl ον, οὐ συκοφαν-
τοῦντος. οἱ δὲ πλεῖστοι μάλιστα καὶ τὸ γελώμενον
τῶν ὀνομάτων δοκιμάζουσιν, ὡς οὐδὲν ἀλλ᾽ ἢ
γεφυροποιοὺς τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐπικχηθέντας ἀa πὸ τῶν
ποιουμένων περὶ τὴν γέφυραν ἱερῶν, ἁγιωτάτων
Kal παλαιοτάτων ὄντων" πόν/ τεμ γὰρ οἱ Λατῖνοι
τὴν γέφυραν. ὀνομάξουσιν. εἶναι μέντοι καὶ τὴν
τήρησιν αὐτῆς καὶ τὴν ἐπισκευήν, ὥσπερ ἄλλο τι
τῶν ἀκινήτων καὶ πατρίων ἱερῶν, προσήκουσαν 66
τοῖς ἱερεῦσιν. οὐ γὰρ θεμιτόν, GAN ἐπάρατον
ἡγεῖσθαι Ῥωμαίους τὴν κατάλυσιν τῆς ξυλίνης
γεφύρας. λέγεται δὲ καὶ τὸ πάμπαν ἄνευ σιδήρου
1 πιστοῦσθαι a correction of Reiske’s, accepted by Coraés
and Bekker: πιστεύεσθαι (believe).
336
NUMA, vill. 10-1x. 3
Romans to erect in their city monuments to the
wisest and the bravest of the Greeks, they set up in
the forum two statues in bronze, one of Alcibiades,
and one of Pythagoras.! However, since the matter
of Numa’s acquaintance with Pythagoras is involved
in much dispute, to discuss it at greater length, and
to win belief for it, would savour of youthful
contentiousness.
IX. To Numa is also ascribed the institution of
that order of high priests who are called Pontifices,
and he himself is said to have been the first of them.
According to some they are called Pontifices
because employed in the service of the gods, who are
powerful and supreme over all the world; and
“notens ” is the Roman word for powerful. Others
say that the name was meant to distinguish between
possible and impossible functions ; the lawgiver en-
joining upon these priests the performance of such
sacred offices only as were possible, and finding no fault
with them if any serious obstacle prevented. But
most writers give an absurd explanation of the name ;
Pontifices means, they say, nothing more nor less
than bridge-builders, from the sacrifices which they
performed at the bridge over the Tiber, sacrifices of
the greatest antiquity and the most sacred character;
for “ pons” is the Latin word for bridge. They say,
moreover, that the custody and maintenance of the
bridge, like all the other inviolable and ancestral rites,
attached to the priesthood, for the Romans held the
demolition of the wooden bridge to be not only
unlawful, but actually sacrilegious. It is also said
1 According to the elder Pliny (N.H. xxxiv. 12), these
statues stood in the comitium at Rome from the time of
the Samnite wars (343-290 B.o.) down to that of Sulla
(138-78 8.0.).
337
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κατὰ δή τι λόγιον συγγεγομφῶσθαι διὰ τῶν
ξύλων. ἡ δὲ λιθίνη πολλοῖςa ὕστερον ἐξειργάLdσ θη
χρόνU οις ὑ(apeπs ᾽ } Αἰμ᾿ ιλίο, υ ταμιεύο΄ ντος. οὐ> μὴνν ἀ> λλὰ Ν
καὶ \ τὴ\ν ξυλί,ν ην τῶaνn Νaοf μᾷa χρό!ν ων ἀ> πολεί/π εσθαθ ι
λέγουσιν, ὑπὸ Μαρκίου τοῦ Νομᾶ θυγατριδοῦ
βασιλεύοντος ἀποτελεσθεῖσαν.
ὋὉ δὲ μέγιστος τῶν ἸΠοντιφίκων οἷον ἐξηγητοῦ
καὶ προφήτου, μᾶλλον δὲ ἱεροφάντου τάξιν εἴλη-
χεν, οὐ μόνον; τῶaν δημοσί,ᾳ δρωμένων ἐπιμελού-
μενος, ἀλλὰ καὶ τοὺς ἰδίᾳ θύοντας ἐπισκοπῶν καὶ
κωλύων παρεκβαίνειν τὰ νενομισμένα, καὶ διδά-
σκων ὅτου τις δέοιτο πρὸΝς θεῶA ν τιμὴν ἢ παραΐί-
τησιν. ἦν δὲ καὶ τῶν ἱερῶν παρθένων ἐπίσκοπος,
aἃ s «ς“ Ἑστιά/δ ας προσαγορεύο/υ σι. ΝομᾷA ya\p δὴ\ καὶ
τὴν τῶν Ἑ στιάδων παρθένων καθιέρωσιν καὶ
ὅef.λ ως τὴ\ ν περὶ\ TOΝ πῦaρ TON ogἀ? θάν/ ατον, aὃ φυλάτ/ τουσιν
αὗται, θεραπείαν τε καὶ τιμὴν ἀποδιδόασιν, εἴτε
ὡς καθαρὰν καὶ ἄφθαρτον τὴν τοῦ πυρὸς οὐσίαν
ἀκηράτοις καὶ ἀμιάντοις παρατιθεμένου σώμασιν,
εἴτε τὸ ἄκαρπον καὶ ἄγονον τῇ παρθενίᾳ συν-
οἰκειοῦντος. ἐπεί τοι τῆς Ἑλλάδος ὅπου πῦρ
ἄ” σβεστόν, ἐ> στιν, ὡςς Πυθοῖ a καὶ Nita ᾿Αθή/ν ησιν, οὐ>
παρθένοι, γυναῖκες δὲ πεπαυμέναι γάμων ἔχουσι
τὴν ἐπιμέλειαν: ἐὰν δὲ ὑπὸ τύχης τινὸς ἐκλίπῃ,
καθάπερ ᾿Αθήνησι μὲν ἐπὶ τῆς ᾿Αριστίωνος
λέγεται τυραννίδος ἀποσβεσθῆναι τὸν ἱερὸν
λύχνον, ἐν Δελφοῖς δὲ τοῦ ναοῦ καταπρησθέντος
ὑ€ πὸ \ Μήδ/ ων, περὶ‘ δὲ\ τὰ\ Μιθριδατικὰδ ὰ καὶ Ν τὸ\ν
ἐb]μ φύλ/ ιον ¢ Ῥωμαίω/ ν πό/λ εμον ἅὉ μα τῷan βωμῷa τὸΝ
1 μόνον with most MSS. (including 8) and edd. : μόνων.
338
NUMA, ix. 3-6
that it was built entirely without iron and fastened
together with wooden pins in obedience to an oracle.
The stone bridge was constructed at a much later
period, when Aemilius was quaestor.!_ However, it is
said that the wooden bridge also was later than the
time of Numa, and was completed by Ancus Marcius,
the grandson of Numa by his daughter, when he was
king.
Τῆς chief of the Pontifices, the Pontifex Maximus,
had the duty of expounding and interpreting the
divine will, or rather of directing sacred rites, not
only being in charge of public ceremonies, but also
watching over private sacrifices and preventing any
departure from established custom, as well as teaching
whatever was requisite for the worship or propitiation
of the gods. He was also overseer of the holy virgins
called Vestals ; for to Numa is ascribed the consecra-
tion of the Vestal virgins, and in general the worship
and care of the perpetual fire entrusted to their charge.
It was either because he thought the nature of fire
pure and uncorrupted, and therefore entrusted it to
chaste and undefiled persons, or because he thought
of it as unfruitful and barren, and therefore associated
it with virginity. Since wherever in Greece a
perpetual fire is kept, as at Delphi and Athens, it is
committed to the charge, not of virgins, but of
widows past the age of marriage. And if by any
chance it goes out, as at Athens during the tyranny
of Aristion? the sacred lamp is said to have been
extinguished, and at Delphi when the temple was
burned by the Medes, and as during the Mithridatic
and the Roman civil wars the altar was demolished
1/179 5. 6:
3. 88-80 Β.σ. Cf. Lucullus, xix. 6; Sulla, xiii. 3.
339
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πῦAρ ἠ3 φανίσ, θη, οὔ” φασι δεῖaν ἀ? πὸ Seshἑ τέsρ ου πυρὸς\
ἐναύεσθαι, καινὸν δὲ ποιεῖLνa καὶ νέῇο ν, ἀνάπτοντας
ἀ) πὸ \ τοῦa ἡe λί/ο υ φλό/γ α καθαρὰν\ καὶ \ ἀ5 μία/ ντον.
ἐξάπτουσι δὲ μάλ, ιστα τοῖaς σκαφείο’ι ς, ἃ κατα-
σκευάζεται μὲν ἀπὸ πλευρᾶς ἰσοσκελοῦς ὀρθογω-
νίου τριγώνου κοιλαινόμενα, συννεύει δ᾽ εἰς ἕν ἐκ
τῆaς περιφερείας κέ,ν τρον. ὅο ταν οὖν θέσιν ἐναντίΨα ν
λά/β ῃ πρὸς\ τὸ\ν ἥὉ λιον, ὥ“ στε τὰ\ς αὐ2γ ὰςΔᾺ παντα-
χό/θ εν ἀ» νακοπτομέν/ ας ἀ> θροίiζf εσθαι Kal N συμπλέ-/
κεσθαι περὶ TO\ κέ/ν τρον, αὐτόν τε διακρίν, ει τὸν
ἀέρα λεπτυνόμενον, καὶ \ τὰ\ κουφό/τ ατα Kal Enpo-
Tata τῶν προστιθεμένων ὀξέως ἀνάπτει κατὰ
τὴν ἀντέρεισιν, σῶn μα Kal \ πληγὴνA πυρώδη τῆAς
αὐγῆς λαβούσης. ἔνιοι μὲν οὖν οὐδὲν ὑπὸ τῶν
ἱς ερῶlaνl παρθέlνe ων ἀ2λ λ᾽ > ἢxX τὸN ἄa σβεστον ἐ? κεῖaν ο
φρουρεῖσθαι πῦρ νομίξουσιν' ἔνιοι δὲ εἶναί τινά
φασιν ἀθέατα τοῖς ἄλλοις ἱερὰ κρυπτόμενα, περὶ
ὧν ὅσα καὶ πυθέσθαι καὶ φράσαι θεμιτὸν ἐν τῷ
Καμίλλου βίῳ γέγραπται.
X. Πρῶτον μὲν οὖν ὑπὸ Νομᾶ καθιερωθῆναι
λέγουσι Teyaviav Kal Βερηνίαν, δεύτερον δὲ
Κανουληΐαν καὶ Ταρπηΐαν" ὕστερον δὲ Σερβίου
δύο προσθέντος ἄλλας τῷ ἀριθμῷ διατηρεῖσθαι"
μέχρι τῶν χρόνων τούτων τὸ πλῆθος. ὡρίσθη δὲ
ταῖς ἱεραῖς παρθένοις ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως ἁγνεία
TPLAKOVTAET/L S, ἐν ἡ τὴν μὲν πρώτην δεκαετίαν ἃ
χρὴ δρᾶν μανθάνουσι, τὴν δὲ μέσην. ἃ μεμαθήκασι
δρῶσι, τὴν δὲ “τρίτην ἑτέρας αὐταὶ διδάσκουσιν.
εἶτα ἀνεῖται τῇ βουλομένῃ μετὰ τὸν χρόνον τοῦ-
1 διατηρεῖσθαι the correction of Coraés, adopted by Bekker:
διατηρῆσαι.
340
NUMA, rx. 6-x. 2
and the fire extinguished, then they say it must not
be kindled again from other fire, but made fresh and
new, by lighting a pure and unpolluted flame from
the rays of the sun. And this they usually effect by
means of metallic mirrors, the concavity of which is
made to follow the sides of an isosceles rectangular
triangle, and which converge from their circum-
ference to a single point inthe centre. When, there-
fore, these are placed opposite the sun, so that its rays,
as they fall upon them from all sides, are collected
and concentrated at the centre, the air itself is
rarefied there, and very light and dry substances
placed there quickly blaze up from its resistance,
the sun’s rays now acquiring the substance and force
of fire. Some, moreover, are of the opinion that
nothing but this perpetual fire is guarded by the
sacred virgins; while some say that certain sacred
objects, which none others may behold, are kept in
concealment by them. What may lawfully be learned
and told about these things, I have written in my
Life of Camillus.!
X. In the beginning, then, they say that Gegania
and Verenia were consecrated to this office by
Numa, who subsequently added to them Canuleia
and Tarpeia; that at a later time two others were
added by Servius, making the number which has
continued to the present time. It was ordained by
the king that the sacred virgins should vow them-
selves to chastity for thirty years; during the first
decade they are to learn their duties, during the
second to perform the duties they have learned, and
during the third to teach others these duties. Then,
the thirty years being now passed, any one who
1 Chapter xx. 3-6.
a
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Tov ἤδη Kal γάμου μεταλαμβάνειν καὶ πρὸς ἕτε-
ρον τραπέσθαι βίον, ἀπαλλαγείσῃ τῆς ἱερουργίας.
λέγονται δὲ οὐ πολλαὶ ταύτην ἀσπάσασθαι τὴν
ἄδειαν, οὐδὲ ἀσπασαμέναις χρηστὰ πράγματα
συντυχεῖν, ἀλλὰ μετανοίᾳ καὶ κατηφείᾳ συνοῦσαι
τὸν λοιπὸν βίον ἐμβαλεῖν τὰς ἄλλας εἰς δεισιδαι-
μονίαν, ὥστε μέχρι γήρως καὶ θανάτου διατελεῖν
ἐγκαρτερούσας καὶ παρθενευομένας.
ἐμὰς δὲ μεγάλας ἀπέδωκεν αὐταῖς, ὧν ἔστι
καὶ τὸ διαθέσθαι ζῶντος ἐξεῖναι πατρὸς καὶ τὰλ-
λα πράττειν ἄνευ προστάτου διαγούσας, ὥὥ σπερ
αἱ τρίπαιδες. ῥα βδουχοῦνται δὲ προϊοῦσαι: κἂν
ἀγομένῳ τινὶ πρὸς θάνατον αὐτομάτως συντύχω-
σιν, οὐκ ἀναιρεῖται. δεῖ δὲ ἀπομόσαι τὴν παρ-
θένον ἀκούσιον καὶ τυχαίαν καὶ οὐκ ἐξεπίτηδες
γεγονέναι τὴν ἀπάντησιν. ὁ δὲ ὑπελθὼν κομιζο- 67
μένων ὑπὸ τὸ φορεῖον ἀποθνήσκει. κόλασις δὲ
τῶν μὲν ἄλλων ἁμαρτημάτων πληγαὶ ταῖς παρ-
θένοις, τοῦ μεγίστου Ποντίφικος κολάζοντος ἔστιν
ὅτε καὶ γυμνὴν τὴν πλημμελήσασαν, ὀθύνης ἐν
παλινσκίῳ παρατεινομένης: ἡ δὲ τὴν παρθενίαν
καταισχύνασα ζῶσα κατορύττεται παρὰ τὴν
Κολλίνην λεγομένην πύλην: ἐν ἧ τις ἔστιν ἐντὸς
τῆς πόλεως ὀφρὺς γεώδης παρατείνουσα πόρρω"
καλεῖται δὲ χῶμα διαλέκτῳ τῇ Λατίνων. ἐνταῦθα
κατασκευάζεται κατάγειος οἶκος οὐ μέγας, ἔχων
ἄνωθεν κατάβασιν. κεῖται δὲ ἐν αὐτῷ κλίνη τε
ὑπεστρωμένη καὶ λύχνος καιόμενος, ἀπαρχαί τε
τῶν πρὸς τὸ ξῆν ἀναγκαίων βραχεῖαί τίνες, οἷον
ἄρτος, ὕδωρ ἐν ἀγγείῳ, γάλα, ἔλαιον, ὥσπερ
ἀφοσιουμένων τὸ μὴ λιμῷ διαφθείρειν σῶμα ταῖς
μεγίσταις καθιερωμένον ἁγιστείαις. αὐτὴν δὲ
342
NUMA, x. 2-6
wishes has liberty to marry and adopt a different
mode of life, after laying down her sacred office.
We are told, however, that few have welcomed the
indulgence, and that those who did so were not
happy, but were a prey to repentance and dejection
for the rest of their lives, thereby inspiring the rest
with superstitious fears, so that until old age and
death they remained steadfast in their virginity.
But Numa bestowed great privileges upon them,
such as the right to make a will during the life time
of their fathers, and to transact and manage their
other affairs without a guardian, like the mothers of
three children. When they appear in public, the
fasces are carried before them, and if they ac-
cidentally meet a criminal on his way to execution,
his life is spared; but the virgin must make oath
that the meeting was involuntary and fortuitous, and
not of design. He who passes under the litter on
which they are borne, is put to death. For their
minor offences the virgins are punished with stripes,
the Pontifex Maximus sometimes scourging the
culprit on her bare flesh, in a dark place, with a
curtain interposed. But she that has broken her
vow of chastity is buried alive near the Colline gate.
Here a little ridge of earth extends for some distance
along the inside of the city-wall ; the Latin word for
it is “agger.” Under it a small chamber is con-
structed, with steps leading down from above. In
this are placed a couch with its coverings, a lighted
lamp, and very small portions of the necessaries of
life, such as bread, a bowl of water, milk, and oil, as
though they would thereby absolve themselves from
the charge of destroying by hunger a life which had
been consecrated to the highest services of religion.
343
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τὴ\ν κολαζομέν4 ην εἰ3ς φορεῖaο ν ἐ2 νθέ7μ ενοι καὶ Ν κατα-
στεγάσαντες ἔξωθεν καὶ καταλαβόντες ἱμᾶσιν, ὡς
μηδδὲὲ φωνὴ\ν ἐ2 ξά/κ ουστον γενέ/σ θαι, κομί/ζ ουσι δι ’
ἀγορᾶς. ἐξίστανται δὲ πάντες σιωπῇ καὶ παρα-
πέ/μ πουσιν ἄφθογγοι μετά τινος δεινῆaς κατηφείας"
οὐ>δ ὲΔ Ν ἐ9 στὶ\ν ἕ[τᾷτ ερον θέ“ αμα φρικτότ/ ερον, οὐδΤΟ᾽, ἡοὐ μέ£ρ αν
ῃς TOA/ LS ἄ” λλην ἄ”γ ει στυγνοτέρ/ αν ἐb]κ ειν/ ῆς. ὃ[τ ταν
δὲ πρὸς τὸν τόπον κομισθῇA TO\ φορεῖοa ν, οἱ μὲν
ὑδ πηρέτ/ αι τοὺ\ς δεσμοὺς\ ἐIξosέ λυσαν, ὁς δὲδὲ τῶaν ἱe ερέ7 ων
ἔξαρχος εὐχάς τινας ἀπορρήτους ποιησάμενος καὶ
χεῖρας ἀνατείνας θεοῖς πρὸ τῆς ἀνάγκης, ἐξάγει
συγκεκαλυμμένην καὶ καθί,σ τησιν ἐπὶ\ κλίμακος
εἰς TO οἴκημα κάτω φερούσης. εἶ= τα αὐτὸς μὲν
ἀποτρέπεται μετὰ τῶν ἄλλων ἱερέων: τῆς δὲ
καταβάσης 7 τε κλί/μ αξ ἀναιρεῖLaτl αι Kal κατα-
κρύπτεται τὸ οἴκημα γῆaς πολλῆςfal ἄ7ν ωθεν ἐπιφορου-
μένης, ὥστε ἰσό/ πεδον τῷfa l λοιπῷ a χώμ7 ατι γενέ7σ θαι
TOV τόπον. οὕτω μὲν αἱ προέμεναι τὴν ἱς ερὰ\ν Tap-
θενί,α ν κολάζονται.
ΧΙ. Νομᾶrςn δὲ λέγεται καὶ τὸΝ τῆ“ς « ᾿στία/ ς ἱερὸν
ἐ> γκύ/κ λιον περιβαλέσ/ θαι τῷa ἀ> σβέ/σ τῳ πυρὶ\ φρου-
ράν, ἀπομιμούμενος οὐ τὸ σχῆμα τῆς γῆς ὡς
Ἑστίας οὔσης, ἀλλὰ τοῦ σύμπαντος κόσμου, οὗ
μέσον οἱ ἸΤυθαγορικοὶ τὸ πῦρ ἱδρῦσθαι νομίζουσι,
καὶ τοῦaτ ο ‘Ecti»a y καλοῦσa ι καὶ μονάδα: τὴ\ν δὲ
γῆν οὔτε ἀκίνητον οὔτε ἐν “μέσῳ τῆς περιφορᾶς
οὖσαν, ἀλλὰ κύκλῳ περὶ τὸ πῦρ αἰωρουμένην οὐ
τῶν τιμιωτάτων οὐδὲ τῶν πρώτων τοῦ κόσμου
μορίων ὑπάρχειν. ταῦτα δὲ καὶ Πλάτωνά φασι
πρεσβύτην γενόμενον διανενοῆσθαι περὶ τῆς γῆς
344
NUMA, x. 6—xI. 2
Then the culprit herself is placed on a litter, over
which coverings are thrown and fastened down with
cords so that not even a cry can be heard from within,
and carried through the forum. All the people
there silently make way for the litter, and follow it
without uttering a sound, in a terrible depression of
soul. No other spectacle is more appalling, nor does
any other day bring more gloom to the city than
this. When the litter reaches its destination, the
attendants unfasten the cords of the coverings. Then
the high-priest, after stretching his hands toward
heaven and uttering certain mysterious prayers before
the fatal act, brings forth the culprit, who is closely
veiled, and places her on the steps leading down
into the chamber. After this he turns away his face,
as do the rest of the priests, and when she has gone
down, the steps are taken up, and great quantities
of earth are thrown into the entrance to the chamber,
hiding it away, and making the place level with the
rest of the mound. Such is the punishment of those
who break their vow of virginity.
XI. Furthermore, it is said that Numa built the
temple of Vesta, where the perpetual fire was kept,
of a circular form, not in imitation of the shape of
the earth, believing Vesta to be the earth, but of the
entire universe, at the centre of which the Pythago-
reans place the element of fire, and call it Vesta
and Unit. And they hold that the earth is
neither motionless nor situated in the centre of sur-
rounding space, but that it revolves in a circle about
the central fire, not being one of the most important,
nor even one of the primary elements of the universe.
This is the conception, we are told, which Plato also,
in his old age, had of the earth, namely that it is
345
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὡὃςς ἐἐνν ἑEτTEέ ρᾳ χώρ5 ᾳ καθθεεσσττώσώησςη, ς, τὴτνὴ ν δδὲὲ μέμέσσην ην Kal
κυριωτάτην ἑτέρῳ τινὶ κρείττονι προσήκουσαν.
XII. Οἱ δὲ Ποντίφικες καὶ τὰ περὶ τὰς ταφὰς
πάτρια τοῖς χρήζουσιν ἀφηγοῦνται, Nowa διδά-
ἕαντος μηδὲν ἡγεῖσθαι μίασμα τῶν τοιούτων,
ἀ> λλὰ \ Kal \ τοὺ\ς ἐ>κ εῖl al θεοὺ\ς σέifβ εσθαι τοῖaς νενομι-
σμένοις, ὡς τὰ κυριώτατα τῶν ἡμετέρων ὑποδεχο-
μένους" ἐξαιρέτως δὲ τὴ\ν προσαγορευομένην At-
βίτιναν, ἐπίσκοπον τῶν περὶ τοὺς θνήσκοντας
ὁσίων θεὸν οὖσαν, εἴτε Περσεφόνην εἴτε μᾶλλον,
ὡςς οἱ € λογιώτ/ ατοι « ‘PwyaiΑw y ὑe πολαμβάνfο υσιν,
᾿Αφροδίτην, οὐ κακῶς εἰς μιᾶς δύναμιν θεοῦ τὰ
περὶ τὰς γενέσεις καὶ τὰς τελευτὰς ἀνάπτοντες.
αὐSτeὸnς δὲ\ καὶ \ τὰ\ πέ/ν θη καθ᾽ aeἡ λικί,α ς καὶ Ν χρόνους
ἔταξεν" οἷον παῖδα μὴ πενθεῖν νεώτερον τριετοῦς,
μηδὲ πρεσβύτερον πλείονας μῆνας ὧν ἐβίωσεν
ἐνιαυτῶν μέχρι τῶν δέκα, καὶ περαιτέρω μηδε-
μί,α ν ἡe λικία7 ν, ἀ᾽ λλὰ \ τοῦa μακροτάτof.ο υ πέ/ν θους
χρόνον εἶναι δεκαμηνιαῖον, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον καὶ χηρεύ-
ουσιν at τῶν ἀποθανόντων γυναῖκες. ἡ δὲ πρό-
τερον γαμηθεῖσα βοῦν ἐγκύμονα κατέθυεν ἐκείνου
νομοθετήσαντος.
Πολλὰς δὲ καὶ ἄλλας Νομᾶ καταδείξαντος
ἱερωσύνας ἔτι δυεῖν μνησθήσομαι, τῆς τε Σαλίων
καὶ τῆς τῶν Φιτιαλέων, αἱ μάλιστα τὴν εὐσέ-
βειαν τοῦf a) ἀνδρὸς ἐμφαίν/ ουσιν. οἱ« μὲν yap
Φιτιαλεῖς εἰρηνοφύλακές τινες ὄντες, ὡς δ᾽ ἐμοὶ
δοκεῖ,a καὶ τοὔν> ομα λαβόντες ἀπὸ\ τῆaς πράξεως,
,
346
NUMA, XI. 2-χπ. 3
established in a secondary space, and that the central
and sovereign space is reserved for some other and
nobler body.
XII. The Pontifices also explain and direct the
ancestral rites of burial for those who desire it, and
they were taught by Numa not to regard any such
offices as a pollution, but to honour the gods below
also with the customary rites, since they receive into
their keeping the most sovereign part of us, and par-
ticularly the goddess called Libitina, who presides
over the solemn services for the dead, whether she is
Proserpina, or, as the most learned Romans maintain,
Venus ; thereby not inaptly connecting man’s birth
and death with the power of one and the same god-
dess. Numa himself also regulated the periods of
mourning according to ages. For instance, over a
child of less than three years there was to be no
mourning at all; over one older than that, the
mourning was not to last more months than it had
lived years, up to ten; and no age was to be mourned
longer than that, but ten months was the period set
for the longest mourning.1 This is also the period
during which women who have lost their husbands
remain in widowhood, and she who took another
husband before this term was out, was obliged by the
laws of Numa to sacrifice a cow with calf.
Numa also established many other orders of priest-
hood, of which I shall mention two, besides, those of
the Salii and the Fetiales, which more than any others
give evidence of the man’s reverent piety. The
Fetiales were guardians of peace, so to speak, and in
my opinion took their name from their office, which
was to put a stop to disputes by oral conference, or
1 Cf. chapter xix. 1].
347
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
λόγῳ τὰ νείκη κατέπαυον, οὐκ ἐῶντες στρατεύειν
πρότερον ἢ πᾶσαν ἐλπίδα δίκης ἀποκοπῆναι.
καὶ γὰρ εἰρήνην “Ἕλληνες καλοῦσιν ὅταν λόγῳ,
μὴA βί/ᾳ , πρὸ\ς ἀλλήλ/ ους χρώμ΄ ενοι λύ4σ ωσι τὰς
διαφοράς/. οἱ e δὲVv . € Ῥωμαίω/ ν Φιτιαλεῖςa πολλάκ,ι ς
μὲν ἐβάδιζον ὡς τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας αὐτοὶ πείθοντες
εὐγνωμονεῖνa : ἀγνωμονούν΄ των δὲ\ μαρτυράμενοι
θεούς, καὶ κατευξάμενοι πολλὰ Ν καὶ δεινὰ Kal?
αὑτῶ-ν αὐτοὶ καὶ τῆA ς πατρίδος εἰ μὴ\ δικαίως
ἐπεξίασιν, οὕτω κατήγγελλον αὐτοῖς τὸν πόλεμον.
κωλυόντων δὲ τούτων ἢ μὴ συναινούντων, οὔτε
wu
στρατιώτῃ θεμιτὸν οὔτε βασιλεῖ Ρωμαίων ὅπλα
κινεῖνr , ἀλλὰ παρὰ \ τούτων ἔδει THY ἀρχὴν τοῦn
πολέμου δεξάμενον ὡς δικαίου τὸν ἄρχοντα, τότε
σκοπεῖν περὶ τοῦ συμφέροντος. λέγεται δὲ καὶ
τὸΝ Κελτικὸνx ἐ3κ εῖaν ο πάθ΄ ος τῇa πόλf ει γενέ/σ θαι
τού/τ ων τῶanν ἱερέων παρανομηθέντων.
ΕΝ ἔτυχον μὲ\ν γὰ\ρ οἱ « βάρ/ βαροι Κλουσίν’ ους
oO
πολιορκοῦνa τες" ἐ> πέ“ μφθη δὲ\ πρεσβευτὴςΝ Φάβ΄ ιος
ΓΛλμβουστος εἰς τὸ στρατόπεδον διαλύσεις πράξων
ὑπὲρ τῶν πολιορκουμένων. λαβὼν δὲ «ἀποκρί-
σεις οὐκ ἐπιεικεῖς καὶ πέρας σχεῖν αὑτῷ τὴν
πρεσβείαν οἰόμενος, ἐνεανιεύσατο πρὸ τῶν Κλου-
σίνων ὅπλα λαβὼν προκαλέσασθαι τὸν ἀριστεύ-
οντα τῶν βαρβάρων. τὰ μὲν οὖν τῆς μάχης
εὐτυχεῖτο καὶ καταβαλὼν ἐσκύλευσε τὸν ἄνδρα"
γνωρίσαντες δὲ οἱ Κελτοὶ πέμπουσιν εἰς Ρώμην
κήρυκα τοῦ Φαβίου κατηγοροῦντες ὡς ἐκσπόνδου
καὶ ἀπίστου καὶ ἀκατάγγελτον ἐξενηνοχότος πρὸς
αὐτοὺς πόλεμον. ἐνταῦθα τὴν μὲν σύγκλητον
οἱ Φιτιαλεῖς ἔπειθον ἐκδιδόναι τὸν ἄνδρα τοῖς
348
NUMA, χη. 3-7
parley!; and they would not suffer a hostile expedition
to be made before every hope of getting justice had
been cut off. For the Greeks call it peace when two
parties settle their quarrels by mutual conference,
and not by violence. And the Roman Fetiales often
went to those who were doing them a wrong and
made personal appeals for fair treatment; but if the
unfair treatment continued, they called the gods to
witness, invoked many dreadful evils upon themselves
and their country in case they resorted to hostilities
unjustly, and so declared war upon them. But if they
forbade it or withheld their consent, neither soldier
nor king of Rome could lawfully take up arms. War
had to begin with their verdict that it was just, and
the ruler, on receiving this verdict, must then de-
liberate on the proper way to wage it. And it is
said that the dreadful disaster which the city ex-
perienced at the hands of the Gauls was in conse-
quence of the illegal treatment of these priests.
For when the Barbarians were besieging Clusium,
Fabius Ambustus was sent from Rome to their camp
to bring about a cessation of hostilities on behalf of
the besieged. But on receiving an unseemly answer,
he thought his office of ambassador was at an end,
and committed the youthful folly of taking up arms
for the Clusians and challenging the bravest of the
Barbarians to single combat. Fabius fought suc-
cessfully, unhorsed his adversary, and stripped him of
his armour. But when the Gauls discovered who he
was, they sent a herald to Rome denouncing Fabius
for violating a truce, breaking his oath, and fighting
against them before war was formally declared. At
Rome the Fetiales tried to persuade the senate to
1 Connecting the name with fateri, fari, to speak.
349
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Κελτοῖς, καταφυγὼν δὲ ἐκεῖνος εἰς τοὺς πολλοὺς
καὶ τῷ δήμῳ σπουδάζοντι χρησάμενος διεκρού-
σατο τὴν δίκην. μετ᾽ ὀλίγον. δὲ ἐπελθόντες οἱ
Κελτοὶ τὴν Ῥώμην πλὴν τοῦ Καπιτωλίου διε-
πόρθησαν. ἀλλὰ ταῦτα μὲν ἐν τοῖς περὶ Κα-
μίλλου μᾶλλον ἀκριβοῦται.
XIII. Τοὺς δὲ Σαλίους ἱερεῖς ἐκ τοιαύτης
λέγεται συστήσασθαι προφάσεως. ἔτος ὄγδοον
αὐτοῦ βασιλεύοντος λοιμώδης νόσος περιϊοῦσα
τὴν Ἰταλίαν ἐστρόβησε καὶ τὴν Ῥώμην. ἀθυ-
μούντων δὲ τῶν ἀνθρώπων ἱστορεῖται “χαλκῆν
πέλτην ef οὐρανοῦ καταφερομένην εἰς τὰς Nopa
πεσεῖν χεῖρας. ἐπὶ δὲ αὐτῇ θαυμάσιόν τινα
λόγον λέγεσθαι ὑπὸ τοῦ βασιλέως, ὃν ‘Hyepias
Te Kal τῶν Μουσῶν πυθέσθαι. τὸ μὲν γὰρ ὅπλον
ἥκειν ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ τῆς πόλεως, καὶ δεῖν αὐτὸ
φρουρεῖσθαι γενομένων ἄλλων ἕνδεκα καὶ σχῆμα
καὶ μέγεθος καὶ μορφὴν ἐκείνῳ παραπλησίων,
ὅπως ἄπορον εἴη τῷ κλέπτῃ δι’ ὁμοιότητα τοῦ
διοπετοῦς ἐπιτυχεῖν" ἔτε δὲ χρῆναι Μούσαις
καθιερῶσαι. τὸ χωρίον ἐκεῖνο καὶ τοὺς περὶ αὐτὸ
λειμῶνας, ὅπου τὰ πολλὰ φοιτῶσαι συνδιατρί-
βουσιν αὐτῷ. “τὴν δὲ πηγὴν ἣ κατάρδει τὸ
χωρίον, ὕδωρ ἱi ερὸν ἀποδεῖξαι ταῖς Ἑστιάσι παρ-
θένοις, ὅπως λαμβάνουσαι καθ᾽ ἡμέραν ἁγνίζωσι
καὶ ῥαίνωσι τὸ ἀνάκτορον. τούτοις μὲν οὖν
μαρτυρῆσαι λέγουσι καὶ τὰ τῆς νόσου παρα-
χρῆμα παυσάμενα. τὴν δὲ πέλτην προθέντος
αὐτοῦ καὶ κελεύσαντος ἁμιλλᾶσθαι τοὺς τεχνίτας
ὑπὲρ τῆς ὁμοιότητος, τοὺς μὲν ἄλλους ἀπειπεῖν,
Οὐετούριον δὲ Μαμούριον ἕνα τῶν ἄκρων δημι-
ουργῶν οὕτως ἐφικέσθαι τῆς ἐμφερείας, καὶ
35°
NUMA, χη. 7--ΧΠι. 3
deliver Fabius into the hands of the Gauls, but he
took refuge with the multitude, and through the
favour of the populace evaded his punishment. After
a little, therefore, the Gauls came up and sacked
Rome, with the exception of the Capitol. But this
story is more fully given in my Life of Camillus.?
XIII. The priesthood of the Salii Numa is said
to have been established for the following reason.
In the eighth year of his reign a pestilence, which
traversed Italy, distracted Rome also. The story
goes that while the people were disheartened by
this, a bronze buckler fell from heaven, which came
into the hands of Numa, and a wonderful account of
it was given by the king, which he learned from
Egeria and the Muses. ‘The buckler came, he said,
for the salvation of the city, and must be carefully
preserved by making eleven others of like fashion,
size, and shape, in order that the resemblance
between them might make it difficult for a thief to
distinguish the one that fell from heaven. He said
further that the spot where it fell, and the adjacent
meadows, where the Muses usually had converse with
him, must be consecrated to them; and that the
spring which watered the spot should be declared
holy water for the use of the Vestal virgins, who
should daily sprinkle and purify their temple with
it. Moreover, they say that the truth of all this
was attested by the immediate cessation of the
pestilence. When Numa showed the buckler to the
artificers and bade them do their best to make others
like it, they all declined, except Veturius Mamurius,
a most excellent workman, who was so happy in his
imitation of it, and made all the eleven so exactly
1 Chapters xvii.—xxii.
351
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κατασκευάσαι πάσας ὁμοίας, ὥστε μηδ᾽ αὐτὸν
ἔτι τὸν Νομᾶν διαγινώσκειν. τούτων οὖν φύ-
λακας καὶ ἀμφιπόλους ἀπέδειξε τοὺς Σαλίους
ἱe ερεῖaςn. Σάλ/ ιοι δὲ\ ἐ> κλήθ/ ησαν, οὐ>χ , ὡeς ἔ” νιοι
μυθολογοῦσa ι, Σαμόθ/ ρᾳκος ἀJ νδρὸΝς ἢx Μαντινέωmeς ,
ὄ” νομα Στια λίο/ υ, πρώτ, ου τὴ\ν ἐLνeό πλιον ἐ5 κδὃι ὃδ ά/ξ αντος
ὄ” ρχησιν, α> λλὰ \ μᾶ“ λλον A> TO \ τῆaς ο5 ρχήσ7 εως αὑΕτῚ ῆςA ,
ἁλτικῆς οὔσης, ἣν ὑπορχοῦνται διαπορευόμενοι
τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν, ὅ“ ταν TA\S ἱe ερᾶ\ς πέfλ τας ἀ> ναλά/β ωσιν
ἐν τῷA Μαρτίῳ/ μηνί, φοινικοῦἴςω μὲν ἐνδεδυμένοι
χιτωνίσ/ κους, μί/τ ραις δὲSS χαλκαῖςa ἐπεζωσμένοι 69
πλατείαις καὶ κράνη χαλκᾶ φοροῦντες, ἐγχειρι-
δίοις δὲ μικροῖς τὰ ὅπλα κρούοντες. ἡ δὲ ἄλλη
τῆaς ὀρχήσεως ποδῶaν ἔργον ἐστί:, κινοῦlaν ται γὰρ
ἐπιτερπῶς, ἑλιγμούς τινας καὶ μεταβολὰς ἐν
ῥυθμῷ τάχος ἔχοντι καὶ πυκνότητα μετὰ ῥώμης
καὶ κουφότ/ ητος ἀποδιδόν/ τες.
Αὐτὰς δὲ τὰς πέλτας ἀγκύλια καλοῦσι διὰ τὸ
σχῆaμ α: κύfκs λος ya\p οὐ>κ ἔ» στιν οὐbyδ ὲ\ ἀ> ποδίδ/ ωσιν,
ὡςς πέ/λ τη, τὴἣνν πον Do/ nec’ ἀ> λλ 9 S? cion\ s4e xe
γραμμῆς ἑλικοειδοῦς, ἧς αἱ κεραῖαι καμπὰς ἔχου-
σαι καὶ συνεπιστρέφουσαι τῇ πυκνότητι πρὸς
ἀλλήλας ἀγκύλον τὸ σχῆμα ποιοῦσιν" ἢ διὰ τὸν
ἀγκῶνα περὶ ὃν περιφέρονται. ταῦτα γὰρ ὁ
Ἰόβας εἴρηκε γλιχόμενος ἐξελληνίσαι τοὔνομα.
δύναιτο δ᾽ ἂν τῆς ἀνέκαθεν φορᾶς πρῶτον ἐπώνυ-
μον γεγονέναι, καὶ τῆς ἀκέσεως τῶν νοσούντων,
καὶ τῆς τῶν , αὐχμῶν λύσεως, ἔτι δὲ τῆς τῶν
δεινῶν ἀνασχέσεως, καθ᾽ ὃ καὶ τοὺς Διοσκούρους
352
NUMA, x11. 3-6
like it, that not even Numa himself could distinguish
them. For the watch and care of these bucklers,
then, he appointed the priesthood of the Salii. Now
the Salii were so named, not, as some tell the tale,
from a man of Samothrace or Mantinea, named Salius,
who first taught the dance in armour; but rather
from the leaping! which characterized the dance it-
self. This dance they perform when they carry the
sacred bucklers through the streets of the city in the
month of March, clad in purple tunics, girt with
broad belts of bronze, wearing bronze helmets on
their heads, and carrying small daggers with which
they strike the shields. But the dance is chiefly a
matter of step; for they move gracefully, and
execute with vigour and agility certain shifting
convolutions, in quick and oft-recurring rhythm.
The bucklers themselves are called “ancilia,”
from their shape; for this is not round, nor yet
completely oval, like that of the regular shield, but
has a curving indentation, the arms of which are
bent back and united with each other at top and
bottom; this makes the shape “ancylon,” the Greek
for curved. Or, they are named from the elbow on
which they are carried, which, in Greek, is “ ankon.”
This is what Juba says, who is bent on deriving the
name from the Greek, But the name may come
from the Greek “anekathen,’ inasmuch as the
original shield fell from on high; or from “akesis,’
because it healed those who were sick of the plague ;
or from “ auchmon lysis,” because it put an end to the
drought ; or, further, from “anaschesis,” because it
brought a cessation of calamities, just as Castor and
Pollux were called Anakes by the Athenians; if,
1 The Latin “‘salire,” to leap.
$53
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Ν Avaxas ᾽ ᾿Αθηναῖοa ι προσηγόρ/ ευσαν, εἴν γε δεῖa πρὸς\
τὴν Ἑλληνικὴν διάλεκτον ἐξάγειν τοὔlνd ομα.
ΤῷA δὲ Mapoupio, λέ/γ ουσι μισθὸ\ν γενέ/σ θαι τῆnaς
τέχνης ἐκείνης μνήuμg ην τινὰ\ δι’> ) ῳγδὼ ῆαςὶ ὑς πὸ Ν τῶ“ν
Σαλίων ἅμα THan πυρρίχῃ διαπεραινομέν/η ς. οἱe δὲMS
ov> Οὐε> τούρVaι ον Μαμούρ/ι ον ei>.v at , φασι τὸΝν aLoOoO-
μενον, ἀλλὰ οὐετέρεμ μεμορία“ μ, ὅty περ ἐστί,’ πα-
λαιὰν μνήμην.
XIV. ᾿Επεὶ δὲ διεκόσμησε τὰΝς ἱερωσύνif.α ς, ἐδεί3-
ματο πλησίον τοῦn a τῆnς € Kotiaid s ἱe εροῦn r TH\Y καλου-
μέ/ν ην «ς' Ῥηγί/α ν, οἷeόr ν τι βασίλ, ειον οἴv κημα καὶ \ τὸ\
πλεῖaσ τον αὐτόθ/ ι τοῦa A χρόν/ ου διέ/ τριβεν ἱερουργῶa“ν
ἢ διδάσκων τοὺς ἱερεῖa ς ἢ πρὸς ἐννοί/ᾳ τινὶ τῶaν
θεί, ων πρὸς\ αὑeτs ὸνN σχολάζ΄ ων. οἰΣκΕῈίΨ αν δ᾽2 εἶ“3 χεν
ἑe τέ/ρ αν περὶ \ τὸ\ν Κυρίν/ ου λόUφd ον, ἧ= ς ἔΜ τι νῦ“ν τὸΝν
τύπον ἐπιδεικνύουσιν. ἐν δὲ ταῖς προπομπαῖς
καὶ ὅλως τῶν ἱερέων ταῖς πομπαῖς προηγοῦντο
κήρυκες ἀνὰ τὴν πόλιν ἐλινύειν κελεύοντες καὶ
τὰ ἔργα καταπαύοντεςς. ὡς yap φασι τοὺς
Πυθαγορικοὺς οὐκ ἐᾶν ἐκ παρόδου προσκυνεῖν
καὶ. προσεύχ2 εσθαι τοῖ-ς“ θεοῖaς , ἀ>λ λ᾽ ? οἴ» κοθεν εὐ> θὺ\ς
ἐπὶ τοῦτο γνώμῃ παρεσκευασμένους βαδίζειν,
οὕτως @eto Νομᾶς χρῆναι, τοὺς πολίτας μήτε
ἀκούειν τι τῶν θείων μήτε ὁρᾶν ἐν παρέργῳ καν
ἀμελῶς, ἀλλὰ σχολὴν ἄγοντας ἀπὸ τῶν ἄχλωὶ
καὶ προσέχοντας τὴν διάνοιανὡ ς πράξει μεγίστῃ
τῇ περὶ τὴν εὐσέβειαν, ψόφων τε καὶ πατάγων
καὶ στεναγμῶν, καὶ ὅσα τοιαῦτα τοῖς ἀναγκαίοις
καὶ βαναύσοις πόνοις ἕπεται, καθαρὰς τὰς ὁδοὺς
Talas ἱς ερουργία/ ις παρέχ/ οντας. ὧν ἴχνος τι μέ/χ ρι
354
NUMA, xi. 6—xIv. 2
that is, we are bound to derive the name from the
Greek.
We are told that Mamertius was rewarded for his
wonderful art by having his name mentioned in a
song which the Salii sing as they perform their war-
dance. Some, however, say that the song does not
commemorate Veturius Mamurius, but “ veterem
memoriam,’ that is to say, ancient remembrance.
XIV. After Numa had thus established and
regulated the priestly orders, he built, near the
temple of Vesta, the so-called Regia, or royal house.
Here he passed most of his time, performing sacred
functions, or teaching the priests, or engaged
in the quiet contemplation of divine things. He
also had another house on the Quirinal hill, the site
of which is still pointed out. At all public and
solemn processions of the priests, heralds were sent
on before through the city, bidding the people make
holiday, and putting a stop to all labour. For, just
as it is said that the Pythagoreans do not allow men
to worship and pray to their gods cursorily and by
the way, but would have them go from their homes
directly to this office, with their minds prepared for
it, so Numa thought that his citizens ought neither
to hear nor see any divine service while they were
occupied with other matters and therefore unable to
pay attention. They shculd rather be free from all
distractions and devote their thoughts to the
religious ceremony as a matter of the highest
importance. They should also rid their streets of
noise and clatter and clamour, and all such accom-
paniments of menial and manual labour, and clear
them for the sacred ceremonies. And the Romans
still preserve some traces of this earlier feeling.
359
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
νῦν διασώζοντες, ὅταν ἄρχων πρὸς ὄρνισιν ἢ θυ-
σίαις διατρίβῃ, βοῶσιν ““Ὅκ aye’ σημαίνει δὲ ἡ
φωνὴ “Τοῦτο πρᾶσσε,᾽ συνεπιστρέφουσα καὶ
κατακοσμοῦσα τοὺς προστυγχάνοντας.
Ἦν δὲ καὶ τῶν ἄλλων παραγγελμάτων αὐτοῦ
πολλὰ τοῖς Πυθαγορικοῖς ἐοικότα. ὡς γὰρ ἐκεῖ-
νοι παρήνουν ἐπὶ χοίνικος μὴ καθῆσθαι, καὶ
μαχαίρᾳ πῦρ μὴ σκαλεύειν, καὶ βαδίζοντας εἰς
ἀποδημίας μὴ μεταστρέφεσθαι, καὶ τοῖς μὲν
οὐρανίοις περισσὰ θύειν, ἄρτια δὲ τοῖς χθονίοις,
ὧν ἑκάστου τὴν διάνοιαν ἀπεκρύπτοντο πρὸς
τοὺς πολλούς, οὕτως ἔνια τῶν Nopa πατρίων
ἀπόρρητον ἔχει τὸν λόγον" οἷον τὸ μὴ σπένδειν
θεοῖς ἐξ ἀμπέλων ἀτμήτων μηδὲ θύειν ἄτερ
ἀλφίτων" καὶ τὸ προσκυνεῖν περιστρεφομένους
καὶ τὸ καθῆσθαι προσκυνήσαντας. τὰ μὲν οὖν
πρῶτα δύο τὴν γῆς ἐξημέρωσιν ἔοικε διδάσκειν,
ὡς μόριον εὐσεβείας οὖσαν' ἡ δὲ περιστροφὴ τῶν
προσκυνούντων λέγεται μὲν ἀπομίμησις εἶναι τῆς
τοῦ κόσμου περιφορᾶς, δόξειε δ᾽ ἂν μᾶλλον ὁ
προσκυνῶν, ἐπεὶ πρὸς ἕω τῶν ἱερῶν βλεπόντων
ἀπέστραπται τὰς ἀνατολάς, μεταβάλλειν ἑαυτὸν
ἐνταῦθα καὶ περιστρέφειν ἐπὶ τὸν θεόν, κύκλον
ποιῶν καὶ συνάπτων τὴν ἐπιτελείωσιν τῆς εὐχῆς
δι’ ἀμφοῖν" εἰ μὴ νὴ Δία τοῖς Αἰγυπτίοις τροχοῖς
ζι
αἰνίττεταί τι καὶ διδάσκει παραπλήσιον ἡ μετα- 70
βολὴ τοῦ σχήματος, ὡς οὐδενὸς ἑστῶτος τῶν
ἀνθρωπίνων, ἀλλ᾽ ὅπως ἂν στρέφῃ καὶ ἀνελίττῃ
τὸν βίον ἡμῶν ὁ θεός, ἀγαπᾶν καὶ δέχεσθαι
προσῆκον. τὸ δὲ καθέζεσθαι προσκυνήσαντας
οἰωνισμὸν εἶναι λέγουσι τοῦ βεβαιότητα ταῖς
356
NUMA, xiv. 2-5
When a magistrate is busy taking auspices or sacri-
ficing, the people cry “Hoc age,’ which means
“Mind this,” and helps to make the bystanders
attentive and orderly.
Many of his other precepts also resembled those
of the Pythagoreans. For instance, the Pythagoreans
said: “Don’t use a quart-measure as ἃ seat”;
“ Don’t poke the fire with a sword’; “ When you set
out for foreign parts, don’t turn back” ; and “To
the celestial gods sacrifice an odd number, but an
even number to the terrestrial”’; and the meaning of
all these precepts they would keep hidden from the
vulgar. So in some of Numa’s rules the meaning is
hidden ; as, for instance, “ Don’t offer to the gods
wine from unpruned vines’’; “Don’t make a
sacrifice without meal”; “Turn round as you
worship’; and “Sit down after worship.” The
first two rules would seem to teach that the sub-
jection of the earth is a part of religion; and the
worshippers’ turning round is said to be an imitation
of the rotary motion of the universe; but I would
rather think that the worshipper who enters a
temple, since temples face the east and the Sun,
has his back towards the sunrise, and therefore
turns himself half round in that direction, and then
wheels fully round to face the god of the temple,
thus making a complete circle, and linking the
fulfilment of his prayer with both deities; unless,
indeed, this change of posture, like the Aegyptian
wheels, darkly hints and teaches that there is no
stability in human affairs, but that we must accept
contentedly whatever twists and turns our lives may
receive from the Deity. And as for the sitting down
after worship, we are told that it is an augury of the
357
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
εὐχαῖς Kal διαμονὴν τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς ἐπιγίνεσθαι.
λέγουσι δὲ καὶ πράξεων διορισμὸν εἶναι τὴν
ἀνάπαυσιν: ὡς οὖν τῇ προτέρᾳ πράξει πέρας
ἐπιτιθέντας καθέζεσθαι παρὰ τοῖς θεοῖς, ἵνα
ἑτέρας πάλιν ἀρχὴν παρ᾽ ἐκείνων λάβωσι. δύνα-
ται δὲ καὶ τοῦτο τοῖς εἰρημένοις ὁμολογεῖν, ἐθί-
ζοντος ἡμᾶς τοῦ νομοθέτου μὴ ποιεῖσθαι τὰς πρὸς
τὸ θεῖον ἐντεύξεις ἐν ἀσχολίᾳ καὶ παρέργως οἷον
σπεύδοντας, ἀλλ᾽ ὅταν χρόνον ἔχωμεν καὶ σχολὴν
ἄγωμεν.
XV. Ἔκ δὲ τῆς τοιαύτης παιδαγωγίας πρὸς
τὸ θεῖον οὕτως ἡ πόλις ἐγεγόνει χειροήθης καὶ
κατατεθαμβημένη τὴν τοῦ Νομᾶ δύναμιν, ὥστε
μύθοις ἐοικότας τὴν ἀτοπίαν λόγους παρα-
δέχεσθαι, καὶ νομίζειν μηδὲν ἄπιστον εἶναι μηδὲ
ἀμήχανον ἐκείνου βουληθέντος. λέγεται γοῦν
ποτε καλέσας ἐπὶ τὴν τράπεζαν οὐκ ὀλίγους τῶν
πολιτῶν, σκεύη τε φαῦλα καὶ δεῖπνον εὐτελὲς
πάνυ προθέσθαι καὶ δημοτικόν' ἀρξαμένων δὲ
δειπνεῖν ἐμβαλὼν λόγον ὡς ἡ θεὸς ἡ σύνεστιν
ἥκοι πρὸς αὐτόν, αἰφνίδιον ἐπιδεῖξαι τόν τε οἶκον
ἐκπτωμάτων πλήρη πολυτελῶν καὶ τὰς τραπέζας
ὄψων τε παντοδαπῶν καὶ παρασκευῆς δαψιλοῦς
γεμούσας. πᾶσαν δὲ ὑπερβέβληκεν ἀτοπίαν
τὸ ὑπὲρ τῆς τοῦ Διὸς ὁμιλίας ἱστορούμενον.
μυθολογοῦσι γὰρ εἰς τὸν ᾿Αβεντῖνον λόφον οὔπω
μέρος ὄντα τῆς πόλεως οὐδὲ συνοικούμενον, ἀλλ᾽
ἔχοντα πηγάς τε δαψιλεῖς ἐν αὑτῷ καὶ νάπας
σκιεράς, φοιτᾶν δύο δαίμονας, Πῖκον καὶ Φαῦνον"
οὺς τὰ μὲν ἄλλα Σατύρων ἄν τις ἢ Πανῶν γένει
προσεικάσειε, δυνάμει δὲ φαρμάκων καὶ δεινότητι
τῆς περὶ τὰ θεῖα γοητείας λέγονται ταὐτὰ τοῖς
358
NUMA, xiv. 5-xv. 3
acceptance of the worshipper’s prayers and the
duration of his blessings. We are also told, that, as
different acts are separated by an interval of rest, so
the worshipper, having completed one act, sits down
in the presence of the gods, in order that he may
begin another with their blessing. But this, too, can
be brought into agreement with what was said
above: the lawgiver is trying to accustom us not to
make our petitions to the Deity when we are busied
with other matters and in a hurry, as it were, but
when we have time and are at leisure.
XV. By such training and schooling in religious
matters the city became so tractable, and stood in
such awe of Numa’s power, that they accepted his
stories, though fabulously strange, and thought
nothing incredible or impossible which he wished
them to believe or do. At any rate, the story goes
that he once invited a large number of the citizens to
his table, and set before them mean dishes and a
very simple repast; but just as they began to eat, he
surprised them by saying that the goddess with whom
he consorted was come to visit him, and lo, on a
sudden, the room was full of costly beakers and the
tables were laden with all sorts of meats and
abundant furniture. But nothing can be so strange
as what is told about his conversation with Jupiter.
When the Aventine hill—so runs the tale—was not
yet a part of the city nor even inhabited, but abounded
in springs and shady dells, two demi-gods, Picus and
Faunus, made it their haunt. In other ways these
divinities might be likened to Satyrs or Pans, but
they are said to have used powerful drugs and
practised clever incantations, and to have traversed
359
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
id’ Ἑλλήνων προσαγορευθεῖσιν ᾿Ιδαίοις Δακτύ-
λοις σοφιζόμενοι περιϊέναι τὴν ᾿Ιταλίαν. τούτους
φασὶ χειρώσασθαι τὸν Νομᾶν, οἴνῳ καὶ μέλιτι
κεράσαντα τὴν κρήνην ἀφ᾽ ἧς ἔπινον συνήθως.
ληφθέντας δὲ πολλὰς μὲν ἰδέας τρέπεσθαι καὶ
μετεκδύεσθαι τὴν αὑτῶν Geshe ἀλλόκοτα φάσ-
ματα καὶ φοβερὰ τῆς ὄψεως προβαλλομένους:
ἐπεὶ δὲ ἔἔ γνωσαν ἑαλωκότες ἰσχυρὰν καὶ ἄφυκτον
ἅλωσιν, ἄλλα τε προθεσπίσαι πολλὰ τῶν μεὰλ-
λόντων καὶ τὸν ἐπὶ τοῖς κεραυνοῖς ἐκδιδάξαι
καθαρμόν, ὃς ποιεῖται μέχρι νῦν διὰ κρομμύων
καὶ τριχῶν καὶ μαινίδων. ἔνιοι δὲ οὐ τοὺς
δαίμονάς φασιν ὑποθέσθαι τὸν καθαρμὸν, ἀλλ᾽
ἐκείνους μὲν καταγαγεῖν τὸν Δία μαγεύσαντας,
τὸν δὲ θεὸν ὀργιζόμενον τῷ Nowa προστάσσειν
ὡς χρὴ γενέσθαι τὸν καθαρμὸν κεφαλαῖς" ὑπο-
λαβόντος δὲ τοῦ Νομᾶ, “ κρομμύων; " εἰπεῖν,
“ ἀνθρώπων" τὸν δὲ αὖθις ἐκτρέποντα τὸ τοῦ
προστάγματος δεινὸν ἐπερέσθαι, “θριξίν;" ἀπο-
κριναμένου δὲ τοῦ Atos,‘ " ἐμψύχοις," ἐπαγαγεῖν
τὸν Νομᾶν, “ μαινίσι; ταῦτα λέγειν ὑπὸ τῆς
᾿Ηγερίας δεδιδαγμένον. καὶ τὸν μὲν θεὸν ἀπελ-
θεῖν ἵλεω γενόμενον, τὸν δὲ τόπον ᾿Ιλίκιον ἀπ᾽
ἐκείνου προσαγορευθῆναι καὶ τὸν καθαρμὸν οὕτω
συντελεῖσθαι. ταῦτα μὲν οὖν τὰ μυθώδη καὶ
γελοῖα τὴν τῶν τότε ἀνθρώπων ἐπιδείκνυται
διάθεσιν πρὸς τὸ θεῖον, ἣν ὁ ἐθισμὸς αὐτοῖς
ἐνεποίησεν. αὐτὸν δὲ τὸν Νομᾶν οὕτω φασὶν εἰς
τὸ θεῖον ἀνηρτῆσθαι ταῖς ἐλπίσιν, ὥστε καὶ
προσαγγελίας αὐτῷ ποτε γενομένης ὡς ἐπέρ-
neve πολέμιοι, μειδιᾶσαι Kal εἰπεῖν" “᾿Εγὼ δὲ
ύω.
360
NUMA, xv. 3-6
Italy playing the same tricks as the so-called Idaean
Dactyli! of the Greeks. These demi-gods Numa is
said to have caught, by mixing wine and honey with
the water of the spring from which they were wont
to drink. When captured, they dropped their own
forms and assumed many different shapes, presenting
hideous and dreadful appearances. But when they
perceived that they were fast caught and could not
escape, they foretold to Numa many things that
would come to pass, and taught him besides the charm
against thunder and lightning, which is still practised
with onions, hair, and sprats. Some, however, say
that it was not the imps themselves who imparted
the charm, but that they called Jupiter down from
heaven by their magic, and that this deity angrily
told Numa that he must charm thunder and lightning
with “heads.” “Of onions?” asked Numa, filling
out the phrase. “Of men,” said Jupiter. Thereupon
Numa, trying once more to avert the horror of the
prescription, asked, “with hair?’’ “ Nay,’ answered
Jupiter, “with living—” “sprats?’’ added Numa, as
he had been taught by Egeria to say. Then the god
returned to heaven in a gracious mood,—* hileos,” as
the Greeks say,—and the place was called Ilicium
from this circumstance; and that is the way the
charm was perfected. These stories, fabulous and
ridiculous as they are, show us the attitude which
the men of that time, from force of custom, took
towards the gods. And Numa himself, as they say,
had such implicit confidence in the gods, that once,
when a message was brought to him that enemies
were coming up against the city, he smiled and said:
“ But I am sacrificing.”
1 Fabulous gnomes associated with the Mount Ida οἱ
Phrygia and Crete.
361
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
XVI. Πρῶτον δέ φασι καὶ Πίστεως καὶ Tép-
μονος ἱερὸν ἱδρύσασθαι. καὶ τὴν μὲν Πίστιν
ὅρκον ἀποδεῖξαι Ῥωμαίοις μέγιστον, ᾧ χρώμενοι
μέχρι νῦν διατελοῦσιν: ὁ δὲ Τέρμων ὅρος ἄν τις
εἴη, καὶ θύουσιν αὐτῷ δημοσίᾳ καὶ ἰδίᾳ κατὰ
τοὺς τῶν ἀγρῶν περιορισμούς, νῦν μὲν ἔμψυχα,
τὸ παλαιὸν δὲ ἀναίμακτος ἦν ἡ θυσία, Νομᾷ @
φιλοσοφήσαντος ὡς χρὴ τὸν ὅριον θεὸν εἰρήνης
φύλακα καὶ δικαιοσύνης μάρτυν ὄντα φόνου
καθαρὸν εἶναι. δοκεῖ δὲ καὶ ὅλως οὗτος ὁρίσαι
τὴν χώραν ὁ βασιλεύς, Ῥωμύλου μὴ βουλη-
θέντος ἐξομολογήσασθαι τῷ μέτρῳ τοῦ οἰκείου
τὴν ἀφαίρεσιν τοῦ ἀλλοτρίου" δεσμὸν γὰρ εἶναι
τῆς δυνάμεως τὸν ὅρον, ἂν φυλάττηται, μὴ
φυλαττόμενον δὲ τῆς ἀδικίας ἔλεγχον. οὐ μὴν
οὐδὲ ἣἢ ν δαψιλὴς χώρα τῇ πόλει κατ᾽ ἀρχάς, ἀλλὰ
τὴν πολλὴν αἰχμῇ προσεκτήσατο Ῥωμύλος: καὶ
ταύτην πᾶσαν ὁ Νομᾶς ἐένειμε τοῖς ἀπόροις
τῶν πολιτῶν, ὡς ἀνάγκην τῆς ἀδικίας ἀφαιρῶν
τὴν ἀπορίαν, καὶ τρέπων ἐπὶ γεωργίαν τὸν δῆμον
ἅμα τῇ χώρᾳ συνεξημερούμενον. οὐδὲν γὰρ ἄλλο
τῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων οὕτως ἔρωτα δριμὺν εἰρήνης
ἐργάζεται καὶ ταχὺν ὡς ὁ ἀπὸ γῆς βίος, ἐν ᾧ
καὶ τῆς πολεμικῆς εὐτολμίας τὸ μὲν ὑπερμαχη-
τικὸν τοῦ οἰκείου διαμένει καὶ πάρεστι, τὸ δὲ εἰς
ἀδικίαν καὶ πλεονεξίαν ἀνειμένον ἐκκέκοπται.
διὸ καὶ τὴν γεωργίαν ὁ Νομᾶς οἷον εἰρήνης
φίλτρον ἐμμίξας τοῖς πολίταις καὶ μᾶλλον ὡς
ἠθοποιὸν Ὧι πλουτοποιὸν ἀγαπήσας τέχνην, εἰς
μέρη τὴν χώραν διεῖλεν, ἃπ άγους προσηγόρευσε,
καὶ καθ᾽ ἕκαστον ἐπισκόπους ἔταξε καὶ περι-
262
NUMA, xvi. 1-4
XVI. He was also the first, they say, to build
temples to Faith and Terminus; and he taught the
Romans their most solemn oath by Faith, which they
still continue to use. Terminus signifies boundary,
and to this god they make public and private sacri-
fices where their fields are set off by boundaries; of
living victims nowadays, but anciently the sacrifice
was a bloodless one, since Numa reasoned that the god
of boundaries was a guardian of peace and a witness
of just dealing, and should therefore be clear from
slaughter. And itis quite apparent that it was
this king who set bounds to the territory of the
city, for Romulus was unwilling to acknowledge, by
measuring off his own, how much he had taken away
from others. He knew that a boundary, if observed,
fetters lawless power; and if not observed, convicts
of injustice. And indeed the city’s territory was not
extensive at first, but Romulus acquired most of it
later with the spear. ΑἹ] this was distributed by
Numa among the indigent citizens. He wished to
remove the destitution which drives men to wrong-
doing, and to turn the people to agriculture, that
they might be subdued and softened along with the
soil they tilled. For there is no other occupation
which produces so keen and quick a relish for peace
as that of a farmer’s life, where so much of the
warrior’s daring as prompts a man to fight for his own,
is always preserved, while the warrior’s licence to in-
dulge in rapacity and injustice is extirpated. Numa,
therefore, administering agriculture to his citizens as
a sort of peace-potion, and well pleased with the art
as fostering character rather than wealth, divided
the city’s territory into districts, to which he gave
the name of “pagi,” and in each of them he set
363
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πόλ, ους. ἔΜ στι &3 ὅ“ τε Kal \ αὐ>τ ὸς\ ἐb]φ ορῶAν καὶ \
τεκμαιρόμ’ ενος ἀπὸ\ τῶlaνl ἔργων τοὺς τρόπους τῶaν
πολιτῶaνA τοὺς μὲν εἰς τιμὰ\ς Kal πί/σ τεις ἀνῆaγA ε,
τοὺς\ δὲ\ ῥe ᾳθύ4μ ους Kalἣ ν ἀ’ μελεῖςA ψέ(γ4 ων καὶ Ν κακί/ζ ων
ἐσωφρόνι/ ζε.
XVII. Τῶν δὲ ἄλλων αὐτοῦ πολιτευμάτων ἡ
κατὰ τέχνας διανομὴA τοῦn πλήθους μάλιστα
θαυμάζεται. τῆAς yap πό/λ εως ἐκ δυεῖaνl γενῶfνal ,
ὥσπερ εἴρηται, συνεστάναι δοκούσης, διεστώσης
δὲ\ μᾶa λλον καὶ \ μηδενὶ\ τρό/ πῳ μιᾶaς γενέ,σ θαι βου-
λομέν/ ης μηδὲN οἷKaο ν ἐ> ξαλεῖa ψαι τὴ\ν ἑe τερό, τητα Kal \
διαφοράν/, ἀ’ λλὰ A συγκρούσv4ε ις ἀ’ παύσfiτ ους καὶ KN φι-
λονεικίας τῶν μερῶν ἐχούσης, διανοηθεὶς ὅτι καὶ
TO“V σωμάτων τὰ φύσ/ ει δύσμικτα Kal σκληρὰ
καταθραύοντες καὶ διαιροῦντες ἀναμιγνύουσιν,
ὑς πὸ Ν μικρό/τ ητος ἀ3 λλήλ, οις συμβαίν7]ο ντα μᾶaλ λον,
ἔγνω κατατεμεῖνA τομὰς πλείο, νας TO σύμπαν πλῆ-A
θος" ἐ9κ δὲ\ τού,τ ων εἰ᾽ς ἑξτὺνέ ρας ἐ, μβαλὼν\ διαφορὰς\
τὴ\ν πρώτην ἐκείνην Kal μεγάλην ἀφανίσαι ταῖaς
ἐλάττοσιν ἐνδιασπαρεῖσαν. ἣν δὲ ἡ διανομὴ
κατὰ N Tas τέ/χ νας, αὐλητῶνA , χρυσοχόω/ ν, TEKTO-
νων, βαφέω/ ν, σκυτοτόμf ων, σκυτοδεψῶνal, χαλκέω, ν,
κεραμέω/ ν. τὰς δὲ λοιπὰς τέχνας εἰς ταὐτὸ συν-
αγαγὼν ἕν αὐτῶν ἐκ πασῶν ἀπέδειξε σύστημα.
κοινωνία/ ς δὲ Kal συνόδ, ους Kal θεῶAν τιμὰς ἀ’ πο-
δοὺς ἑκάστῳ γέν/ ει πρεπούσας, τό/τ ε πρῶaτ ον ἐκ
τῆaς πόλεως ἀνεῖλε TO\ λέlaγ εσθαι Kal νομίζεσθαι
τοὺς\ μὲ\ν Σαβίν,ο υς, τοὺς\ δὲN ES Ῥωμαίο/υ ς, καὶ x τοὺς\
364
NUMA, xvi. 4-xvil. 3
overseers and patrols. But sometimes he would
inspect them in person, and judging of the charac-
ters of the citizens from the condition of their farms,
would advance some to positions of honour and
trust; while others, who were indolent and careless,
he would chide and reproach, and so try to make
them sensible.
XVII. But of all his measures, the one most
admired was his distribution of the people into groups
according to their trades or arts. For the city was
supposed to consist of two tribes, as has been said,}
although it had no consistency, but was rather divided
into two tribes, and utterly refused to become united,
or to blot out its diversities and differences. On the
contrary, it was filled with ceaseless collisions and
contentions between its component parts. Numa,
therefore, aware that hard substances which will not
readily mingle may be crushed and pulverized, and
then more easily mix and mingle with each other-
owing to the smallness of their particles, determined
to divide the entire body of the people into a greater
number of divisions, and so, by merging it in other
distinctions, to obliterate the original and great dis-
tinction, which would be lost among the lesser ones.
He distributed them, accordingly, by arts and trades,
into musicians, goldsmiths, carpenters, dyers, leather-
workers, curriers, braziers, and potters. The remain-
ing trades he grouped together, and made one body
out of all who belonged to them. He also appointed
social gatherings and public assemblies and rites of
worship befitting each body. And thus, at last, he
banished from the city the practice of speaking and
thinking of some citizens as Sabines, and of others
1 Chapter ii. 4f,
VOL. I, n 365
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μὲν Τατίου, τοὺς δὲ Ρωμύλου πολίτας, ὥστε THY
διαίρεσιν εὐαρμοστίαν καὶ ἀνάμιξιν πάντων γε-
νέσθαι πρὸς πάντας.
᾿Επαινεῖται δὲ τῶν πολιτικῶν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὸ
περὶ τὸν νόμον διόρθωμα τὸν διδόντα τοῖς πατρά-
σι τοὺς παῖδας πιπράσκειν, ὑπεξελομένου τοὺς
γεγαμηκότας, εἰ τοῦ “πατρὸς ἐπαινοῦντος καὶ
κελεύοντος ὁ γάμος γένοιτο. δεινὸν γὰρ ἡγεῖτο
τὴν ὡς ἐλευθέρῳ γεγαμημένην γυναῖκα δούλῳ
συνοικεῖν.
XVIII, “Hato δὲ καὶ τῆς περὶ τὸν οὐρανὸν
πραγματείας οὔτε ἀκριβῶς οὔτε παντάπασιν
ἀθεωρήτως. Ῥωμύλου. γὰρ βασιλεύοντος ἀλό-
γως ἐχρῶντο τοῖς μησὶ καὶ ἀτάκτως, τοὺς μὲν
οὐδὲ εἴκοσιν ἡμερῶν, τοὺς δὲ πέντε καὶ τριάκοντα,
τοὺς δὲ πλειόνων λογιζόμενοι, τῆς δὲ γινομένης
ἀνωμαλίας περὶ τὴν σελήνην καὶ τὸν ἥλιον
ἔννοιαν οὐκ ἔχοντες, ἀλλ᾽ ἕν φυλάττοντες μόνον,
ὅπως ἑξήκοντα καὶ τριακοσίων ἡμερῶν ὁ ἐνιαυτὸς
ἔσται. Νομᾶς δὲ τὸ παράλλαγμα THS ἀνωμαλίας
ἡμερῶν ἕνδεκα γίνεσθαι λογιζόμενος, ὡς τοῦ μὲν
σεληνιακοῦ τριακοσίας πεντήκοντα τέσσαρας
ἔχοντος ἡμέρας, τοῦ δὲ ἡλιακοῦ τριακοσίας ἑξή-
κοντα πέντε, τὰς ἕνδεκα ταύτας ἡμέρας διπλα-
σιάξων ἐπήγαγε παρ᾽ ἐνιαυτὸν ἐπὶ τῷ Φεβρου- 12
αρίῳ μηνὶ τὸν ἐμβόλιμον, ὑὑ πὸ Ῥωμαίων _Mepen-
Sivov καλούμενον, εἴκοσι. καὶ δυοῖν ἡμερῶν ὄντα.
καὶ τοῦτο μὲν αὐτῷ τὸ ἴαμα τῆς ἀνωμαλίας μει-
ζόνων ἔμελλεν ἐἰ αμάτων δεήσεσθαι.
Merexivnce δὲ καὶ τὴν τάξιν τῶν μηνῶν' τὸν
γὰρ “Μάρτιον πρῶτον ὄντα τρίτον ἔταξε, πρῶτον
δὲ τὸν ᾿Ιανουάριον, ὃς ἣν ἑνδέκατος ἐπὶ Ῥωμύλου,
366
NUMA, xvii. 2-ανπι. 3
as Romans; or of some as subjects of Tatius, and
others of Romulus, so that his division resulted in a
harmonious blending of them all together.
Praise is also given to that measure of his whereby
the law permitting fathers to sell their sons was
amended. He made an exception of married sons,
provided they had married with the consent and
approval of their fathers. For he thought it a hard
thing that a woman who had married a man whom
she thought free, should find herself living with a
slave.
XVIII. He applied himself, also, to the adjustment
of the calendar, not with exactness, and yet not alto-
gether without careful observation. For during the
reign of Romulus, they had been irrational and irre-
gular in their fixing of the months, reckoning some
at less than twenty days, some at thirty-five, and
some at more; they had no idea of the inequality in
the annual motions of the sun and moon, but held
to this principle only, that the year should consist of
three hundred and sixty days. But Numa, estimat-
ing the extent of the inequality at eleven days, since
the lunar year had three hundred and fifty-four days,
but the solar year three hundred and sixty-five,
doubled these eleven days, and every other year in-
serted after the month of February the intercalary
month cajled Mercedinus by the Romans, which
consisted of twenty-twodays. This correction of the
inequality which he made was destined to require
other and greater corrections in the future.
He also changed the order of the months. March,
which had been first, he made the third month, and
January, which had beenthe eleventh under Romulus,
367
PLUTARCR’S LIVES
δωδέκατος δὲ καὶ τελευταῖος ὁ Φεβρουάριος, ᾧ
νῦν δευτέρῳ χρῶνται. πολλοὶ δέ εἰσιν οἱ καὶΓΝ
a
προστεθῆναι τούτους ὑπὸ Νομᾶ τοὺς μῆνας λέ-
γουσι, τόν, τε ᾽ ᾿Ιανουάριον καὶ τὸν Φεβρουάριον,
ἐξ ἀρχῆAς δὲ χρῆaσ θαι δέκα μόνον εἰς τὸν ἐνιαυτόν, ,
ὡeς ἔΕΣν ιοι τῶfaνl βαρβάρ, ων τρισί,, καὶ \ τῶaν « “ΕλλήΥν̓ ων
᾽ Αρκάδες μὲν τέσσαρσιν, ἕε ξ δὲ ᾿Ακαρνᾶν΄- ες, Aiyu-
πτίο» ις δὲ μηνιαῖοa ς ἦν ὁi e ἐνιαυτός, εἶτα τετρά-
μηνος, ὥσς φασι. διὸ καὶ νεωτάτην χώραν οἶ-
κοῦντες ἀρχαιότατοι δοκοῦσιν εἶναι καὶ πλῆθος
ἀμήχανον ἐτῶAν ἐπὶ ταῖςn γενεαλογία, ις καταφέρου-
σιν, ἅτε δὴ τοὺς μῆνας εἰς ἐτῶν ἀριθμὸν τιθέμενοι.
XIX. «ςῬ ωμαῖοa ι δὲ ὅτε μὲν δέκα μῆnνa ας εἰς τὸ\ν
ἐνιαυτὸν ἔταττον, οὐ δώδεκα, τεκμήριον ἡ τοῦ
τελευταίο, υ προσηγορία/: δέκατον yap αὐτὸν ἄχρι
νῦaν καλοῦσanι ν: ὅτι δὲ τὸ\ν Μάρτιον πρῶτa ον, ἡ
τάξις: τὸν γὰρ ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου πέμπτον ἐκάλουν
πέ,μὔ πτον: ἕ-“ κτον δὲΝ τὸ\ν ἕ¢ κτον Kal x τῶAν ἄ7 λλων
ἑξῆa ς ὁς μοί/ω ς ἕκαστον, ἐπεὶ τὸν ᾿Ιά, νουάριον καὶ
to\v Φεβρουάρ, ιον πρὸ\ tovA Μαρτίο, υ τιθεμέν, οις
συνέiβF αινεν αὐτοῖςa τὸδνι εἰρημένον μῆaν α πέμπτον
μὲν ὀνομάζειν, ἕβδομον δὲ ἀριθμεῖν. ἄλλως δὲ
Kal Ν λό’γ ον εἶ> χε τὸ\ν Μάρ/ τιον Μ “Apet καθιερωμέν/ ον
ὑigπ ὸ Ν τοῦπ ὰ δ. Ῥωμύλ7 ου πρῶaτn ον ὀ’ νομάζ,, εσθαι" δεύ΄ὔτ ερον
δὲ τὸν > ᾿Απρί/λ λιον, ἐπώνυμον ὄ5 ντα τῆaς ᾿Αφροδί-
της, ἐν ᾧv2 θύ’ο υσί la τε THA θεῷna Kal ταῖςa καλάνδαις
αἱ γυναῖκa ες ἐστεφανωμένfα ι μυρσίν/ ῃ λούονται.
τινὲς δὲ οὐ διὰ\ τὴ\ν ᾽ ᾿Αφροδί7τ ην τὸν ᾿Απρίλλιόν
368
NUMA, xvin. 3—x1x. 2
he made the first month ; February, which had been
twelfth and last, thus became the second month, as
now. Butthere are many who say that these months
of January and February were added to the calendar
by Numa, and that at the outset the Romans had
only ten months in their year, as some Barbarians
have three, and as, among the Greeks, the Arcadians
have four, and the Acarnanians six; the Aegyptian
year had at first only a single month in it, afterwards
four, as weare told. And therefore, though they in-
habit a very recent country,! they have the credit of
being a very ancient people, and load their genealo-
gies with a prodigious number of years, since they
really count their months as so many years.
XIX. That the Romans had at first only ten
months in their year, and not twelve, is proved by the
name of their last month; for they still call it
December, or the tenth month. And that March
used to be their first month, is proved by the sequence
of months after it; for the fifth month after it used
to be called Quintilis, the sixth Sextilis, and so on
with the rest. Therefore, when they placed January
and February before March, they were guilty of
naming the above-mentioned month Quintilis, or
fifth, but counting it seventh. And _ besides, it
was reasonable that March, which is consecrate to
Mars, should be put in the first place by Romulus,
and April in the second place, since this month
is named after Aphrodite. In it they sacrificed to
this goddess, and on its first day the women bathe
with myrtle garlands on their heads. Some, how-
ever, say that April, with its smooth “p,” cannot
1 Perhaps as formed by the deposits of the Nile (Herod. ii.
5 and 9).
369
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
φασιν, ἀλλ᾽ ὥσπερ ἔχει τοὔνομα ψιλόν, » ᾿Απρίλ-
ALov κεκλῆσθαι τὸν μῆνα τῆς ἐαρινῆς ὥρας ἀκμα-
ζούσης ἀνοίγοντα καὶ ἀνακαλύπτοντα τοὺς βλα-
στοὺς τῶν φυτῶν: τοῦτο γὰρ ἡ γλῶττα σημαίνει.
τῶAν δ᾽ ἐφεξῆaς τὸν μὲ\ν Μάϊο- ν καλοῦσA ιν ἀπὸ Μαίας"
Ἑρμῇ γὰρ ἀνιέρωται' τὸν δὲ ᾿Ιούνιον ἀπὸ τῆς
"H pas. εἰ>σ ὶ ὶ δέδέ τινες οἱ e τού4τ ους ἡς λικί’α ς ἐΨ πωνύμ/ ους
εἶναι λέγοντες πρεσβυτέρας καὶ νεωτέρας" μαϊώ-
pets yap οἱ πρεσβύτibε ροι παρ᾽ Ψ αὐτοῖςal , ἰουνιώρεις
δὲ οἱ νεώτεροι καλοῦνται. τῶν δὲ λοιπῶν ἕκαστον
ἀπὸ τῆς τάξεως, ὥσπερ ἀριθμοῦντες, ὠνόμαξον
πέμπτον, ἕκτον, ἕβδομον, ὄγδοον, ἔνατον, δέκατον"
εἶτα ὁ πέμπτος ἀπὸ Καίσαρος τοῦa καταγωνισα-
μέ/ν ου Πομπήϊfοun ν ᾽ ᾿ΙούuAλ ιος: ὁ€ δὲἌ ΜΜΟἕ κτος Αὔoγ ουστος
ἀpl.π ὸ xX τοῦa δευτέ4ρ ου μὲ\ν ἄx ρξαντος, > Σεβαστοῦa δὲ\
ἐπικληθέντος, ὠνομάσθη. τοὺς δὲ ἐφεξῆς 1 Δο-
μετιανὸς εἰσεποίησε ταῖς αὑτοῦ προσωνυμίαις οὐ
πολὺν\ χρόν/ ον, ἀ> λλὰ \ τὰεςἶ αὑeτ ῶaν ἀ᾽ ναλαβόν, τες
πάλ/ ιν ἐ3 κεί/ν ου σφαγέν/ τος ὁς μὲ\ν ἕ“ βδομος, ὁe δὲ\
ὄ5]γ δοος καλοῦν“-“τ αι. μόνΥ͂ οι δ᾽ οἱ τελευταῖοa ι δύο
τὴν ἀπὸ τῆς τάξεως κλῆσιν, ὥσπερ ἔσχον ἐξ
ἀρχῆς, διεφύλαξαν.
ῶν δὲ ὑπὸ Νομᾶ προστεθέντων ἢ μετατε-
θέντων ὁ« μὲν Φεβρουάριος οἷον καθάρσιος ἄν τις
εἴη: καὶ γὰρ ἡ λέξις ἔγγιστα τοῦτο σημαίνει, καὶ
τοῖlςal φθιτοῖςr ἐναγίζουσι τότε καὶ τὴAν τῶ“3ν, Λουπερ-
καλίων ἑορτὴν εἰς τὰ πολλὰ καθαρμῷ προσεοι-
κυῖaα ν τελοῦσnAι ν: ὁ€ δὲ πρῶaτ ος ᾽ ‘lavovdpios ἀπὸ ‘
τοῦΟ Ρ ᾿Ιανοῦ“.Ὁ δοκεῖa dél i μοι τὸ\ν Μάρ/ τιον ὁe Νομᾶςna
1 ἐφεξῆς Bekker adds δύο.
379
NUMA, xix. 2-5
be derived from Aphrodite, with its rough “ ph,”
but that this month of high spring time is called
April because it opens and discloses the buds and
shoots in vegetation, this being the meaning of the
word “aperio.” ‘The next month in order is called
May, from Maia, the mother of Mercury, to whom it
is sacred ; and June is so named from Juno. There
are some, however, who say that these months get
their name from an age, older and younger; for
“majores’’ is their name for the elder, “ juniores”’
for the younger men. Each of the remaining months
they named from its arithmetical position in the list,
the fifth Quintilis, the sixth Sextilis, and so on with
September, October, November, and December.
Afterwards the fifth month was named Julius, from
Julius Caesar, the conqueror of Pompey; and the
sixth month Augustus, from the second Caesar, who
was given that title. The seventh and eighth months
bore for a short time the names Germanicus and
Domitianus, which the emperor Domitian gave them ;
but when he was slain, they resumed their old names
of September and October. Only the last two
months, November and December, preserved the
names derived from their position in the list just as
they were at the outset.
Of the months which were added or transposed
by Numa, February must have something to do with
purification, for this is nearest to the meaning of the
word, and in this month they make offerings to the
dead and celebrate the festival of the Lupercalia,
which, in most of its features, resembles a_puri-
fication.! The first month, January, is so named
from Janus. And 1 think that March, which is
1 Cf. Romulus, xxi. 4-8,
37!
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐπώνυμον ὄντα τοῦ “Apews ἐκ τῆς προεδρίας
μεταστῆσαι, βουλόμενος ἐν παντὶ τῆς πολεμικῆς
δυνάμεως προτιμᾶσθαι τὴν πολιτικήν. ὁ γὰρ
᾿Ιανὸς ἐν τοῖς πάνυ παλαιοῖς εἴτε δαίμων εἴτε
βασιλεὺς γενόμενος πολιτικὸς καὶ κοινωνικὸς ἐκ
τοῦ θηριώδους καὶ ἀγρίου λέγεται μεταβαλεῖν
τὴν δίαιταν. καὶ διὰ τοῦτο πλάττουσιν αὐτὸν
ἀμφιπρόσωπον, ὡς ἑτέραν ἐξ ἑτέρας τῷ βίῳ περι-
ποιήσαντα τὴν μορφὴν καὶ διάθεσιν.
XX. Ἔστι δὲ αὐτοῦ καὶ νεὼς ἐν Ῥώμῃ Ld 3
δίθυρος, ὃν πολέμου πύλην καλοῦσι. νομίζεται
γὰρ ἀνεῷχθαι μὲν αὐτὸν ὅταν ἦ πόλεμος, κεκλεῖ-
σθαι δὲ εἰρήνης γενομένης. ὃ δὴ χαλεπὸν ἦν καὶ
σπανίως γινόμενον, ἀεί τινι συνηρτημένης πο-
λέμῳ τῆς ἡγεμονίας, διὰ μέγεθος τοῖς κύκλῳ
περικεχυμένοις ee βαρβάροις ἀντερειδούσης.
πλὴν ἐπί γε τοῦ Σεβαστοῦ Καίσαρος ἐκλείσθη
καθελόντος ᾿Αντώνιον: καὶ πρότερον ὑπατευ-
όντων Μάρκου ᾿Ατιλίου καὶ Τίτου Μαλλίου
χρόνον οὐ πολύν' εἶτα εὐθὺς ἀνεώχθη πολέμου
συρραγέντος. ἀλλ᾽ ἐπί γε τῆς Nowa βασιλείας
οὐδεμίαν ἡμέραν ἀνεῳγμένος PON, τρία δὲ καὶ
τετταράκοντα ἔτη συνεχῶς ἔμεινε κεκλεισμένος"
οὕτως ἐξήρητο παντελῶς τὰ τοῦ πολέμου καὶ
πανταχόθεν. οὐ γὰρ μόνον ὁ Ῥωμαίων ἡἡ μέρωτο
καὶ κατεκεκήλητο τῇ δικαιοσύνῃ καὶ πρᾳότητι
τοῦ βασιλέως δῆμος, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰς κύκλῳ πόλεις,
ὥσπερ αὔρας τινὸς ἐκεῖθεν ἢ πνεύματος ὑγιεινοῦ
φέροντος, ἀρχὴ μετα βολῆς ἔλαβε καὶ πόθος
εἰσερρύη πάντας «εὐνομίας καὶ εἰρήνης καὶ γῆν
φυτεύειν καὶ τέκνα τρέφειν ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ καὶ
372
NUMA, xix. 5-xx. 3
named from Mars, was moved by Numa from its
place at the head of the months because he wished
in every case that martial influences should yield
precedence to civil and political. For this Janus, in
remote antiquity, whether he was a demi-god or a
king, was a patron of civil and social order, and is
said to have lifted human life out of its bestial and
savage state. [or this reason he is represented with
two faces, implying that he brought men’s lives out
of one sort and condition into another.
XX. He also has a temple at Rome with double
doors, which they call the gates of war; for the
temple always stands open in time of war, but is
closed when peace has come. The latter was a
difficult matter, and it rarely happened, since the
realm was always engaged in some war, as its in-
creasing size brought it into collision with the
barbarous nations which encompassed it round about.
But in the time of Augustus Caesar it was closed,
after he had overthrown Antony; and before that,
when Marcus Atilius and Titus Manlius were consuls,
it was closed a short time ; then war broke out again
at once, and it was opened. During the reign of
Numa, however, it was not seen open for a single
day, but remained shut for the space of forty-three
years together, so complete and universal was the
cessation of war. For not only was the Roman
people softened and charmed by the righteousness
and mildness of their king, but also the cities round
about, as if some cooling breeze or salubrious wind
were wafted upon them from Rome, began to ex-
perience a change of temper, and all of them were
filled with longing desire to have good government,
to be at peace, to till the earth, to rear their children
373
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 σέβεσθαι θεούς. ἑορταὶ δὲ καὶ θαλίαι καὶ παρ᾽
ἀ3 λλήλ/ ους ἀ’ δεῶlaςl ἐ3,ό ἢ ντων καὶ \ ἀ3 ναμιγνυμέν/ ων ὑe πο-
δοχαὶΝ καὶ \ φιλοφροσύν/ αι τὴ\ν ᾽ ᾿Ιταλί[4α ν κατεῖAχ ον,
οἷον ἐκ πηγῆς“ τῆaς NowaA σοφία’ ς τῶ“νὉ καλῶaνn Kal
δικαίων ἐπεισρεόντων εἰς ἅπαντας καὶ διαχεο-
μέ,ν ης τῆaς περὶ ἐκεῖra)ν ον γαλήνης" ὥστε Kal τὰς
ποιητικὰς ὑπερβολὰς ἐνδεῖν πρὸς τὴν τότε κατά-
5 στασιν λέ’γ ουσιν" cc? ““᾿Ἐν δὲ\ σιδαροδέτ/ οις πό,ρ παξιν
aidav ἀραχνᾶν ἔργα" καί, “ εὐρὼς δάμναται
e” yxea / Te λογχωτὰ \ ξί/ φεά£ τ 2 ἀ> μφήκ/ε α, χαλκεᾶaν
δὲ οὐκέτι σαλπίγγων κτύπος, οὐδὲ συλᾶτaA αι μελί-
φρων ὕΨ πνος ἀb πὸ \ βλεφάρ/ ων. ” οὔ4τ ε γὰ\ρ πό[λ εμος
οὔτε στάσις οὔτε νεωτερισμὸςΝ περὶ πολιτείαν
ἱ« στό,ρ ηται Nowal al βασιλεύο,ν τος: οὐ᾽ μὴAν οὐ5δ0᾽» ἐ> π 3
αὐὙτΈῚὸΝ ν ἐ> κεῖa νον ἔ” χθρα τις ἢἋ φθόνf ος ἢXx δι’3 x)ἔ ρωτα
βασιλείας ἐπιβουλὴ καὶ σύ4σ τασις ἀνδρῶaνA , ἀλλ ᾽
εἴΜ»τΜ ε φόβος θεῶLaνl προκήδ/ εσθαι δοκούveν των τοῦL al
ἀνδρὸς εἴτε τῆς ἀρετῆς αἰδὼς εἴτε δαιμόνιος}
τύχη, πάσης κακίας ἄθικτον ἐπ᾽ ἐκείνου καὶ
καθαρὸνx διαφυλά/τ τουσα τὸ\ν βίο’ ν, ἐ5 ναργὲς\ ἐ3 ξή/-
νεγκε παράδειγμα καὶ τεκμήριον τῆς Πλατωνικῆς
φωνῆςan, ἣἃ ν ὕστερον ἐκεῖa νος οὐκ ὀλίiγg οις χρόνοις
γενόμενος ἐτό/ λμησεν ἀφεῖaν αι περὶ πολιτείας, ὡς
μί/α κακῶνa παῦnλ α Kal λύσις ἀνθρώποις ἐστίν, Ex
τινος τύχης θείας εἰς ταὐτὸ \ διανοίlᾳa φιλοσόUφ ῳ
βασιλικὴν συμπεσοῦσαν δύναμιν ἐγκρατῆ καὶ
ὑπερδέξιον τῆaς κακία/ ς TH\Y ἀρετὴν καταστῆσa αι.
“ Μακάριος μὲν γὰρ αὐτὸς ὁ σώφρων ὡς ἀλη-
1 δαιμόνιος Bryan’s correction, adop‘ed by Coraés and
Bekker: δαίμονος.
374
NUMA, xx. 4-7
in quiet, and to worship the gods. Festivals and
feasts, hospitalities and friendly converse between
people who visited one another promiscuously and
without fear,—these prevailed throughout Italy,
while honour and justice flowed into all hearts from
the wisdom of Numa, as from a fountain, and the
calm serenity of his spirit diffused itself abroad.
Thus even the hyperboles of the poets fall short of
picturing the state of man in those days: “ And on
the iron-bound shield-handles lie the tawney spiders’
webs”’; and, “rust now subdues the sharp-pointed
spears and two-edged swords; no longer is the
blast of brazen trumpets heard, nor are the
eyelids robbed of delicious sleep.”! For there
is no record either of war, or faction, or
political revolution while Numa was king. Nay
more, no hatred or jealousy was felt towards his
person, nor did ambition lead men to plot and
conspire against his throne. On the contrary, either
fear of the gods, who seemed to have him in their
especial care, or reverence for his virtue, or a mar-
vellous felicity, which in his days kept life free from
the taint of every vice, and pure, made him a manifest
illustration and confirmation of the saying which
Plato,? many generations later, ventured to utter
regarding government, namely, that human ills would
only then cease and disappear when, by some divine
felicity, the power of a king should be united
in one person with the insight of a philosopher,
thereby establishing virtue in control and mastery
over vice. ‘“ Blessed,” indeed, is such a wise man
ΤΑ free citation, apparently from memory, of Bacchylides,
Fragment 13 (Bergk). See Jebb’s Bacchylides, p. 411.
2 Republic, p. 487 6.
375
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
θῶς, “ μακάριοι δὲ οἱ συνήκοοι τῶν. ἐκ τοῦ σωφρο-
8 νοῦντος στόματος ἰἰ όντων λόγων." τάχα γὰρ οὐδὲ
ἀνάγκης τινὸς δεῖ πρὸς τοὺς πολλοὺς οὐδὲ ἀπει-
λῆς, αὐτοὶ δὲ τὴν ἀρετὴν ἐν εὐδήλῳ παραδείγματι
καὶ λαμπρῷ τῷ βίῳ τοῦ ἄρχοντος ὁρῶντες, ἑκου-
σίως σωφρονοῦσι καὶ συμμετασχηματίξονται
πρὸς τὸν ἐν φιλίᾳ καὶ ὁμονοίᾳ τῇ πρὸς αὐτοὺς
μετὰ δικαιοσύνης καὶ μετριότητος ἀμύμονα ἱ καὶ
μακάριον βίον, ἐν ᾧ τὸ κάλλιστον ἁπάσης πολι-
τείας τέλος ἐστί, καὶ βασιλικώτατος ἁπάντων
ὁ τοῦτον τὸν βίον καὶ ταύτην τὴν διάθεσιν τοῖς
ὑπηκόοις ἐνεργάσασθαι δυνάμενος. ταῦτα μὲν
οὖν Νομᾶς παντὸς μᾶλλον φαίνεται συνεωρακώς.
ΧΧΙ. Περὶ δὲ παίδων αὐτοῦ καὶ γάμων ἀντι-
λογίαι γεγόνασι τοῖς ἱστορικοῖς. οἱ μὲν γὰρ οὔτε
γάμον ἄλλον ἢ τὸν Τατίας λαβεῖν αὐτὸν οὔτε
παιδὸς ἑτέρου γενέσθαι πατέρα πλὴν μιᾶς θυγα-
τρὸς Πομπιλίας λέγουσιν' οἱ δὲ πρὸς ταύτῃ τέσ-
σαρας υἱοὺς ἀναγράφουσιν αὐτοῦ, Πόμπωνα,
Iltvov, Κάλπον, Μάμερκον, ὧν ἕκαστον οἴκου
διαδοχὴν καὶ γένους ἐντίμου καταλιπεῖν. εἶναι
γὰρ ἀπὸ μὲν τοῦ Πόμπωνος τοὺς “Πομπωνίους,
ἀπὸ δὲ Πίνου τοὺς Ilivapious, ἀπὸ δὲ Κάλπου 74
τοὺς Καλπουρνίους, ἀπὸ δὲ Μαμέρκου τοὺς Μα-
μερκίους, οἷς διὰ τοῦτο καὶ 'Ῥῆγας γενέσθαι
παρωνύμιον, ὅπερ ἐστὶ βασιλέας. τρίτοι δέ εἰσιν
οἱ τούτων μὲν κατηγοροῦντες ὡς χαριζομένων τοῖς
γένεσι καὶ προστιθέντων οὐκ ἀληθῆ στέμματα
τῆς ἀπὸ Νομᾶ διαδοχῆς, τὴν δὲ Πομπιλίαν οὐκ ἐκ
Τατίας γεγονέναι λέγοντες, ἀλλ᾽ ἐξ ἑτέρας γυναι-
1 ἀμύμονα MSS. and edd.: ἀκύμονα (waveless, serene), after
Wyttenbach.
376
NUMA, xx. 7—xxI. 2
“in himself, and blessed, too, are those who hear the
words of wisdom issuing from his lips.’””!__ For possibly
there is no need of any compulsion or menace in
dealing with the multitude, but when they see with
their own eyes a conspicuous and shining example of
virtue in the life of their ruler, they will of their own
accord walk in wisdom’s ways, and unite with him in
conforming themselves to a blameless and blessed
life of friendship and mutual concord, attended by
righteousness and temperance. Such a life is the
noblest end of all government, and he is most a king
who can inculcate such a life and such a disposition
in his subjects. This, then, as it appears, Numa was
preeminent in discerning.
XXI. As regards his marriages and offspring, his-
torians are at variance. Some say that he had no
other wife than Tatia, and no other child than one
daughter, Pompilia. Others ascribe to him four sons
besides, Pompon, Pinus, Calpus, and Mamercus, each
one of whom was the founder of an honourable
family. From Pompon the Pomponii are descended,
from Pinus the Pinarii, from Calpus the Calpurnii,
and from Mamercus the Mamercii, who for this
reason had also the surname of Reges, or Kings.
But there is a third class of writers who accuse the
former of paying court to these great families by
forging for them lines of descent from Numa, and
they say that Pompilia was not the daughter of
Tatia, but of Lucretia, another wife whom Numa
1 Cf. Plato, Laws, p. 7lle.
377
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 KOS, ἣν ἤδη βασιλεύων ἔἔ γημε, Λουκρητίας" πάν-
τες δ᾽ οὖν ὁμολογοῦσι τὴν Πομπιλίαν Μαρκίῳ
γαμηθῆναι. παῖς δὲ ἦν ὁ Μάρκιος ἐκείνου Μαρ-
κίου τοῦ Νομᾶν παρορμήσαντος ἐπὶ τὴν βασι-
λείαν: καὶ γὰρ συμμετῴκησεν εἰς Ῥώμην αὐτῷ
καὶ τῆς συγκλήτου μετέσχε τιμώμενος, καὶ μετὰ
τὴν Νομᾶ τελευτὴν Ὁστιλίῳ περὶ τῆς βασιλείας
εἰς ἀγῶνα καταστὰς καὶ ἡττηθεὶς ἀa πεκαρτέρησεν.
ὁ δὲ VEOS αὐτοῦ Μάρκιος ἔχων τὴν ἸΠομπιλίαν
κατέμεινεν ἐν “Ῥώμῃ καὶ Μάρκιον᾽ Ἄγκον ἐγέννη-
σεν, ὃς peta Τύλλον “Οστίλιον ἐβασίλευσε.
4 τοῦτον, ὡς λέγεται, πενταετῆ καταλιπὼν ὁ Νομᾶς
ἐτελεύτησεν, οὐ ταχείας οὐδ᾽ αἰφνιδίου “γενομένης
αὐτῷ τῆς τελευτῆς, ἀλλὰ κατὰ “μικρὸν ὑπὸ γήρως
καὶ νόσου μαλακῆς ἀπομαραινόμενος, ὡς ἱστόρηκε
Πείσων. ἐτελεύτησε δὲ χρόνον οὐ πολὺν τοῖς
ὀγδοήκοντα προσβιώσας.
XXII. Ζηλωτὸν δὲ αὐτοῦ καὶ τῷ τάφῳ τὸν βίον
ἐποίησαν οἵ τέ σύμμαχοι καὶ φίλοι δῆμοι, TUVEA-
θόντες ἐἐ πὶ τὰς ταφὰς ἅμα δημοσίαις ἐπιφοραῖς
καὶ στεφάνοις, οἵ τε “πατρίκιοι τὸ λέχος ἀράμενοι,
καὶ συμπαρόντες οἱ τῶν θεῶν ἱερεῖς καὶ παρα-
πέμποντες, ὁ δ᾽ ἄλλος ὅμιλος ἀναμεμιγμένων καὶ
γυναικῶν καὶ παίδων οὐχ ὡς βασιλέως ταφαῖς
γηραιοῦ παρόντες, GAN ὥς τινα τῶν φιλτάτων ἕκα-
στος ἐν ἀκμῇ βίου ποθούμενον θάπτων, μετ᾽ οἰμω-
2 γῆς καὶ κλαυθμῶν ἑπόμενοι. πυρὶ μὲν οὖν οὐκ
ἔδοσαν τὸν νεκρὸν αὐτοῦ κωλύσαντος, ὡς λέγεται,
δύο δὲ ποιησάμενοι λιθίνας σοροὺς ὑπὸ τὸ Ἰάνοκ-
λον ἔθηκαν, τὴν μὲν ἑτέραν ἔχουσαν τὸ σῶμα, τὴν
δὲ ἑτέραν τὰς ἱερὰς βίβλους ἃς ἐγράψατο μὲν αὐτός,
378
NUMA, xxi. 3-xxm. 2
married after he became king. However, all are
agreed that Pompilia was married to Marcius. Now
this Marcius was a son of the Marcius who induced
Numa to accept the throne.1_ That Marcius accom-
panied Numa to Rome, and there was honoured with
membership in the Senate. After Numa’s death, he
competed for the throne with Hostilius, and being
defeated, starved himself to death. But his son
Marcius, the husband of Pompilia, remained at Rome,
and begat Ancus Marcius, who succeeded Tullus
Hostilius in the kingdom. This Ancus Marcius is
said to have been only five years old when Numa
died, not a speedy nor a sudden death, but wasting
away gradually from old age and a mild disorder, as
Piso writes. He was something over eighty years
old when he died.
XXII. His obsequies were as much to be envied
as his life. The peoples which were in alliance and
friendship with Rome assembled at the rites with
public offerings and crowns; the senators carried his
bier, the priests of the gods served as its escort, and
the rest of the people, including women and chil-
dren, followed with groans and lamentations, not as
though they were attending the funeral of an aged
king, but as though each one of them was burying
some dearest relation taken away in the flower of life.
They did not burn his body, because, as it is said, he
forbade it; but they made two stone coffins and
buried them under the Janiculum. One of these
held his body, and the other the sacred books which
he had written out with his own hand, as the Greek
1 Cf. chapter vi.
379
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὥσπερ οἱ τῶν Ἑλλήνων νομοθέται τοὺς κύρβεις,
ἐκδιδάξας δὲ τοὺς ἱερεῖς, ἔτι ζῶν τὰ γεγραμμένα
καὶ πάντων ἕξιν τε καὶ γνώμην ἐνεργασάμενος
αὐτοῖς, ἐκέλευσε συνταφῆναι μετὰ τοῦ σώματος,
ὡς οὐ καλῶς ἐν ἀψύχοις γράμμασι φρουρουμένων
τῶν ἀπορρήτων. ᾧ λογισμῷ φασι μη ὲ τοὺς
Πυθαγορικοὺς εἰς γραφὴν κατατίθεσθαι τὰ συν-
τάγματα, μνήμην δὲ καὶ παίδευσιν αὐτῶν ἄγρα-
pov ἐμποιεῖν τοῖς ἀξίοις. καὶ τῆς γε περὶ τὰς
ἀπόρους καὶ ἀρρήτους λεγομένας ἐν γεωμετρίᾳ
μεθόδους πραγματείας πρός τινα τῶν ἀναξίων
ἐκδοθείσης, ἔφασαν ἐπισημαίνειν τὸ δαιμόνιον
μεγάλῳ τινὶ καὶ κοινῷ κακῷ τὴν γεγενημένην
παρανομίαν. καὶ ἀσέβειαν ἐπεξερχόμενον. ὥστε
συγγνώμην ἔχειν πολλὴν τοῖς εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ Πυθα-
γόρᾳ Νομᾶν φιλοτιμουμένοις συνάγειν ἐπὶ τοσαύ-
ταις ὁμοιότησιν.
Οἱ δὲ περὶ ᾿Αντίαν ἱστοροῦσι δώδεκα μὲν εἶναι
βίβλους ἱεροφαντικάς, δώδεκα δὲ ἄλλας 'Ελ-
ληνικὰς φιλοσόφους τὰς εἰς τὴν σορὸν συντεθεί-
σας. τετρακοσίων δέ που διαγενομένων ἐτῶν
ὕπατοι μὲν ἦσαν Πόπλιος Κορνήλιος καὶ Μάρκος
Βαίβιος' ὄμβρων δὲ μεγάλων ἐπιπεσόντων καὶ
χώματος περιρραγέντος ἐξέωσε τὰς σοροὺς τὸ
ῥεῦμα: καὶ τῶν ἐπιθημάτων ἀποπεσόντων ἡ μὲν
ἑτέρα κενὴ παντάπασιν ὥφθη καὶ μέρος οὐδὲν
οὐδὲ λείψανον ἔχουσα τοῦ σώματος, ἐν δὲ τῇ
ἑτέρᾳ τῶν γραμμάτων εὑρεθέντων ἀναγνῶναι μὲν
αὐτὰ λέγεται TlertAvos στρατηγῶν τότε, πρὸς δὲ
τὴν σύγκλητον κομίσαι," μὴ δοκεῖν αὐτῷ θεμιτὸν
εἶναι λέγων μηδὲ ὅσιον ἔκπυστα πολλοῖς τὰ γε-
1 κομίσαι Coraés, Sintenis!, and Bekker, with C: ὁρμῆσαι.
380
NUMA, xxu. 2-5
lawgivers their tablets. But since, while he was
still living, he had taught the priests the written
contents of the books, and had inculcated in their
hearts the scope and meaning of them all, he com-
manded that they should be buried with his body,
convinced that such mysteries ought not to be en-
trusted to the care of lifeless documents. This is the
reason, we are told, why the Pythagoreans also do
not entrust their precepts to writing, but implant the
memory and practice of them in living disciples
worthy to receive them. And when their treatment
of the abstruse and mysterious processes of geometry
had been divulged to a certain unworthy person,
they said the gods threatened to punish such lawless-
ness and impiety with some signal and wide-spread
calamity. Therefore we may well be indulgent with
those who are eager to prove, on the basis of so
many resemblances between them, that Numa was
acquainted with Pythagoras.
Antias, however, writes that it was twelve pontifical
books, and twelve others of Greek philosophy, which
were placed in the coffin. And about four hundred
years afterwards, when Publius Cornelius and Marcus
Baebius were consuls, heavy rains fell, and the tor-
rent of water tore away the earth and dislodged the
coffins. When their lids had fallen off, one coffin was
seen to be entirely empty, without any trace whatever
of the body, but in the other the writings were found.
These Petilius, who was then praetor, is said to have
read, and then brought to the senate, declaring that,
in his opinion, it was not lawful or proper that the
331
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γραμμένα γενέσθαι: διὸ καὶ κομισθείσας εἰς TO
Κομίτιον τὰς βίβλους κατακαῆναι.
Πᾶσι μὲν οὖν ἕπεται τοῖς δικαίοις καὶ ἀγαθοῖς
ἀνδράσι μείζων ὁ κατόπιν καὶ “μετὰ τὴν τελευτὴν
ἔπαινος, τοῦ φθόνου πολὺν χρόνον οὐκ ἐπιζῶντος,
ἐνίων δὲ καὶ προαποθνήσκοντος" οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾽
ἐκείνου γε τὴν δόξαν αἱ τῶν ὕστερον βασιλέων 75
τύχαι λαμπροτέραν ἐποίησαν. πέντε γὰρ γενο-
μένων μετ᾽ αὐτὸν ὁ μὲν ἔσχατος ἐκπεσὼν ,τῆς
ἀρχῆς ἐν φυγῇ κατεγήρασε, τῶν δὲ πεσσάρων
οὐδεὶς κατὰ φύσιν ἐτελεύτησεν, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν τρεῖς
ἐπιβουλευθέντες ἐσφάγησαν, Οστίλιος δὲ Τύλλος,
ὃς μετὰ Νομᾶν ἐβασίλευσε, καὶ τὰ πλεῖστα τῶν
ἐκείνου καλῶν, ἐν δὲ πρώτοις καὶ μάλιστα τὴν
περὶ τὸ θεῖον εὐλάβειαν, ἐπιχλευάσας καὶ καθυ-
βρίσας ὡς ἀργοποιὸν καὶ γυναικώδη, πρὸς πόλε-
μον ἔτρεψε τοὺς πολίτας, οὐδ᾽ αὐτὸς ἐνέμεινε τοῖς
νεανιεύμασι τούτοις, ἀλλ ὑπὸ νόσου χαλεπῆς
καὶ πολυτρόπου τὴν γνώμην ἀλλασσόμενος εἰς
δεισιδαιμονίαν ἐνέδωκεν οὐδέν τι τῇ κατὰ Νομᾶν
εὐσεβείᾳ προσήκουσαν, ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ἐνεποίησε
τοῖς ἄλλοις τὸ τοιοῦτον πάθος, ὡς λέγεται, κατα-
φλεχθεὶς ὑπὸ κεραυνῶν.
AYKOYPFOY KAI NOMA ΣΎΓΚΡΙΣΙΣ
I. ᾿Αλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ τὸν Νομᾶ καὶ Λυκούργου διελη-
AVG ayer βίον, ἐκκειμένων ἀμφοῖν, εἰ καὶ χαλεπὸν
ἔργον, οὐκ ἀποκνητέον συναγαγεῖν τὰς διαφοράς.
482
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, 1.1
writings should be published abroad. The books
were therefore carried to the comitium and burned.
It is true, indeed, of all just and good men, that
they are praised more after they have left the world
than before, since envy does not long survive them,
and some even see it die before them; but in Numa’s
case the misfortunes of the kings who followed him
made his fame shine all the brighter. For of the
five who came after him, the last was dethroned and
grew old in exile, and of the other four, not one died
a natural death. Three of them were conspired
against and slain; and Tullus Hostilius, who reigned
next after Numa, and who mocked and derided
most of his virtues, and above all his devotion
to religion, declaring that it made men idle and
effeminate, turned the minds of the citizens to war.
He himself, however, did not abide by his pre-
sumptuous folly, but was converted by a grievous
and complicated disease, and gave himself over to a
superstition which was far removed from the piety of
Numa. His subjects, too, were even more affected
with superstition, as we are told, when he died by a
stroke of lightning.
COMPARISON OF LYCURGUS AND NUMA
I. Now that we have recounted the lives of Numa
and Lycurgus, and both lie clearly before us, we
must attempt, even though the task be difficult, to
assemble and put together their points of difference.
383
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ai μὲν yap κοινό/τ ητες ἐπιφαίνονται ταῖςa πράξεσιν,
οἷον ἡ σωφροσύνη τῶaν ἀνδρῶνa , ἡ εὐσέβεια, τὸΝ
πολιτικόν, τὸ παιδευτικόν, τὸ μίαν ἀρχὴν παρὰ
τῶlaνl θεῶa ν ἀμφοτέρους λαβεῖνa τῆnς νομοθεσία/ ς"
τῶν δὲ ἰδίᾳ ἑκατέρου καλῶν πρῶτόν ἐστι Νομᾷ
μὲν ἡ παράληψις τῆς βασιλείας, Λυκούργῳ δὲ ἡ
παράδοσις. ὁ« μὲν yap οὐκ αἰτῶ“ν ἔλαβεν, ὁe δὲ\
ἔχων ἀπέδωκε. καὶ τὸν μὲν ἕτεροι κύριον αὑτῶν
κατέστησαν ἰδιώτην καὶ ξένον ὄ” ντα, ὁe δὲ αὐτὸΝς
αὑ¢τ ὸ\ν ἰ2 διώ, την ἐ’κ βασιλέω/ ς ἐ3 ποίη/ σε. καλὸἊνν μὲ\ν
οὖν τὸ κτήσασθαι δικαιοσύνη τὴν βασιλείαν,
καλὸν δὲ τὸ προτιμῆσαι τὴν δικαιοσύνην τῆς
βασιλείας. ἡ γὰρ ἀρετὴ τὸν μὲν οὕτως ἔνδοξον
κατέ/σ τησεν ὥ“ στε βασιλεία/ ς ἀ> ξιωθῆνanα ι, τὸ\ν δὲδὲ
οὕτω μέγαν ἐποί/η σεν ὥστε βασιλεία, ς KaTa-
φρονῆσαι.
Δεύτερον τοί,ν υν, ἐπεὶ καθάπερ appovixot
λύρ΄ὔ ας, O« μὲ\ν ἐ3 κλελυμέν/ ην καὶ \ τρυφῶaσ αν ἐ3 πέτ/ εινε
τὴ\ν Σπάρ/ την, ὁς δὲ\ τῆiaςl ς Ῥώμ, ης τὸΧ σφοδρὸνΝ ἀ> νῆrκ ε
καὶ σύντονον, ἡ μὲν χαλεπότης τοῦ ἔργου τῷ
Λυκούργῳ πρόσεστιν. οὐ γὰρ θώρακας ἐκδῦναι
καὶ ξίφη τοὺς πολίτας καταθέσθαι ἔπειθεν, ἀλλὰ
χρυσὸν καὶ ἄργυρον ἀφεῖναι καὶ στρωμνὰς ἐκ-
βαλεῖν πολυτελεῖς καὶ τραπέζας, οὐδὲ παυσαμέ-
νους πολέ,μ ων ἑε ορτάζ7,ε ιν καὶ \ θύε΄ ιν, ἀ᾽ λλὰ \ δεῖτ πνα
καὶ πότους ἐάσαντας ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις καὶ ταῖς
παλαίστραις διαπονεῖσθαι καὶ ἀσκεῖν. ὅθεν ὁ
μὲν δι᾿ εὐνοίας καὶ τιμῆς ἅπαντα πείθων ἔπραξεν,
ὁi d δὲa κινδυνεύων καὶ βαλλόμ, ενος μόγις ἐπεκρά-
τησεν.
384
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, ι. 1-4
For their points of likeness are obvious from their
careers: their wise moderation, their piety, their
talent for governing and educating, and their both
deriving their laws from a divine source. But each
also performed noble deeds peculiar to himself. To
begin with, Numa accepted, but Lycurgus resigned,
a kingdom. One got it without asking for it, the
other had it and gave it up. One was made by
others their sovereign, though a private person and
a stranger ; the other made himself a private person,
though he was a king. It was a noble thing, of
course, to win a kingdom by righteousness ; but it
was also a noble thing to set righteousness above a
kingdom. For it was virtue which rendered the one
so famous as to be judged worthy of a kingdom, and
virtue, too, which made the other so great as to scorn
a kingdom.
In the second place, then, it is granted that, just
as musicians tune their lyres, so Lycurgus tightened
the strings at Sparta, which he found relaxed with
luxury, and Numa loosened the strings at Rome,
where the tones were sharp and high; but the task
was more difficult in the case of Lycurgus. For his
efforts were to persuade the citizens, not to take off
their breast-plates and lay aside their swords, but to
cast away gold and silver, and abandon costly couches
and tables; not to cease from wars and hold festivals
and sacrifices, but to give up feasting and drinking
and practise laboriously as soldiers and athletes.
Wherefore the one accomplished all his ends by
persuasion, through the good-will and honour in
which his people held him; but the other had to
risk his life and suffer wounds, and scarcely then
prevailed.
385
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἭΜμερος μέντοι καὶ φιλάνθρωπος ἡ τοῦ Nopa
μοῦσα πρὸς εἰρήνην καὶ δικαιοσύνην μεθαρμο-
σαμένου καὶ καταπραὕναντος ἐξ ἀκρατῶν καὶ
διαπύρων ἠθῶν τοὺς πολίτας. εἰ δὲ καὶ τὸ
περὶ τοὺς Εἵλωτας ἀναγκάσει τις ἡμᾶς εἰς τὴν
5 Λυκούργου θέσθαι πολιτείαν, ὠμότατον ἔργον
καὶ παρανομώτατον, μακρῷ τινι τὸν Νομᾶν ἑλλη-
νικώτερον γεγονέναι νομοθέτην φήσομεν, ὅς γε
καὶ τοὺς ὡμολογημένους δούλους ἔγευσε τιμῆς
ἐλευθέρας, ἐν τοῖς ἹΚρονίοις ἑστιᾶσθαι μετὰ τῶν
δεσποτῶν ἀναμεμιγμένους ἐθίσας. καὶ γὰρ τοῦτο
τῶν Nowa πατρίων ἕν εἶναι λέγουσιν, ἐπὶ τὰς
τῶν ἐτησίων ἀπολαύσεις καρπῶν τοὺς συνεργοὺς
παραλαμβάνοντος. ἔνιοι δὲ τοῦτο ὑπόμνημα τῆς
Κρονικῆς ἐκείνης ἰσονομίας ἀποσώζεσθαι μυθο-
λογοῦσιν, ὡς μηδενὸς δούλου μηδὲ δεσπότου,
πάντων δὲ συγγενῶν καὶ ἰσοτίμων νομιζομένων.
II. “Ὅλως δὲ φαίνονται πρὸς τὴν αὐτάρκειαν
ἀμφότεροι καὶ σωφροσύνην ὁμοίως ἄγοντες τὰ
πλήθη, τῶν δὲ ἄλλων ἀρετῶν ὁ μὲν τὴν ἀνδρείαν
μᾶλλον, ὁ δὲ τὴν δικαιοσύνην ἠγαπηκώς" εἰ μὴ νὴ
Δία διὰ τὴν ὑποκειμένην τῶν πολιτευμάτων
ἑκατέρου φύσιν ἢ συνήθειαν, οὐχ ὁμοίαν οὗσαν,
2 ἀνομοίας ἔδει παρασκευῆς. οὔτε γὰρ Νομᾶς διὰ 76
δειλίαν κατέλυσε τὸ πολεμεῖν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ TO μὴ
ἀδικεῖν, οὔτε Λυκοῦργος εἰς ἀδικίαν κατεσκεύασε
πολεμικούς, ἀλλ᾽ ὑπὲρ τοῦ μὴ ἀδικεῖσθαι. τὰς
οὖν ὑπερβολὰς ἀφαιροῦντες ἀμφότεροι καὶ τὰς
ἐνδείας ἀναπληροῦντες τῶν ὑπαρχόντων περὶ τοὺς
πολίτας, ἠναγκάζοντο μεγάλαις χρῆσθαι μετα-
βολαῖς.
386
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, 1. 4-11. 2
Numa’s muse, however, was gentle and humane,
and he converted his people to peace and righteous-
ness, and softened their violent and fiery tempers.
And if we must ascribe to the administration of
Lycurgus the treatment of the Helots, a most savage
and lawless practice, we shall own that Numa was
far more Hellenic as a lawgiver, since he gave
acknowledged slaves a taste of the dignity of freedom,
by making it the custom for them to feast in the
company of their masters during the Saturnalia.!
For this too was one of the institutions of Numa, as
we are told, who thereby admitted to the enjoyment
of the yearly fruits of the earth those who had helped
to produce them. Some, however, fancy that this
custom was a reminder of the equality which
characterized the famous Saturnian age, when there
was neither slave nor master, but all were regarded
as kinsmen and equals.
II. In general, both alike manifestly strove to
lead their peoples to independence and sobriety;
but as regards the other virtues, the one set his
affections more on bravery, the other on righteousness ;
unless, indeed, the different natures or usages on
which the government of each was based required
different provisions. For it was not out of cowardice
that Numa put a stop to the waging of war, but to
prevent the commission of injustice ; neither was it
to promote the commission of injustice that Lycurgus
made his people warlike, but that they might not
suffer injustice. Accordingly, in removing the ex-
cesses and supplying the deficiencies of their
citizens, both were forced to make great innovations.
1 A mid-winter harvest festival in honour of Saturnus.
387
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 Kal μὴν τῆς te διατάξεως καὶ τῆς διαιρέσεως
τῶν πολιτευμάτων ὀχλικὴ μὲν ἀκράτως ἡ τοῦ
Νομᾶ καὶ θεραπευτικὴ τοῦ πλήθους, ἐκ χρυσο-
χόων καὶ αὐλητῶν καὶ σκυτοτόμων συμμιγῆ τινα
καὶ παμποίκιλον ἀποφαίνοντος δῆμον, αὐστηρὰ
δὲ ἡ Λυκούργειος καὶ ἀριστοκρατική, τὰς μὲν
βαναύσους ἀποκαθαίρουσα τέχνας εἰς οἰκετῶν καὶ
μετοίκων χεῖρας αὐτοὺς δὲ τοὺς πολίτας εἰς τὴν
ἀσπίδα καὶ τὸ δόρυ συνάγουσα, πολέμου χειρο-
τέχνας καὶ θεράποντας “Apews ὄντας, ἄλλο δὲ
οὐδὲν εἰδότας οὐδὲ μελετῶντας ἢ πείθεσθαι τοῖς
ἄρχουσι καὶ κρατεῖν τῶν πολεμίων. Οὐδὲ γὰ
χρηματίζεσθαι τοῖς ἐλευθέροις ἐξῆν, ἵνα ἐλεύ-
εροι παντελῶς καὶ καθάπαξ ὦσιν, ἀλλ᾽ ἣν ἡ
περὶ τὰ χρήματα κατασκευὴ δεδομένη δούλοις
καὶ Εἵλωσιν, ὥσπερ ἡ περὶ τὸ δεῖπνον καὶ ὄψον
διακονία. Νομᾶς δὲ οὐδὲν διέκρινε τοιοῦτον,
ἀλλὰ τὰς μὲν στρατιωτικὰς ἔπαυσε πλεονεξίας,
τὸν δὲ ἄλλον οὐκ ἐκώλυσε χρηματισμόν, οὐδὲ τὴν
τοιαύτην κατεστόρεσεν ἀνωμαλίαν, ἀλλὰ καὶ
πλούτῳ προϊέναι μέχρι παντὸς ἐφῆκε, καὶ πενίας
πολλῆς ἀθροιζομένης κα ὑπορρεούσης εἰς τὴν
πόλιν ἠμέλησε, δέον εὐθὺς ἐν ἀρχῇ, μη έπω
πολλῆς μηδὲ “μεγάλης ἀνισότητος οὔσης, ἀλλ᾽ ἔτι
τοῖς βίοις ὁμαλῶν καὶ παραπλησίων ὄντων,
ἐνστῆναι πρὸς τὴν πλεονεξίαν, ὥὥ σπερ Λυκοῦργος,
καὶ φυλάξασθαι τὰς ἀπ᾽ αὐτῆς βλάβας, οὐ μικρὰς
γενομένας, ἀλλὰ τῶν πλείστων καὶ μεγίστων
κακῶν, ὅσα συνηνέχθη, σπέρμα καὶ ἀρχὴν παρα-
σχούσας. ὁ δὲ τῆς γῆς ἀναδασμὸς οὔτε τὸν
Λυκοῦργον, ἐμοὶ δοκεῖν, ποιεῖ ψεκτὸν γενόμενος
οὔτε τὸν Νομᾶν μὴ γενόμενος. τῷ μὲν γὰρ ἕδραν
388
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, u. 3-6
And surely, as regards the arrangement and
classification of the citizens under their respective
governments, Numa’s was strongly popular and
inclined to favour the masses, resulting in a_pro-
miscuous and variegated commonalty of goldsmiths,
musicians, and leather-workers ; but that of Lycurgus
was rigid and aristocratic, relegating the mechanical
arts into the hands of slaves and aliens, but confining
the citizens themselves to the use of the shield and
the spear, so that they were artificers of war and
servants of Ares, but knew and cared for nothing
else than to obey their commanders and master their
enemies. For freemen were not even permitted to
transact business, that they might be entirely and
forever free, but the whole apparatus of business was
turned over to slaves and Helots, just like the pre-
paration and serving of their meals. Numa, on the
contrary, made no such distinctions, but, while he
put a stop to military rapacity, he prohibited no
other gainful occupation. Nor did he reduce the
great inequalities resulting therefrom, but left the
acquisition of wealth wholly unrestricted, and paid
no attention to the great increase of poverty and its
gradual influx into the city. And yet it was his
duty at the very outset, while as yet there was no
general or great disparity of means, but people still
lived on much the same plane, to make a stand
against rapacity, as Lycurgus did, and take measures
of precaution against its mischiefs ; for these were
not trifling, but furnished the seed and source of the
most and greatest evils of after times. But as
regards the redistribution of the land, Lycurgus, in
my opinion, is not to be censured for making it, nor
Numa for not making it. In the one case, the re-
389
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ κρηπῖδα τῆς πολιτείας ἡ ἰσότης αὕτη Tap-
ἔσχε, τὸν δὲ προσφάτου τῆς κληρουχίας οὔσης
οὐδὲν ἤπειγεν ἄλλον ἐμβαλεῖν ἀναδασμὸν οὐδὲ
κινεῖν τὴν πρώτην νέμησιν, ὡς εἰκός ἐστι, κατὰ
χώραν μένουσαν.
III. Τῆς δὲ περὶ τοὺς γάμους καὶ τὰς τεκνώσεις
κοινωνίας τὸ ἀζηλότυπον ὀρθῶς καὶ πολιτικῶς
ἐμποιοῦντες ἀμφότεροι τοῖς ἀνδράσιν οὐ κατὰ
πᾶν εἰς τοῦτο συνηνέχθησαν, ἀλλ’ ὁ Ῥωμαῖος
μὲν ἀνὴρ ἱκανῶς ἔχων παιδοτροφίας, ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου
δὲ πεισθεὶς δεομένου πέκνων, ἐξίστατο τῆς
γυναικός, ἐκδόσθαι , καὶ μετεκδόσθαι κύριος
ὑπάρχων, ὁ δὲ Λάκων, οἴκοι τῆς γυναικὸς
οὔσης παρ αὐτῷ καὶ τοῦ γάμου μένοντος ἐπὶ
τῶν ἐξ ἀρχῆς δικαίων, μετεδίδου τῷ πείσαντι
τῆς κοινωνίας εἰς τέκνωσιν. πολλοὶ δέ, ὥσπερ
εἴρηται, καὶ παρακαλοῦντες εἰσῆγον ἐξ ὧν ἂν
ἐδόκουν μάλιστα παῖδας εὐειδεῖς καὶ ἀγαθοὺς
γενέσθαι. τίς οὖν ἡ διάκρισις τῶν ἐθισμῶν; ἢ
ταῦτα μὲν ἰσχυρὰ καὶ ἄκρατος ἀπάθεια πρὸς
γαμετὴν καὶ τὰ ταράττοντα καὶ κατακαίοντα
ξηλοτυπίαις τοὺς πολλούς, ἐκεῖνα δὲ ὥσπερ
αἰσχυνομένη ἀτυφία. τίς, παρακάλυμμα τὴν ey-
γύην ἐφελκομένη καὶ τὸ δυσκαρτέρητον ἐξομο-
λογουμένη τῆς κοινωνίας;
Ere δὲ 'μᾶλλον ἡ περὶ τὰς παρθένους φυλακὴ
κατέσταλται τῷ Νομᾷ πρὸς τὸ θῆλυ καὶ κόσμιον"
ἡ δὲ τοῦ Λυκούργου παντάπασιν ἀναπεπταμένη
καὶ ἄθηλυς οὖσα τοῖς ποιηταῖς λόγον παρέσχηκε.
φαινομηρίδας τε γὰρ αὐτὰς ἀποκαλοῦσιν, ὡς
399°
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, π΄. 6-11. 3
sulting equality was the foundation and base of his
polity ;b ut in the other, since the allotment of lands
was recent, there was no urgent reason for introduc-
ing another division, or for disturbing the first assign-
ment, which probably was still in force.
III. With regard to community in marriage and
parentage, though both, by a sound policy, inculcated
in husbands a freedom from selfish jealousy, still,
their methods were not entirely alike. The Roman
husband, if he had a sufficient number of children to
rear, and another, who lacked children, could per-
suade him to the step, relinquished his wife to him,
having the power of surrendering her entirely, or only
for a season ; but the Spartan, while his wife remained
in his house, and the marriage retained its original
rights and obligations, might allow any one who
gained his consent to share his wife for the purpose
of getting children by her. And many husbands, as
we have said,! would actually invite into their homes
men whom they thought most likely to procure them
handsome and noble children. What, then, is the
difference between the two customs? We may say,
perhaps, that the Spartan implies a complete indiffer-
ence to the wife, and to the jealous emotions which
confound and consume the hearts of most men;
while the Roman, as if with shame-faced modesty,
makes a veil of the new betrothal, and concedes
that community of wives is really insupportable.
Still further, Numa’s watchful care of young
maidens was more conducive to feminine decorum;
but the treatment of them by Lycurgus, being
entirely unconfined and unfeminine, has given oc-
casion to the poets. They call them “ phainomerides,”’
1 Lycurgus, xv. 7.
39!
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Ἴβυκος, καὶ avdpopavets λοιδοροῦσιν, ws Εὐρι-
πίδης, λέγων'
A’ σὺν νέοισιν ἐξερημοῦσιν ' δόμους
γυμνοῖσι μηροῖς καὶ πέπλοις ἀνειμένοὶς.
4 τῷ γὰρ ὄντι τοῦ παρθενικοῦ χιτῶνος αἱ πτέρυγες (ie!
οὐκ ἦσαν συνερραμμέναι κάτωθεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνεπτύσ-
σοντο καὶ συνανεγύμνουν ὅλον ἐν τῷ βαδίζειν
τὸν μηρόν. καὶ σαφέστατα τὸ γινόμεοον εἴρηκε
Σοφοκλῆς ἐν τούτοις"
Καὶ τὰν νέορτον, ἃς ἔτ᾽ ἄστολος χιτὼν
θυραῖον ἀμφὶ μηρὸν
πτύσσεται, ᾿Ὡρμιόναν.
διὸ καὶ θρασύτεραι λέγονται γενέσθαι καὶ πρὸς
αὐτοὺς πρῶτον ἀνδρώδεις τοὺς ἄνδρας, ἅτε δὴ
τῶν μὲν οἴκων ἄρχουσαι κατὰ κράτος, ἐν δὲ τοῖς
δημοσίοις πράγμασι καὶ γνώμης μεταλαμβάνου-
σαι καὶ παρρησίας περὶ τῶν μεγίστων. ὁ δὲ
Νομᾶς ταῖς γαμεταῖς τὸ μὲν ἀξίωμα καὶ τὴν
τιμὴν ἐτήρησε πρὸς τοὺς ἄνδρας, ἣν εἶχον ἀπὸ
“Ῥωμύλου θεραπευόμεναι διὰ τὴν ἁρπαγήν, αἰδῶ
δὲ πολλὴν ἐπέστησεν αὐταῖς καὶ πολυπραγμοσύ-
νην ἀφεῖλε καὶ νήφειν ἐδίδαξε καὶ σιωπᾶν εἴθισεν,
οἴνου μὲν ἀπεχομένας τὸ πάμπαν, λόγῳ δὲ μηδὲ
ὑπὲρ τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἀνδρὸς ἄνευ χρωμένας.
λέγεται γοῦν ποτε γυναικὸς εἰπούσης δίκην ἰδίαν
ἐν ἀγορᾷ πέμψαι τὴν σύγκλητον εἰς θεοῦ, πυν-
1 Δξερημοῦσιν adapted from ἐξερημοῦσαι (leaving their homes).
392
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, u1. 3-6
bare-thighed (so Ibycus), and revile them as mad after
men. Thus Euripides says } :—
“ They leave their homes to mingle with the youths;
Their thighs are naked, flying free their robes.”
For in fact the flaps of the tunic worn by their
maidens were not sewn together below the waist,
but would fly back and lay bare the whole thigh as
they walked. Sophocles pictures the thing very
clearly in these words ? :—
“ And that young maid, whose tunic, still unsewn,
Lays bare her gleaming thigh
Between its folds, Hermione.”
And so their women, it is said, were too bold,
putting on men’s airs with their husbands even, to
begin with, since they ruled their houses absolutely,
and besides, on public occasions, taking part in de-
bate and the freest speech on the most important
subjects. But Numa, while carefully preserving to
the matrons that dignified and honourable relation to
their husbands which was bestowed on them by
Romulus,’ when he tried by kindly usage to efface
the memory of the violence done them, nevertheless
enjoined great modesty upon them, forbade them
all busy intermeddling, taught them sobriety, and
accustomed them to be silent ;w ine they were to re-
frain from entirely, and were not to speak, even on
the most necessary topics, unless their husbands were
with them. At any rate, it is said that when a woman
once pleaded her own cause in the forum, the senate
sent to inquire of an oracle what the event might
1 Andromache, 587 f. (Kirchhoff), slightly adapted.
4 Fragment 788 (Nauck). 3 Cf. Romulus, xix. 6.
398
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
θανομένην Tivos dpa TH πόλει σημεῖον εἴη TO γεγε-
νημέν» ον. Kal \ τῆaς ἄ” λλης εὐ> πειθεί΄α ς Kal πρᾳότ, ητος
αὐτῶν μέγα τεκμήριον ἡ μνήμη τῶν χειρόνων. ὡς
γὰρ παρ᾽ ἡμῖν οἱ ἱστορικοὶ γράφουσι τοὺς πρώ-
τους ἢ φόνον ἐμφύλιον ἐργασαμένους ἢ πολεμή-
σαντας ἀ> δελφοῖςlal ἢA πατρὸςἊν αὐ>τ όχ/ ειρας ἢaA μητρὸςΝ
γενομένους, οὕ¢ τω € Ῥωμαῖοa ι μνημονεύουσιν ὅτι
πρῶrτ ος μὲ\ν ἀ> πεπέ/μ ψατο γυναῖaκ α Σπόρ4 ιος Καρ-
Bi,r dos, μετὰ\ τὴΝὰν ¢ Ῥώμ΄ ης κτί,σ ιν ἔBAτ εσι τριά,κ οντα
καὶ διακοσίοις οὐδενὸ\ς τοιούτου γεγονότ4 ος, πρώτη
δὲ γυνὴ Πιναρίου Θαλαία τοὔνομα διηνέχθη πρὸς
éς xupaΝv. αὑςτ ῆaς Γεγανί"α2 ν Ταρκυνίο, υ Σουπέρ, βου
βασιλεύοντος. οὕτω καλῶς καὶ κοσμίως τεταγ-
μένα τὰ τῶν γάμων ἣν ὑπὸ τοῦ νομοθέτου.
IV. Τῇ δὲ ἄλλῃ τῶν παρθένων ἀγωγῇ καὶ τὰ
περὶ\ τὰ\ς ἐ9 κδό,σ εις ὁ¢ μολογεῖ,n τοῦa n μὲ\ν Λυκούρig γου
πεπείρους καὶ ὀργώσας νυμφεύοντος, ὅπως ἧ τε
ὁ« μιλία/ , δεομέ/ν ης ἤ» δη τῆnς φύ(σ4 εως, χάρ/ ιτος ἢ°
καὶ φιλίας ἀρχὴ μᾶλλον ἢ μίσους καὶ φόβου
παρὰ φύσιν βιαζομένων, καὶ τὰ σώματα ῥώμην
ἔχῃ πρὸς τὸ τὰς κυήσεις ἀναφέρειν καὶ τὰς ὠδιῖ-
vas, ὡςς ἐδπ᾽᾽.. . οὐ50δ. ὲΧν ἄ+ λλο γαμουμέν, ων ἢx TO\ τῆaς
τεκνώσεως ἔργον, τῶν δὲ Ρωμαίων δωδεκαετεῖς
καὶ Ν νεωτέρας ἐb]κ διδό,ν των' οὕ“ τω ya\p ἂx ν μά/λ ιστα
καὶ Ν TOΝ σῶa μα Kal N TON y ἦἐδ θος καθαρὸνΝ Kal Ν ἄΨἘθ ικτον ἐCπoeὶn
τῷa γαμοῦνa τι γί/ν εσθαι. δῆa λον οὖ9ν ὅΨ τι TO\ μὲ\ν
394
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, πη. 6-1Vv. 2
portend for the city. And for their usual gentle-
ness and readiness to obey, there is strong evidence
in the specific mention made of those who were less
amenable. For just as our Greek historians record
the names of those who first slew kinsfolk, or made
war on their brothers, or were parricides, or matricides,
so the Romans make record of the fact that Spurius
Carvilius was the first to divorce his wife, two
hundred and thirty years after the founding of Rome,
there being no precedent for it; also that the wife
of Pinarius, Thalaea by name, was the first woman to
quarrel with her own mother-in-law, Gegania, in the
reign of Tarquinius Superbus. In such fitting and
proper manner were marriages regulated by their
lawgiver.
IV. Further, the practice of the two peoples in the
matter of giving their young maids in marriage
conforms to their education of them in general.
Lycurgus made them brides only when they were
fully ripe and eager for it, in order that intercourse
with a husband, coming at a time when nature
craved it, might produce a kindly love, instead of the
timorous hate that follows unnatural compulsion ; also
that their bodies might be vigorous enough to en-
dure the strain of conception and child-birth, con-
vinced as he was that marriage had no other end
than the production of children. The Romans, on
the other hand, gave their maidens in marriage when
they were twelve years old, or even younger. In
this way more than any other, it was thought, both
their bodies and their dispositions would be pure and
undefiled when their husbands took control of them.
It is clear, therefore, that one practice regarded
nature more, with children in view; the other re-
395
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
φυσικώτ, ερον πρὸἊς τέ’κ νωσιν, TO\ δὲ\ ἠ᾽ θικώτ, ερον
πρὸς συμβίωσιν.
9 Αλλὰ \ μὴ\ν ἐ5 πιστασία,ι ς τε παί/δ ων καὶ \ συναγε-
λασμοῖςa Kal παιδαγωγίαις Kal κοινωνία,ι ς, περί TE
δεῖπνα καὶ γυμνάσια καὶ παιδιὰς αὐτῶν ἐμμελεί-
ais Kal διακοσμήσεσιν, οὐδέν TL τοῦa προστυχόν/ τος
νομοθέτ/ ου βελτίο/ να toΝvΥ Nopava ὁς Λυκοῦnρ γος
ἀποδείκνυσιν, ἐπὶ ταῖς τῶν πατέρων ποιησά-
μενον ἐπιθυμία’,ι ς ἢ χρείαις τὰ\ς τῶaν νέAω ν ἀγω-
yas, εἴτε Tis ἐργάτην γῆnς βούλοιτο ποιεῖaν τὸ\ν
υἱἘὸΝ ν εἴ” τε ναυπηγὸν\ ἢA χαλκέα, διδάlσh κειν ἢXx αὐ>λ ητήν/,
ὥ“ σπερ ov» πρὸς\ aἕAν τέ7λ] ος ὀ3 φεί,λ οντας ἐ3 ξ ἀ> ρχῆςA
ἄ” γεσθαι καὶ \ συνεπιστρέfφ εσθαι τοῖvςal ἤ» θεσιν, ἀ2 λλ 2
οἷον εἰς ναῦν ἐπιβάτας ἕτερον ἐξ ἑτέρας ἥκοντα
χρείας καὶ προαιρέσεως ἐν τοῖς κινδύνοις μόνον
φόβῳ τοῦn ἰδί/ ου συνίστασθαι πρὸς τὸ κοινόν,
ἄyA λλως δὲ\ τὸx καθ᾽ > αὑCoτe ὸνN σκοπεῖνlal ἕ“ καστον. καὶ \
τοῖlςad μὲ\ν πολλοῖςa οὐ>κ ἄΝ ξιον ἐ>’γ καλεῖ"ν“" νομοθέτ/ αις
ἐλλείifπ ουσιν ἢa Ov > ἄγνοιαν ἢa δι’P pἀ σθέν/ε ιαν: ἀ> νδρὶ\
δὲ σοφῷa βασιλεία’ ν παραλαβόντι δή΄ὔμ ου νεωστὶ
συνισταμέν/ ου καὶ πρὸ\ς μηδὲν ἀντιτείνοντος, περὶ
τί πρῶτον! ἣν σπουδάσαι προσῆκον ἢ παίδων ἐκ-
τροφὴ\ν Kal νέ»ω ν ἄ» σκησιν, ὅ“ πως μὴ\ διά, φοροι μηδὲ\
ταραχώδεις γένοιντο τοῖς ἤθεσιν, ἀλλ᾽ εἰς ἕν τι 78
κοινὸν ἀρετῆς ἴχνος εὐθὺς ἐξ ἀρχῆς πλαττόμενοι
καὶ \ τυπούμa ενοι συμβαίν/ο ιεν ἀ> λλήλ/ο ις; ὃἃ δὴἉ πρός,
TE τὰ\ ἄ” λλα καὶ \ σωτηρία/ ν νόμων ὠ2 φέλῇ ησε τὸ\ν
Λυκοῦρn γον. μικρὸς ya\p ἣν ὁδ τῶlaνl ὅρκων φόβος, εἰ
1 πρῶτον Bekker corrects to πρότερον.
396
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, ιν. 2-5
garded more the formation of character, with married
life in view.
But surely, by his careful attention to boys, by
their collection into companies, their discipline and
constant association, and by his painstaking arrange-
ments for their meals and bodily exercise and sports,
Lycurgus proves that Numa was no more than an
ordinary lawgiver. For Numa left the bringing
up of youths to the wishes or necessities of their
fathers. A father might, if he wished, make his
son a tiller of the soil, or a shipwright, or might
teach him to be a smith or a flute-player, as if
it were not important that all of them should be
trained with one and the same end in view from the
outset, and have their dispositions formed alike; but
rather as if they were like passengers on a ship, each
coming with a different object and purpose, and each
therefore uniting with the rest for the common good
only in times of peril, through fear of private loss,
but otherwise consulting only his own _ interests.
Now, it is not worth while to censure the common
run of legislators, who fail through ignorance or
weakness. But when a wise man had consented to
be king over a people newly constituted and pliant
to his every wish, what should have been his first
care, unless it was the rearing of boys and the
training of youths so that there might be no con-
fusing differences in their characters, but that they
might be moulded and fashioned from the very
outset so as to walk harmoniously together in the
same path of virtue? This, indeed, was what
helped Lycurgus to secure, among other things, the
stability and permanence of his laws. The Spartans
tovuk oaths to maintain these laws, it is true, but
VOL. 1. O 397
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μὴ\ ὃ διὰ\ τῆaς παιδὃε ία" ς καὶ \ τῆaς ἀ> γωγῆςa οἷφΦο ν ἀ3 νέἐδδε υσε il
τοῖaς ἤθεσι τῶlaνl παίδων TOUSx νό/μ ους, Kal συνῳκείωσε
τῇla l τροφῇA Tov ζῆa λον τῆnς πολιτεία, ς, ὥστε TEVTAKO-
σίων ἐτῶa ν πλείω χρόν/ ον Ta κυριώτατα Kal
μέγιστα διαμεῖaν αι τῆnςa νομοθεσία, ς, ὥifσ περ βαφῆςa
ἀκράτου καὶ ἰσχυρῶaς καθαψαμένUηA ς.
Νομᾷa δὲδὲ ὅ« περ ἦ5 ν τέ/λ ος τῆaς πολιτεία/ ς, ἐ2ν
εἰ9 ρή/ν ῃ κ- αὶ \ φιλί/ᾳ τὴ\ν € Ῥώμ΄ ην ὑe πάρ4 χειν, εὐ᾽ θὺ\ς
συνεξέλιπε: καὶ μετὰ τὴ\ν τελευτὴν ἐκείνου TOV
ἀμφίθ, υρον οἶκον, ὃa ν κεκλεισμέν/ ον AUTO\S συνεῖAχ εν,
ὥ¢ σπερ ὄ» ντως ἐν αὐτῷla l τιθασεύδω ν καθειργμένον τὸν
πόλεμον, ἐξ ἀμφοτέρων ἀναπετάσαντες αἵματος
καὶ \ νεκρῶaν τὴ\ν by᾿ Ιταλί/α ν ἐDνP,έ πλησαν: καὶ \ οὐIδOὲN
ο’ λί/γ ον χρόν/ ον ἡς καλλίσ/ τη καὶ \ ὃ δικαιοτά/τ η κατά-΄
στασις ἔμεινεν, ἅτε δὴ\ καὶ TO\ συνδετικὸν ἐν αὑτῇ,a
τὴν παιδείαν, οὐκ ἔχουσα.
“Tt οὖν, φήσει τις, “οὐκ ἐπὶ τὸ βέλτιον ἡ
ς Ῥώ,μ η προῆaλn θε τοῖaς πολεμικοῖςla;) 9᾿9.. .ἐ ρωτῶlνal ἐ’ ρώ/ τημα
μακρᾶςn ἀποκρίσεως δεό/ μενον πρὸς ἀνθρώπους
τὸ\ BEβXέλ τιον ἐ»ν x πλiοLύ τῳ Kal \ τρυφῇa Kal \ ἡς γεἣ μονίᾳ/
μᾶalλ λον ἢ σωτηρίᾳ, Kal πρᾳότ/ ητι Kal THa μετὰ
δικαιοσύν/ ης αὐ>τ αρκείᾳ/ τιθεμέν/ ους. οὐ> μὴ\ν ἀΣ λλὰ \
καὶ Ν τοῦaτ ο Λυκού7ρ γῳ που δό/ξ ει βοηθεῖνan, τὸ\
ceῬ ωμαίο/ υς μὲ\ν τὴ\ν ἐwπdὶ Nowa“ κατάσ/ τασιν ἐ> ξαλλά-/
ἕαντας ἐπιδοῦναι τοῖς πράγμασι τοσοῦτον, Λακε-
δαιμονίους δὲ ἅμα τῷ πρῶτον ἐκβῆναι τὴν
Λυκούργου διάταξιν, ἐκ μεγί72σ των ταπεινοτάτους
γενέ/σ θαι καὶ \ τὴ\ν τῶaν ¢ ᾿Ελλλή/ νων ἡe γεμ4 ονί1αg ν ἀ᾽ πο-
1 ἀνέδευσε Bekker adopts Reiske’s correction to ἐνέδευσε.
398
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, ιν. 5-8
this would have availed little had he not, by means
of his training and education of the boys, infused his
laws, as it were, into their characters, and made the
emulous love of his government an integral part of
their rearing. The result was that for more than
five hundred years the sovereign and fundamental
features of his legislation remained in force, like a
strong and penetrating dye.
But that which was the end and aim of Numa’s
government, namely, the continuance of peace and
friendship between Rome and other nations, straight-
way vanished from the earth with him. ‘After his
death the double doors of the temple! which he had
kept continuously closed, as if he really had war
caged and confined there, were thrown wide open,
and Italy was filled with the blood of the slain.
Thus not even for a little time did the beautiful
edifice of justice which he had reared remain stand-
ing, because it lacked the cement of education.
“What, then!’’ some one will say, “was not
Rome advanced and bettered by her wars?” That
is a question which will need a long answer, if I am
to satisfy men who hold that betterment consists
in wealth, luxury and empire, rather than in safety,
gentleness, and that independence which is attended
by righteousness. However, it will be thought, 1
suppose, to favour the superior claims of Lycurgus,
that, whereas the Romans increased in power as
they did after abandoning the institutions of Numa’s
time, the Lacedaemonians, on the other hand, just
as soon as they forsook the precepts of Lycurgus,
sank from the highest to the lowest place, lost their
supremacy over the Greeks, and were in danger of
i Cf. Numa, xx. 1.
399
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
βαλόντας κινδυνεῦA σαι περὶ \ ἀναστάσεως. ἐκεῖAν ο
μέντοι TOA Nowa A μέ/γ α καὶ \ θεῖa ον ὡς ἀληθῶlςol
ὑe πάρ/ χει, TO\ ξέ/ νῳ Te μεταπέ/μ πτῳ γενέ/σ θαι καὶ \
πάν, τα πειθοῖ a μεταβαλεῖνA, καὶ \ κρατῆAσ αι πό,λ εως
οὔ» πω συμπεπνευκυία/ς , μήτ/ ε ὅ“ πλων δεηθέ/ν τα μήτ4 ε
Bi7a s τινός, , wςs Λυκοῦρa γος ἐΨπ ὶ ΣΝ τὸ\ν δῆA μον ἦ= γε τοὺ\ς
ἀ3 ρί/σ τους, ἀ3 λλὰ Ν σοφί’ᾳ καὶ \ δικαιοσύν’ὔ ῃ πάν4 τας
προσαγαγόμενον Kal συναρμόσ/ αντα.
400
LYCURGUS AND NUMA, 1w..8
utter destruction. Nevertheless, this remains a
great feature in Numa’s career, and one really
divine, that he was a stranger, and yet was
summoned to the throne, where he changed the
whole nature of the state by force of persuasion
alone, and mastered a city which was not yet in
sympathy with his views ; and that he accomplished
this without appeal to arms or any violence (unlike
Lycurgus, who led the nobles in arms against the
commons), but by his wisdom and justice won the
hearts of all the citizens and brought them into
harmony.
491
8 v1 AMROEARSU 2URSROI YI
ΓΑ ΠΣ, ec CaN Bag ride ἐπῶν
ψN ἢaθ ὲa oea udR, ak Mg torino 2as bsPe oR fe ΘΉBΒiΘtΈs y Sὁ AE |
att, bogs duly otedw opovlodt, of) bedouinusa
noiesvzroq lo stot x oiipta a4. to sigtad slodw
GSP 408: serA SHEYS : αἰ Bote Manin” Hits” Sone
hadatiqainons od dadt bas ¢awgtraid div apis
sila) sonoloiy yaa τὸ any οὐ leogqe Iuodsiv auit
SE εἴπει ihre HR Polder Sila THA! “Gil? τ
“8: gro, ΘΟ λα bys, ctobetyy, itt,y d Jud, (ἀπορτησθο
ofat asad Jdgquoid Bess anoxidio 51} ἡμῶν pas
Rosa yay Ouse ἢ ae TW MAS LOS ET ai Yooured
\
SOLON
ΣΟΛΩΝ
1 Δίδυμος ὁ γραμματικὸς ἐν TH περὶ TOV
ἀξόνων τῶν Σόλωνος ἀντιγραφῇ πρὸς ᾿Ασκληπιά-
δὴν Φιλοκλέους τινὸς τέθεικε λέξιν, ἐν ἧ τὸν
Σόλωνα πατρὸς Εὐφορίωνος ἀποφαίνει παρὰ τὴν
τῶν ἄλλων δόξαν, ὅσοι μέμνηνται Σόλωνος.
᾿Εξηκεστίδου γὰρ αὐτὸν ἅπαντες ὁμαλῶς γεγο-
νέναι λέγουσιν, ἀνδρὸς οὐσίᾳ μέν, ὥς φασι, καὶ
δυνάμει ,“μέσου τῶν πολιτῶν, οἰκίας δὲ πρώτης
κατὰ γένος" ἦν γὰρ Κοδρίδης ἀνέκαθεν. τὴν δὲ
μητέρα τοῦ Σόλωνος Ἡρακλείδης. ὁ Ποντικὸς
ἱστορεῖ τῆς Πεισιστράτου μητρὸς ἀνεψιὰν γε-
νέσθαι. καὶ φιλία τὸ πρῶτον ἦν αὐτοῖς πολλὴ
μὲν διὰ τὴν συγγένειαν, πολλὴ δὲ διὰ τὴν 79
εὐφυΐαν καὶ ὥραν, ὡς ἔνιοί φασιν, ἐρωτικῶς τὸν
Πεισίστρατον. ἀσπαξζομένου τοῦ Σόλωνος. ὅθεν
ὕστερον, ὡς ἔοικεν, εἰς διαφορὰν αὐτῶν ἐν τῇ
πολιτείᾳ καταστάντων οὐδὲν ἤνεγκεν ἡ ἔχθρα
σκληρὸν. οὐδ᾽ ἄγριον πάθος, ἀλλὰ παρέμεινεν
ἐκεῖνα τὰ δίκαια ταῖς ψυχαῖς, καὶ παρεφύλαξε,
Τυφόμενα Δίου πυρὸς ἔτι ζῶσαν φλόγα,
τὴν ἐρωτικὴν μνήμην καὶ χάριν. ὅτι δὲ πρὸς τοὺς
καλοὺς οὐκ ἣν ἐχυρὸς ὁ Σόλων οὐδ᾽ Ἔρωτι θαρ-
ραλέος“ ἀνταναστῆναι πύκτης ὅπως ἐς χεῖρας, 1
1 νΈρωτι μέν νυν boris ἀντανίσταται
πύκτης ὕπως ἐς χεῖρας, οὐ καλῶς φρονεῖ.
(Sophocles, Z'rachiniae, 441 f.)
404
SOLON
I. Divymus the grammarian, in his reply to
Asclepiades on Solon’s tables of law, mentions a
remark of one Philocles, in which it is stated that
Solon’s father was Euphorion, contrary to the opinion
of all others who have written about Solon. For
they all unite in saying that he was a son of
Execestides, a man of moderate wealth and influence
in the city, but a member of its foremost family,
being descended from Codrus. Solon’s mother,
.according to Heracleides Ponticus, was a cousin of
the mother of Peisistratus. And the two men were
at first great friends, largely because of their kinship,
and largely because of the youthful beauty of
Peisistratus, with whom, as some say, Solon was
passionately in love. And this may be the reason
why, in later years, when they were at variance
about matters of state, their enmity did not bring
with it any harsh or savage feelings, but their former
amenities lingered in their spirits, and preserved
there,
“smouldering with a lingering flame of Zeus-sent
tireἃ
the grateful memory of their love. And that Solon
was not proof against beauty in a youth, and made
not so bold with Love as “to confront him like a
boxer, hand to hand,” may be inferred from his
1 Kuripides, Bacchae, 8.
405
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἔκ τε τῶν ποιημάτων αὐτοῦ λαβεῖν ἔστι, και
νόμον ἔγραψε διαγορεύοντα δοῦλον μὴ ξηραλοι-
φεῖν μηδὲ παιδεραστεῖν, εἰς τὴν τῶν καλῶν
μερίδα καὶ σεμνῶν ἐπιτηδευμάτων τιθέμενος τὸ
πρᾶγμα, καὶ τρόπον τινὰ τοὺς ἀξίους προκαλού-
4 μενος ὧν τοὺς ἀναξίους ἀπήλαυνε. λέγεται δὲ
καὶ Πεισίστρατος ἐραστὴς Χάρμου γενέσθαι, καὶ
τὸ ἄγαλμα τοῦ Ἔρωτος ἐν ᾿Ακαδημείᾳ καθιε-
ρῶσαι, ὅπου τὸ πῦρ ἀνάπτουσιν οἱ τὴν ἱερὰν
λαμπάδα διαθέοντες.
TH. Θυΐδὲ οὖν Σόλων τὴν οὐσίαν τοῦ πατρὸς
ἐλαττώσαντος εἰς φιλανθρωπίας τινάς, ὥς φησιν
“Ἰρμιππος, καὶ χάριτας, οὐκ ἂν ἀπορήσας τῶν
βουλομένων ἐπαρκεῖν, αἰδούμενος δὲ λαμβάνειν
Tap ἑτέρων ἐξ οἰκίας γεγονὼς εἰθισμένης ἑ€ τέροις
βοηθεῖν, ὥρμησε νέος ὧν ἔτι πρὸς ἐμπορίαν.
καίτοι φασὶν ἐἔ νιοι πολυπειρίας ἕνεκα μᾶλλον καὶ
ἱστορίας ἢ χρηματισμοῦ πλανηθῆναι τὸν Σόλωνα.
2 σοφίας μὲν γὰρ ἦν ὁμολογουμένως ἐραστής, ὅς
γε καὶ πρεσβύτερος ὧν ἔλεγε “γηράσκειν αἰεὶ
πολλὰ διδασκόμενος} πλοῦτον δ᾽ οὐκ ἐθαύμαζεν,
ἀλλὰ καί φησιν ὁμοίως πλουτεῖν ᾧ τεῦ
πολὺς ἄργυρός ἐστι
καὶ χρυσὸς καὶ γῆς πυροφόρου πεδία
ἵπποι θ᾽ ἡμίονοί τε, καὶ ᾧ μόνα ταῦτα πάρεστι,
γαστρί τε καὶ πλευρῇ καὶ ποσὶν ἁβρὰ παθεῖν,
παιδός T ἠδὲ γυναικός, ἐπὴν καὶ ταῦτ᾽ ἀφίκηται,
ἥβη, σὺν δ᾽ ὥρη γίνεται ἁρμοδία.
1 Γηράσκω δ᾽ αἰεὶ πολλὰ διδασκόμενος. Fragment 18 (Bergk,
Poet. Lyr. Gr. ii.4 p. 47).
2ι΄τσόν Tot πλουτοῦσιν ὅτῳ πολὺς ἄργυρός ἐστιν, K.T.A.,
Fragment 24 (Bergk), verses 1-6.
406
SOLON, 1. 3-11. 2
poems. He also wrote a law forbidding a slave
to practise gymnastics or have a boy lover, thus
putting the matter in the category of honourable and
dignified practices, and in a way inciting the worthy
to that which he forbade the unworthy. And it is
said that Peisistratus also had a boy lover, Charmus,
and that he dedicated the statue of Love in the
Academy, where the runners in the sacred torch race
light their torches.
II. Solon, then, after his father had impaired his
estate in sundry benevolent charities, as Hermippus
tells us, might have found friends enough who were
willing to aid him. But he was ashamed to take
from others, since he belonged to a family which
had always helped others, aud therefore, while still
a young man, embarked in commerce. And yet
some say that he travelled to get experience and
learning rather than to make money. For he was
admittedly a lover of wisdom, since even when he
was well on in years he would say that he “ grew old
ever learning many things”; and he was not an
admirer of wealth, but actually says that two men are
alike wealthy of whom one
“much silver hath,
And gold, and wide domains of wheat-bearing soil,
Horses and mules; while to the other only enough
belongs
To give him comfort of food, and clothes, and
shoes,
Enjoyment of child and blooming wife, when these
too come,
And only years commensurate therewith are his.”
407
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 ἀλλ᾽ ἑτέρωθι λέγει"
Χρήματα δ᾽ ἱμείρω μὲν ἔχειν, ἀδίκως δὲ πε-
πᾶσθαι
οὐκ ἐθέλω: πάντως ΤΩΝ ἐμὰ ἦλθε δίκη.
κωλύει δὲ οὐδὲν τὸν ἀγαθὸν καὶ πολιτικὸν ἄνδρα
μήτε τῶν “περιττῶν τὴν κτῆσιν ἐν σπουδῇ τί-
θεσθαι μήτε τῆς χρείας τῶν ἀναγκαίων. καὶ
ἱκανῶν καταφρονεῖν. ἐν δὲ τοῖς τότε χρόνοις,
καθ᾽ “Ησίοδον,ἔἔ ρ γον οὐδὲν ἣἢ ν ὄνειδος, οὐδὲ τέχνη
διαφορὰν ἔφερεν, ἐμπορία δὲ καὶ δόξαν εἶχεν
οἰκειουμένη τὰ βαρβαρικὰ καὶ προξενοῦσα φι-
λίας βασιλέων καὶ πραγμάτων ἐμπείρους ποιοῦ-
4 σα πολλῶν. ὄνιοι δὲ καὶ πόλεων οἰκισταὶ γε-
γόνασι μεγάλων, ὡς καὶ Μασσαλίας ἹἸΠ]ρῶτις
ὑπὸ Κελτῶν τῶν περὶ τὸν “Ῥοδανὸν ἀγαπηθείς.
καὶ Θαλῆν δέ φασιν ἐμπορίᾳ χρήσασθαι καὶ
Ἱπποκράτην τὸν μα ἡματικόν, καὶ Unrate τῆς
ἀποδημίας ἐφόδιον ἐλαίου τινὸς ἐν Αἰγύπτῳ διά-
θεσιν γενέσθαι.
III. Τὸ δ᾽ οὖν εὐδάπανον τῷ Σόλωνι καὶ ὑγρὸν
πρὸς τὴν δίαιταν, καὶ TO φορτικώτερον ἢ φίλοσο-
φώτερον ἐν τοῖς ποιήμασι διαλέγεσθαι περὶ τῶν
ἡδονῶν, τὸν ἐμπορικὸν οἴονται βίον προστε-
τρῖφθαι πολλοὺς γὰρ ἔχοντα κινδύνους καὶ
μεγάλους ἀνταπαιτεῖν πάλιν εὐπαθείας τινὰς καὶ
2 ἀπολαύσεις. ὅτι δ᾽ αὑτὸν ἐν τῇ τῶν πενήτων
μερίδι μᾶλλον ἢ τῇ τῶν πλουσίων ἔταττε, δῆλόν
ἐστιν ἐκ τούτων"
Πολλοὶ γὰρ πλουτεῦσι κακοί, ἀγαθοὶ δὲ πέ-
νονται"
ἀλλ᾽ ἡμεῖς αὐτοῖς οὐ διαμειψόμεθα
408
SOLON, u. 3-1. 2
However, in another place he says :—1
‘Wealth I desire to have; but wrongfully to get it,
I do not wish. Justice, even if slow, is sure.”
And there is no reason why a good statesman should
either set his heart too much on the acquisition
of superfluous wealth, or despise unduly the use of
what is necessary and convenient. In those earlier
times, to use the words of Hesiod,? “ work was no
disgrace,” nor did a trade bring with it social inferi-
ority, and the calling ofa merchant was actually held
in honour, since it gave him familiarity with foreign
parts, friendships with foreign kings, and a large
experience in affairs. Some merchants were actually
founders of great cities, as Protis, who was beloved
by the Gauls along the Rhone, was of Marseilles.
Thales is said to have engaged in trade, as well as
Hippocrates the mathematician ; and Plato defrayed
the expenses of his sojourn in Egypt by the sale
of oil. τὴν
III. Accordingly, if Solon’s way of living was
expensive and profuse, and if, in his poems, he speaks
of pleasure with more freedom than becomes a
philosopher, this is thought to be due to his
mercantile life; he encountered many and great
dangers, and sought his reward therefor in sundry
luxuries and enjoyments. But that he classed
himself among the poor rather than the rich, is clear
from these verses :—*
“For often evil men are rich, and good men poor;
But we will not exchange with them
1 Fragment 13 (Bergk), verses 7 f.
3. Works and Days, 311. 3 Fragment 15 (Bergk).
409
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τῆaς ἀ» ρετῆaς TOΧV πλοῦτa ον' ἐ3 πεὶ \ TO\ μὲ\ν ἔ” μπεδον
αἰεί,
χρήματα δ᾽ ἀνθρώπων ἄλλοτε ἄλλος ἔχει.
8 τῇ δὲ ποιήσει κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς μὲν εἰς οὐδὲν ἄξιον 80
σπουδῆς, ἀλλὰ παίζων ἔοικε προσχρήσασθαι
καὶ παράγων ἑαυτὸν ἐν τῷ σχολάζειν: ὕστερον
δὲ καὶ γνώμας ἐνέτεινε φιλοσόφους καὶ τῶν
πολιτικῶν πολλὰ συγκατέπλεκε τοῖς ποιήμασιν,
οὐχ ἱστορίας ἕνεκεν καὶ μνήμης, ἀλλ᾽ ᾿ἀπολογι-
σμούς τε τῶν πεπραγμένων ἔχοντα καὶ προτρο-
πὰς ἐνιαχοῦ καὶ νουθεσίας καὶ ἐπιπλήξεις πρὸς
4 τοὺς ᾿Αθηναίους. ἔνιοι δέ φασιν ὅτι καὶ τοὺς
νόμους ἐπεχείρησεν ἐντείνας εἰς ἔπος ἐξενεγκεῖν,
καὶ διαμνημονεύουσι τὴν ἀρχὴν οὕτως ἔχουσαν'
Πρῶτα μὲν εὐχώμεσθα Διὶ Κρονίδῃ βασιλῆϊ
θεσμοῖς τοῖσδε τύχην ἀγαθὴν καὶ κῦδος ὀπάσ-
σαι.
Φιλοσοφίας δὲ τοῦ ἠθικοῦ μάλιστα τὸ πολιτι-
κόν, ὥσπερ οἱ πλεῖστοι τῶν σοφῶν, ἠγάπησεν.
ἐν δὲ τοῖς φυσικοῖς ἁπλοῦς ἐστι λίαν καὶ ἀρχαῖος,
ὡς Kaasἐ κ τούτων"
5 Ex νεφέλης πέλεται χιόνος μένος ἠδὲ χαλάζης"
βρ οντὴ δ᾽ ἐκ λαμπρᾶς γίνεται ἀστεροπῆς.
ἐξ ἀνέμων δὲ θάλασσα ταράσσεται" ἢν δέ τις
αὐτὴν
μὴ\ κινῇ,a πάνΑ των ἐ" στὶ \ δικαιοτάτ/ η.
καὶ ὅλως ἔοικεν ἡ Θάλεω μόνου σοφία τότε
περαιτέρω τῆς χρείας ἐξικέσθαι τῇ θεωρίᾳ" τοῖς
410
SOLON, 11. 2-5
Our virtue for their wealth, since one abides
alway,
While riches change their owners every day.”
And he seems to have composed his poetry at first
with no serious end in view, but as amusement and
diversion in his hours of leisure. Then later, he put
philosophic maxims into verse, and interwove many
political teachings in his poems, not simply to record
and transmit them, but because they contained
justifications of his acts, and sometimes exhortations,
admonitions, and rebukes for the Athenians. Some
say, too, that he attempted to reduce his laws to
heroic verse before he published them, and they give
us this introduction to them :—
“First let us offer prayers to Zeus, the royal son of
Cronus,
That he may give these laws of ours success and
fame.” }
In philosophy, he cultivated chiefly the domain of
political ethics, like most of the wise men of the
time; and in physics, he is very simple and anti-
quated, as is clear from the following verses :—
“From clouds come sweeping snow and hail,
And thunder follows on the lightning’s flash.
By winds the sea is lashed to storm, but if it be
Unvexed, it is of all things most amenable.” 2
And in general, it would seem that Thales was
the only wise man of the time who carried _ his
speculations beyond the realm of the practical ; the
1 Fragment 31 (Bergk).
2 Fragment 9, verses 1-2; and fragment 12 (Bergk).
411
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δὲ\ ἄ9)λ λοις ἀ> πὸ \ τῆaς πολιτικῆςA ἀ» ρετῆnςa τοὔ» νομα τῆloςl
σοφίας ὑπῆρξε.
IV. Γενέσθαι δὲ μετ᾽ ἀλλήλων ἔν τε Δελφοῖς
ὁe μοῦ[ ον λέγονται καὶ πάλιν ἐν KopivOe, ἸΤεριάνδρου
σύλλογόν τινα κοινὸν αὐτῶν καὶ συμπόσιον
κατασκευάσαντος. ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον εἰς ἀξίωμα καὶ
δόξαν αὐτοὺς κατέστησεν ἡ τοῦ τρίποδος περίοδος
καὶ \ διὰ\ πάν, των ἀ> νακύκ/ λησις Kal ἀ3 νθύπ΄ ειξις μετ ’
εὐμενείας φιλοτί/μ ου γενομένη. Κῴων yap, ὥς
φασι, καταγόντων σαγήνην, καὶ ξένων ἐκ Μιλή-
Tov πριαμένων τὸΝν βόfλ ον οὔπω φανερὸν ὄ5) ντα,
χρυσοῦς ἐφάνη τρίπους ἑλκόμενος, ὃν λέγουσιν
€ Ελέν4 ην πλέο/ υσαν ἐ2κ Τροί/α ς αὐDτ2 όθkeh, ι καθεῖνa αι
χρησμοῦ τινος ἀναμνησθεῖσαν παλαιοῦ. γενο-
μένης δὲ τοῖς ξένοις πρῶτον ἀντιλογίας πρὸς τοὺς
ἁλιέας περὶ τοῦ τρίποδος, εἶτα τῶν πόλεων
ἀ3 ναδεξαμέν/ ων τὴ\ν διαφορὰ\ν ἄyAχ ρι πολέμ/ ου προ-
ελθοῦσαν, ἀνεῖλεν ἀμφοτέροις ἡ Πυθία τῷ σοφω-
τάτῳ τὸν τρίποδα ἀποδοῦναι. καὶ πρῶτον μὲν
ἀπεστάλη πρὸς Θαλῆν εἰς Μίλητον, ἑκουσίως
τῶν Κῴων ἑνὶ δωρουμένων ἐκείνῳ περὶ οὗ πρὸς
ἅὉ παντας ος μοῦa Μιλησίο/ υς ἐ2 πολέ/μ ησαν. Θάλ/ εω
δὲ Βίαντα σοφώτερον ἀποφαίνοντος αὑτοῦ πρὸς
ἐκεῖ- νον Kev’ ἀπ᾽ 3 ἐκείνου δ᾽ αὖ9θ5 ις ἀπεστάλη πρὸς
ἄλλον ὡς σοφώτερον. εἶτα περιϊὼν καὶ ἀνα-
πεμπόμενος οὕ“ τως ἐ>π ὶ | Θαλῆνn τὸx δεύ4τ ερον ἀ> φί-/
κετο, καὶ τέλος εἰς Θήβας ἐκ Μιλήτου κομισθεὶς
τῷa 3 ᾿Ισμηνί/ῳ ? ᾿Από/λ λωνι καθιερώθ/ η.
412
SOLON, 1. 5-1v. 3
rest} got the name of wisdom from their excellence
as statesmen.
IV. They are all said to have met together at
Delphi, and again in Corinth, where Periander
arranged something like a joint conference for them,
and a banquet. But what contributed still more to
their honour and fame was the circuit which the
tripod made among them, its passing round through
all their hands, and their mutual declination of it,
with generous expressions of good will. Some Coans,
as the story goes, were dragging in a net, and some
strangers from Miletus bought the catch as yet
unseen. It proved to contain a golden tripod which
Helen, on her voyage from Troy, is said to have
thrown in there, when she called to mind a certain
ancient oracle. First the strangers had a dispute
with the fishermen about the tripod, and then their
cities took up the quarrel and went at last to war,
whereupon the Pythian priestess of Apollo told both
parties in an oracle that the tripod must be given to
the wisest man. So in the first place it was sent to
Thales at Miletus, the Coans willingly bestowing
upon him alone that for which they had waged war
against all the Milesians together. But Thales
declared that Bias was a wiser man than he, and the
tripod was sent to Bias. From Bias, in his turn,
it was dispatched to another, as wiser than he. So
it went the rounds and was sent away by each in
turn, until at last it came to Thales for the second
time. Finally, it was carried from Miletus to Thebes
and dedicated to Ismenian Apollo.
1 The names usually given in the list of the Seven Wise
Men are: Bias of Priene, Chilon of Sparta, Cleobulus of
Lindus, Periander of Corinth, Pittacus of Mitylene, Solon of
Athens, and Thales of Miletus. See chapter xii. 4.
413
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 Θεόφραστος δέ φησι, πρῶaτ ον μὲν εἰς ἹΤριή/ν ην
Βί,αὔ ντι τὸ\ν τρί/ ποδα πεμφθῆνlaαl ι, δεύveτ ερον δ᾽’ εἰ3ς.
Μίλητον Θαλῇ Βίαντος ἀποπέμψαντος: οὕτω δὲ
διὰ πάντων πάλιν εἰς Βίαντα περιελθεῖν, τέλος δὲ
ei>s Δελφοὺς\ ἀ’ ποσταλῆνaα ι. ταῦaτ α μὲ\ν οὖ5ν ὑCπoaὸn
πλειό΄ν ων τεθρύ4λ ηται, πλὴ\ν O“ TL TO\ δῶcaρl ον ἀ>ν τὶ \ τοῦa
τρί/ ποδος οἱ £ μὲ\ν φιά/λ ην ὑὉ πὸX N Κροί[σ4 ου πεμφθεῖσa αν,
ς δὲé€ ποτήρ/ ιον βαθυκλέο/ υς ἀ» πολιπόν, τος εἶ5 ναι
λέγουσιν.
V. Ἰδίᾳ δ᾽ ᾿Αναχάρσεώς τε πρὸς Σόλωνα καὶ
πάλ/ ιν Θάλ; εω συνουσία/ ν τινὰ\ καὶ \ λογUdο ὺυς a’v a-
γράφουσι τοιούτους. ᾽ Ἀνάχ΄ αρσιν μὲ\ν εἰJς S Αθήν/ ας
φασὶν ἐπὶ τὴν Σόλωνος οἰκίαν ἐλθόντα κόπτειν,
καὶ λέγειν ὡς ξένος ὧὦ ν ἀφῖκται φιλίαν ποιησόμενος
καὶ ξενίαν πρὸς αὐτόν. ἀποκριναμένου δὲ τοῦ
Σόλωνος ws οἴκοι βέλτιόν ἐἐ στι ποιεῖσθαι φιλίας,
“Οὐκοῦν, φάναι τὸν ᾿Ανάχαρσιν, “αὐτὸς ὧν οἴκοι
σὺ ποίησαι φιλίαν καὶ ξενίαν πρὸς ἡμᾶς." ᾿ οὕτω δὴ
θαυμάσαντα τὴν ἀγχίνοιαν τοῦ ἀνδρὸς. τὸν Σόλωνα
δέξασθαι φιλοφρόνως, καὶ χρόνον τινὰ κατασχεῖν
παρ᾽ αὑτῷ, ἤδη τὰ δημόσια πράττοντα καὶ συν-
ταττόμενον τοὺς νόμους. τὸν οὗν ᾿Ανάχαρσιν 8]
πυθόμενον καταγελᾶν τῆς πραγματείας τοῦ Σόλω-
νος, οἰομένου γράμμασιν ἐφέξειν τὰς ἀδικίας καὶ
πλεονεξίας τῶν πολιτῶν, ἃ μηδὲν τῶν ἀρωχνίων
διαφέρειν, GAN ὡς ἐκεῖνα τοὺς μὲν ἀσθενεῖς καὶ
λεπτοὺς τῶν ἁλισκομένων καθέξειν, ὑπὸ δὲ τῶν
δυνατῶaν καὶ πλουσί/ω ν διαρραγήσεσθαι. τὸν δὲ
Σόλωνα πρὸς ταῦτά φασιν εἰπεῖν ὅτι καὶ συν-
θήκας ἄνθρωποι φυλάττουσιν, ἃς οὐδετέρῳ λυσι-
414
SOLON, τιν. 4-v. 3
Theophrastus, however, says that the tripod was
sent in the first place to Bias at Priene, and in the
second place to Thales at Miletus, at the instance of
Bias, and so passed through the hands of all the wise
men until it came round again to Bias, and finally was
sent to Delphi. These, Phen, are ine more common
versions of the tale. But some say that the gift
thus passed from hand to hand was not the tripod
now seen at Delphi, but a bowl sent there by
Croesus; and others that it was a beaker left there
by Bathycles.
V. In particular we are told of private intercourse
between Solon and Anacharsis, and between Solon
and Thales, of which the following accounts are
given.t Anacharsis came to Athens, knocked at
Solon’s door, and said that he was a stranger who
had come to make ties of friendship and hospitality
with him. On Solon’s replying that it was better to
make one’s friendships at home, “ Well then,” said
Anacharsis, ‘‘do thou, who art at home, make me
thy friend and guest.’”” So Solon, admiring the
man’s ready wit, received him graciously and kept
him with him some time. This was when he was
already engaged in public affairs and compiling his
laws. Anacharsis, accordingly, on learning what
Solon was about, laughed at him for thinking that
he could check the injustice and rapacity of the
citizens by written laws, which were just like spiders’
webs; they would hold the weak and delicate who
might be caught in their meshes, but would be torn
in pieces by the rich and powerful. To this Solon is
said to have answered that men keep their agree-
ments with each other when neither party profits by
1 In chapters. v. and vi.
415
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τελέςf ἐbdσ τε παραβαίν/ε ιν τῶAν θεμέἰνδ ων: Kal τοὺς\
νόμους αὐτὸς οὕτως ἁρμόζεται τοῖς πολίταις ὥστε
πᾶσι τοῦ παρανομεῖν βέλτιον ἐπιδεῖξαι τὸ δικαιο-
πραγεῖνa . ἀ> λλὰ \ ταῦvaτl α μὲ\ν ὡςς 2 Avay/ apors εἴ” καζεν
ἀπέβη μᾶλλον ἢ κατ᾽ ἐλπίδα τοῦ Σόλωνος. ἔφη
δὲ κἀκεῖνο θαυμάζειν ὁ ᾿Ανάχαρσις ἐκκλησίᾳ
παραγενόμ,ε νος, sOTsL λέ,γὕ ουσι μὲxν rοἱe σοφοὶ\ 7π αρ S
“ EArnot, κρίtAν ουσι δὲδὲ ote ἀ»μ αθεθῖ ςa.
VI. Πρὸς Θαλῆν δ᾽ εἰς Μίλητον ἐλθόντα τὸν
sΣ ό,λ ωνα θ θαυμά4ζ ειν ὅ« τι γάUμL ου καὶW K παιδὃο ποιΐαHidς τὸ\
παράπαν nuédnke. καὶ τὸ\ν ΘαλῆνA τότε μὲν
σιωπῆσαι, διαλιπόντα δ᾽ ὀλίγας ἡμέρας ἄνδρα
παρασκευάσαι ἕένον, ἀρτίως ἥκειν φάσκοντα
δεκαταῖον ἐξ ᾿Αθηνῶν. πυθομένου δὲ τοῦ Σό-
λωνος εἰ δή TL καινὸν ἐν ταῖς ᾿Αθήναις, δεδιδαγ-
μένον ἃ χρὴ λέγειν τὸν ἄνθρωπον, “Οὐδέν," εἰπεῖν,
ἕτερον, εἰ μὴ νὴ Δία νεανίσκου τινὸς ἣν ἐκφορὰ
καὶ προὔπεμπεν ἡ πόλις. ἦν γὰρ υἱός, ὡς ἔφα-
σαν, ἀνδρὸς ἐνδόξου καὶ πρωτεύοντος ἀρετῇ τῶν
πολιτῶν" οὐ παρῆν δέ, ἀλλ᾽ ἀποδημεῖν ἔφασαν
αὐτὸν ἤδη πολὺν χρόνον. ὡς δυστυχὴς ἐἐ κεῖνος,"
φάναι τὸν Σόλωνα. “τίνα δὲ ὠνόμαζον αὐτόν;
“"Hxovoa, φάναι, “ τοὔνομα, τὸν ἄνθρωπον,
Praα λλ , οὐ μνημονεύω΄ " πλὴNνow raO TL πολὺς\ λό,γ ος ἢ3 ν au-᾽
τοῦ “σοφίας καὶ δικαιοσύνης." οὕτω δὴ Kad’ ἑἑ κάστην
ἀπόκρισιν τῷ φόβῳ προσαγόμενον τὸν Σόλωνα
καὶ τέλος ἤδη ΄συντεταραγμένον αὐτὸν ὑποβάλ-
λειν τοὔνομα τῷ ξένῳ, πυνθανόμενον μὴ Σόλωνος
ὁ τεθνηκὼς υἱὸς ὠνομάζετο. φήσαντος δὲ τοῦ
ἀνθρώπου, τὸν μὲν ὁρμῆσαι παίειν τὴν κεφαλὴν
καὶ τἄλλα ποιεῖν καὶ λέγειν ἃ συμβαίνει τοῖς
416
SOLON, v. 3-vI. 3
the breaking of them, and he was adapting his laws
to the citizens in such a manner as to make it clear
to all that the practice of justice was more advanta-
geous than the transgression of the laws. But the
results justified the conjecture of Anacharsis rather
than the hopes of Solon. It was Anacharsis, too,
who said, after attending a session of the assembly,
that he was amazed to find that among the Greeks,
the wise men pleaded causes, but the fools decided
them.
VI. On his visit to Thales at Miletus, Solon is said
to have expressed astonishment that his host was
wholly indifferent to marriage and the getting of
children. At the time Thales made no answer, but
a few days afterwards he contrived to have a stranger
say that he was just arrived after a ten days’ journey
from Athens. When Solon asked what news there
was at Athens, the man, who was under instructions
what to say, answered: “None other than the
funeral of a young man, who was followed to the
grave by the whole city. For he was the son, as 1
was told, of an honoured citizen who excelled all
others in virtue; he was not at the funeral of his
son; they told me that he had been travelling
abroad for a long time.” “40 the miserable man!”’
said Solon; “pray, what was his name?” “I
heard the name,” the man said, “but I cannot
recall it; only there was great talk of his wisdom
and justice.”” Thus every answer heightened Solon’s
fears, and at last, in great distress of soul, he told
his name to the stranger and asked him if it was
Solon’s son that was dead. The man said it was;
whereupon Solon began to beat his head and to do
and say everything else that betokens a transport of
41]
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
περιπαθοῦσι, Tov δὲ Θαλῆν ἐπιλαβόμενον αὐτοῦ
καὶ γελάσαντα, “Ταῦτά τοι," φάναι, “ ὦ Σόλων,
ἐμὲ γάμου καὶ παιδοποιΐας ἀφίστησιν, ἃ καὶ σὲ
κατερείπει τὸν ἐρρωμενέστατον. ἀλλὰ θάρρει τῶν
λόγων ἕνεκα τούτων" οὐ γάρ εἰσιν ἀληθεῖς." ταῦτα
μὲν οὖν Ἕρμιππος ἱστορεῖν φησι Ἰ]άταικον, ὃς
ἔφασκε τὴν Αἰσώπου ψυχὴν ἔχειν.
VIL. ἼΛτοπος δὲ καὶ ἀγεννὴς ὁ τῷ φόβῳ τῆς
ἀποβολῆς τὴν κτῆσιν ὧν χρὴ προϊέμενος" οὕτω
γὰρ ἄν τις οὐ πλοῦτον, οὐ δόξαν, οὐ σοφίαν
ἀγαπήσειε παραγενομένην, δεδιὼς στέρεσθαι.
καὶ γὰρ ἀρετήν, ἧς κτῆμα μεῖζον οὐδὲν οὐδ᾽ ἥδιον,
ἐξισταμένην ὑπὸ νόσων καὶ φαρμάκων ὁρῶμεν"
αὐτῷ τε Θαλῇ μὴ γήμαντι πλέον οὐδὲν εἰς ἀφο-
βίαν, εἰ μὴ καὶ φίλων κτῆσιν ἔφυγε καὶ οἰκείων
καὶ πατρίδος. ἀλλὰ καὶ παῖδα θετὸν ἔσχε
ποιησάμενος αὐτὸς τὸν τῆς ἀδελφῆς, ὥς φασι,
Κύβισθον. ἐχούσης γάρ τι τῆς ψυχῆς ἀγαπη-
τικὸν ἐν ἑαυτῇ καὶ πεφυκυίας, ὥὥσ περ αἰσθάνεσθαι
καὶ διανοεῖσθαι καὶ μνημονεύειν, οὕτω καὶ φιλεῖν,
ἐνδύεταί τι τούτῳ καὶ προσφύεται τῶν ἐκτὸς οἷς
οἰκεῖον οὐδέν ἐστιν, καὶ καθάπερ οἶκον ἢ χώραν
γνησίων ἔρημον διαδόχων, τὸ φιλόστοργον ἀλλό-
τριοι καὶ νόθοι παῖδες ἢ θεράποντες εἰσοικι-
σάμενοι καὶ καταλαβόντες Gua τῷ φιλεῖν τὸ
φροντίζειν καὶ δεδιέναι περὶ αὐτῶν ἐνεποίησαν.
ὥστ᾽ ἴδοις ἂν ἀνθρώπους στερροτέρᾳ τῇ φύσει
περὶ γάμου καὶ γενέσεως παίδων διαλεγομένους,
εἶτα τοὺς αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ παισὶν ᾿οἰκοτρίβων ἢ θρέμ- 82
μασι παλλακῶν νοσοῦσι καὶ θνήσκουσι παρα-
τεινομένους πόθῳ καὶ φωνὰς ἀγεννεῖς ἀφιέντας.
418
SOLON, vi. 3-vi. 3
grief. But Thales took him by the hand and said,
with a smile, “ This it is, O Solon, which keeps me
from marriage and the getting of children; it
overwhelms even thee, who art the most stout-
hearted of men. But be not dismayed at this
story, for it is not true.” Such, at any rate, accord-
ing to Hermippus, is the story of Pataecus, who used
to boast that he had Aesop’s soul.
VII. However, it is irrational and ignoble to
renounce the acquisition of what we want for fear of
losing it ; for on this principle a man cannot be grati-
fied by the possession of wealth, or honour, or wisdom,
for fear he may be deprived of them. Indeed, even
virtue, the most valuable and pleasing possession in
the world, is often banished by sickness and drugs.
And Thales himself, though unmarried, was never-
theless not wholly free from apprehension, unless he
also avoided having friends, or relations, or country.
On the contrary, he had a son by his own adoption, as
we are told, Cybisthus, his sister’s son. For the soul
has in itself a capacity for affection, and loves just as
naturally as it perceives, understands, and remembers.
It clothes itself in this capacity, and attaches itself
to those who are not akin to it, and just as if it were
a house or an estate that lacks lawful heirs, this
craving for affection is entered and occupied by alien
and illegitimate children, or retainers, who, along
with love for them, inspire anxiety and fear in
their behalf. So that you will find men of a
somewhat rugged nature who argue against marriage
and the begetting of children, and then, when
children of their servants, or offspring of their
concubines fall sick and die, these same men are
racked with sorrow and lament abjectly. Some, too,
419
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἔνιοι δὲ καὶ κυνῶν θανάτῳ καὶ ἵππων αἰσχρῶς
καὶ ἀβιώτως ὑπὸ λύπης διετέθησαν. ἀλλ᾽ ἕτεροί
γε παῖδας ἀγαθοὺς ἀποβαλόντες οὐδὲν ἔπαθον
δεινὸν οὐδ᾽ ἐποίησαν αἰσχρόν, ἀλλὰ καὶ χρώμενοι
τῷ λοιπῷ βίῳ κατὰ λόγον διετέλεσαν. ἀσθένεια
γάρ, οὐκ εὔνοια, λύπας ἀπεράντους ἐπάγεται καὶ
φόβους ἀνθρώποις ἀνασκήτοις ὑπὸ λόγου πρὸς
τύχην, οἷς οὐδ᾽ ἀπόλαυσις ἐγγίνεται τοῦ ποθου-
μένου παρόντος, τοῦ μέλλοντος ὠδῖνας ἀεὶ καὶ
τρόμους καὶ ἀγῶνας, εἰ στερήσονται, πταρέχοντος
αὐτοῖς. δεῖ δὲ μήτε πενίᾳ πρὸς χρημάτων
πεφράχθαι] στέρησιν μήτε ἀφιλίᾳ πρὸς φίλων
ἀποβολὴν μήτ᾽ ἀπαιδίᾳ πρὸς τέκνων θάνατον,
ἀλλὰ τῷ λογισμῷ πρὸς πάντα. καὶ ταῦτα μέν,
ὡς ἐν τῷ παρόντι, πλείονα τῶν ἱκανῶν.
VII. ‘Erret δὲ ΠΘΈΡΟΝ, τινα καὶ δυσχερῆ πόλε-
μον οἱ ἐν ἄστει περὶ τῆς Σαλαμινίων νήσου Μεγα-
ρεῦσι πολεμοῦντες ἐξέκαμον, καὶ νόμον ἔθεντο
μήτε γράψαι τινὰ μήτ᾽ εἰπεῖν αὖθις ὡς χρὴ τὴν
πόλιν ἀντιποιεῖσθαι τῆς Σαλαμῖνος, ἢ θανάτῳ
ζημιοῦσθαι, βαρέως φέρων τὴν ἀδοξίαν ὁὁ Σόλων,
καὶ τῶν νέων ὁρῶν πολλοὺς δεομένους ἀρχῆς ἐπὶ
τὸν πόλεμον, αὐτοὺς δὲ μὴ θαρροῦντας ἄρξασθαι
διὰ τὸν νόμον, ἐσκήψατο μὲν ἔκστασιν τῶν λο-
γισμῶν, καὶ λόγος εἰς τὴν πόλιν ἐκ τῆς οἰκίας
διεδόθη παρακινητικῶς ἔχειν αὐτόν, ἐλεγεῖα δὲ
κρύφα συνθεὶς καὶ μελετήσας ὥστε λέγειν ἀπὸ
στόματος, ἐξεπήδησεν εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν ἄφνω
πιλίδιον περιθέμενος. ὄχλου δὲ πολλοῦ συνδρα-
1 πεφράχθαι Bekker and Cobet, after Bryan: πεπαῦσθαι
(be delivered from).
420
SOLON, vu. 3-vi1. 2
at the death even of dogs and horses, have been
plunged into shameful and intolerable grief. But
others have borne the loss of noble sons without
terrible sorrow or unworthy conduct, and have con-
formed the rest of their lives to the dictates of
reason. For it is weakness, not kindness, that brings
men into endless pains and terrors when they are
not trained by reason to endure the assaults of
fortune. Such men do not even enjoy what they
long for when they get it, but are filled with con-
tinual pangs, tremors, and struggles by the fear of
future loss. However, we must be fortified not by
poverty against deprivation of worldly goods, nor by
friendlessness against loss of friends, nor by child-
lessness against death of children, but by reason
against all adversities. This, under present circum-
stances, is more than enough on this head.
VIII. Once when the Athenians were tired out
with a war which they were waging against the
Megarians for the island of Salamis, they made a law
that no one in future, on pain of death, should move,
in writing or orally, that the city take up its
contention for Salamis. Solon could not endure the
disgrace of this, and when he saw that many of the
young men wanted steps taken to bring on the war,
but did not dare to take those steps themselves on
account of the law, he pretended to be out of his
head, and a report was given out to the city by his
family that he showed signs of madness. He then
secretly composed some elegiac verses, and after
rehearsing them so that he could say them by rote,
he sallied out into the market-place of a sudden,
with a cap upon his head. After a large crowd had
421
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μόντος ἀναβὰς ἐπὶ τὸν τοῦ κήρυκος λίθον ἐν ὠδῇ
διεξῆλθε τὴν ἐλεγείαν, ἧς ἐστιν ἀρχή:
Αὐτὸς κῆρυξ ἦλθον ἀφ᾽ ἱμερτῆς Σαλαμῖνος,
κόσμον ἐπέων ὠδὴν ἀντ᾽ ἀγορῆς θέμενος.
τοῦτο τὸ ποίημα Σαλαμὶς ἐπιγέγραπται καὶ
στίχων ἑκατόν ἐστι, χαριέντως πάνυ πεποιημένον.
τότε δὲ ἀσθέντος αὐτοῦ καὶ τῶν φίλων τοῦ
Σόλωνος ἀρξαμένων ἐπαινεῖν, μάλιστα δὲ τοῦ
Πεισιστράτου τοῖς πολίταις ἐγκελευομένου καὶ
παρορμῶντος πεισθῆναι τῷ λέγοντι, λύσαντες
τὸν νόμον αὖθις ἥπτοντο τοῦ πολέμου, προστη-
σάμενοι τὸν Σόλωνα.
Τὰ μὲν οὖν δημώδη τῶν λεγομένων τοιαῦτ᾽
ἐστίν, ὅτι πλεύσας ἐπὶ Κωλιάδα μετὰ τοῦ
Πεισιστράτου, καὶ καταλαβὼν αὐτόθι πάσας
τὰς γυναῖκας τῇ Δήμητρι τὴν πάτριον θυσίαν
ἐπιτελούσας, ἔπεμψεν ἄνδρα πιστὸν εἰς Σαλαμῖνα
προσποιούμενον αὐτόμολον εἶναι, κελεύοντα τοὺς
Μεγαρεῖς, εἰ βούλονται τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων τὰς πρώ-
τας λαβεῖν γυναῖκας, ἐπὶ Κωλιάδα μετ᾽ αὐτοῦ
πλεῖν τὴν ταχίστην. ὡς δὲ πεισθέντες οἱ Μεγα-
ρεῖς ἄνδρας ἐξέπεμψαν ἐν τῴ πλοίῳ καὶ κατεῖδεν
ὁ “Σόλων τὸ πλοῖον ἐλαυνόμενον ἀπὸ τῆς νήσου,
τὰς μὲν γυναῖκας ἐκποδὼν ἀπελθεῖν ἐκέλευσε,
τῶν δὲ νεωτέρων τοὺς μηδέπω γενειῶντας ἐνδύ-
μασι καὶ “μίτραις, καὶ ὑποδήμασι τοῖς ἐκείνων
σκευασαμένους καὶ λαβόντας ἐγχειρίδια κρυπτὰ
παίζειν καὶ χορεύειν προσέταξε πρὸς τῇ θαλάσσῃ,
μέχρις ἂν ἀποβῶσιν οἱ πολέμιοι καὶ γένηται τὸ
πλοῖον ὑποχείριον. οὕτω δὴ τούτων πραττομένων,
422
SOLON, vu. 2-6
collected there, he got upon the herald’s stone and
recited the poem which begins :—
“ Behold in me a herald come from lovely Salamis,
With a song in ordered verse instead of a
harangue.”’!
This poem is entitled “ Salamis,’ and contains a
hundred very graceful verses. When Solon had
sung it, his friends began to praise him, and
Peisistratus in particular urged and incited the
citizens to obey his words. They therefore
repealed the law and renewed the war, putting
Solon in command of it.
The popular account of his campaign is as follows.
Having sailed to Cape Colias with Peisistratus, he
found all the women of the city there, performing
the customary sacrifice to Demeter. He therefore
sent a trusty man to Salamis, who pretended to be
a deserter, and bade the Megarians, if they wished
to capture the principal women of Athens, to sail
to Colias with him as fast as they could. The
Megarians were persuaded by him, and sent off some
men in his ship. But when Solon saw the vessel
sailing back from the island, he ordered the women
to withdraw, and directed those of the younger
men who were still beardless, arraying themselves
in the garments, head-bands, and sandals which
the women had worn, and carrying concealed
daggers, to sport and dance on the sea shore until
the enemy had disembarked and the vessel was in
their power. This being done as he directed, the
1 Only six more verses are preserved (Fragments 1-3,
Bergk). They contain reproaches of the Athenians for
abandoning Salamis, and an exhortation to go and fight for it.
423
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὑe παχθέν,τ ες οἱ e Μεγαρεῖςa τῇa ὄ” ψει καὶ \ προσμί-s
ἕαντες ἐγγύς, ἐξεπήδων ὡς ἐπὶ γυναῖκας, ἁμιλλώ-
μενοι πρὸςN ἀ> λλήλEeο υς, 1 W“ oTE μηδδεέν α ὃ διαφυγεῖνa ,
ἀ3 λλὰ \ πάνiy τας ἀ» πολέσθαι, καὶ \ τὴ\ν νῆfalσ ον ἐ>?π ιπλεὺ-jie
σαντας εὐθὺς ἔχειν τοὺς ᾿Αθηναίους.
IX. Ἴλλοι δέ φασιν οὐ τοῦτον τὸν τρόπον
γενέlAσ θαι τὴ\ν κατάλ4 ηψιν, ἀ2 λλὰ \ πρῶaτ ον μὲ\ν αὐΣΕΞτῚ ῷ
τὸν ἐν Δελφοῖς θεὸν χρῆσαι"
᾿Αρχηγοὺς χώρας θυσίαις ἥρωας ἐνοίκους
¢t/- hao, τοὺς\ κόλποις 3 ᾿Ασωπιὰς\ ἀδὰμ φικαλύπΞτ ει,
οἱ φθίμενοι δέρκονται ἐς ἠέλιον δύνοντα"
τὸν δὲ Σόλωνα διαπλεύσαντα νυκτὸς εἰς τὴν
νῆσον ἐντεμεῖν σφάγια Ἰϊ]εριφήμῳ καὶ Kuypet
τοῖς ἥρωσιν. εἶτα παρὰ τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων ἐθελοντὰς
λαβεῖν πεντακοσίους, δόγματος γενομένου τού-
τους, ἂν κατασχῶσι τὴν νῆσον, κυρίους εἶναι τοῦ
πολιτεύματος. ἀναχθέντα δὲ συχναῖς ἁλιάσιν
ἅμα τριακοντόρου συμπαραπλεούσης ὑφορμί-
σασθαι τῇ Σαλαμῖνι κατὰ χηλήν τινα πρὸς τὴν
Εὔβοιαν" ἀποβλέπουσαν. πυθομένους δὲ τοὺς ἐν
Σαλαμῖνι Μεγαρεῖς ἔκ τινος φήμης οὐδὲν βέβαιον,
αὐτοὺς μὲν εἰς τὰ ὅπλα θορυβουμένους βαδίζειν,
ναῦν δ᾽ ἀποστεῖλαι κατασκεψομένην τῶν πολε-
μίων: ἧς ἐγγὺς ἐλθούσης κρατῆσαι τὸν Σόλωνα
καὶ καθεῖρξαι τοὺς Μεγαρεῖς. ἐμβιβάσαι δὲ τῶν
᾿Αθηναίων τοὺς κρατίστους κελεύσαντα πλεῖν ἐπὶ
τὴν πόλιν, ὡς ἂν ἐνδέχηται μάλιστα κρύπτοντας
1 ἀλλήλους Sintenis and Bekker assume here a lacuna in
the text, where such details were given as are found in
Polyaenus, Strategemata, i. 20.
2 Εὔβοιαν Sintenis suggests Νίσαιαν (cf. xii. 3),
424
SOLON, vin. 6-1x. 3
Megarians were lured on by what they saw, beached
their vessel, and leapt out to attack women, as they
supposed, vying with one another in speed. The
result was that not a man of them escaped, but
all were slain, and the Athenians at once set sail and
took possession of the island.
IX. Others, however, say that the island was not
taken in this way, but that Solon first received this
oracle from the god at Delphi :—
“The tutelary heroes of the land where once they
lived, with sacred rites
Propitiate, whom the Asopian plain now hides in
its bosom ;
There they lie buried with their faces toward the
setting sun.”
Thereupon Solon saiJed by night to the island and
made sacrifices to the heroes Periphemus and
Cychreus. Then he took five hundred Athenian
volunteers, a decree having been made that these
should be supreme in the government of the island
if they took it, and setting sail with a number
of fishing boats convoyed by a thirty-oared ship,
he anchored off the island of Salamis, at a point of
land looking towards Euboea. But the Megarians
in the city of Salamis, hearing only an uncertain
report of what had happened, armed themselves
hurriedly and set out for the place, at the same time
dispatching a ship to spy out the enemy. This ship
came near and was captured by Solon, who put her
crew in confinement. Then he manned her with
the best of his Athenians, and ordered them to sail
against the city, keeping themselves as much
425
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἑαυτούς" ἅμα δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους » ᾿Αθηναιους ἀναλα-
βόντα πεζῇ συμφέρεσθαι τοῖς Μεγαρεῦσι" καὶ
τῆς μάχης ἔτι συνεστώσης φθάσαι τοὺς ἀπὸ τῆς
νεὼς καταλαβόντας τὴν πόλιν.
wv Εοικε δὲ\ τῷA λό,γ ῳ τού/τ ῳ Kal \ τὰ\ δρώ,μ ενα
μαρτυρεῖνa. ναῦ{« aς yap/ « tis [᾿1 Αττικὴ\ προσέπ/ λει
σιωπῇ τὸ πρῶτον, εἶτα κραυγῇ καὶ ἀλαλαγμῷ
προσφερομέν΄ ων εἷ“Ὁς ἀmνeὴ ρ ἔΝΜ νοπλος ἐ3 ξαλλόμἢ ενος
μετὰ\ Bonκsι ἔἔθθε ι πρὸς\ ἄLAκ ρον TOS X Σκιράδa ιον 1'72 ἐ κ γῆaς
προσφερομένο’ὔ ις. πλησίο, ν δὲ\ τοῦn r? ‘Evvadto, u τὸ\
ἱερόν ἐστιν ἱδρυσαμένου Σόλωνος. ἐνίκησε γὰρ
τοὺ\ς Μεγαρέα/ς , καὶ \ ὅ[τσ οι μὴ\ διεφθά/ρ ησαν ἐ2ν
τῇ μάχῃ, πάντας ὑποσπόνδους ἀφῆκεν.
X. Οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ τῶAν Μεγαρέων ἐπιμενό,ν των
πολλὰ \ κακὰ \ Kal Νὴ δρῶaν τες ἐ?ν τῷa πολέῇμ ῳ Kal \
πάσ/ χοντες, ἐ3 ποιήSσi αντο Λακεδαιμονίο/ υς διαλλα-
κτὰ\ς καὶ \ δικαστάς΄. οἱ e μὲ\ν οὖ9ν πολλοὶ \ τῷA Σό,λ ωνι
συναγωνί/σ ασθαι λέ/γ ουσι τὴ\ν ς Ομήρ/ ου δό/ξ αν'
ἐμβαλόντα γὰρ αὐτὸν ἔπος εἰς νεῶν κατάλογον
ἐπὶ τῆς δίκης ἀναγνῶναι"
Αἴας δ᾽ ἐκ Σαλαμῖνος ἄγεν δυοκαίδεκα νῆας,
στῆrσn ε δ᾽> ,ἄ» γων fἵeνe ᾽ I> }᾿ ΑθηναίΔω ν “ἵ σταντο φάλ/ αγγες.
αὐτοὶ δ᾽ ᾿Αθηναῖοι ταῦτα μὲν οἴονται φλυαρίαν
εἶναι, τὸ\ν δὲ Σό/λ ωνά φασιν ἀποδεῖaξn αι τοῖnςr δι-
κασταῖς- ὅΨ τι ΦιλαῖοA ς καὶ Εὐ>ρ υσάκ/η ς, Αἴ”α ντος
υἱΕοίΛ, 2 ᾿Αθή/ν ησι πολιτεία, ς μεταλαβόν/τ ες παρέ-/
1 Σκιράδιον after this word Sintenis and Bekker assume a
lacuna in the text.
426
SOLON, 1x. 3-x. 2
concealed as was feasible. At the same time, with
the rest of his Athenians, he engaged the Megarians
on land, and while the fight was still raging,
the crew of the ship succeeded in capturing the
city.
Now there seems to be a confirmation of this
story in certain ceremonies afterwards established.
Namely, an Attic ship would approach the island in
silence at first, then its crew would make an onset
with shouts and cries, and one man in full armour
would leap out with a shout of triumph and run to
the promontory of Sciradium to inform those who
were attacking by land. Hard by that place is the
temple of Enyalius! which was erected by Solon.
For he conquered the Megarians, and all who were
not slain in the battle were released on parole.
X. Notwithstanding all this, the Megarians per-
sisted in their opposition, and both sides inflicted
and suffered many injuries in the war, so that finally
they made the Lacedaemonians arbiters and judges
of the strife. Accordingly, most writers say that
the fame of Homer favoured the contention of
Solon; for after himself inserting a verse into the
Catalogue of Ships, he read the passage at the trial
thus :—
““ Ajax from Salamis brought twelve ships,
And bringing, stationed them near the Athenian
hosts.” 2
The Athenians themselves, however, think this an
idle tale, and say that Solon proved to the judges
that Philaeus and Eurysaces, the sons of Ajax,
became citizens of Athens, made over their island
1 Ares. 2 Thad, 11. 557 1.
427
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δοσαν τὴν νῆσον αὐτοῖς, καὶ κατῴκησαν ὁ μὲϊ
ἐν Βραυρῶνι τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς, ὁ δὲ ἐν Μελίτῃ" καὶ
δῆanμ ον ἐbdπ ώνῇ υμον Diraio/ v τῶAν Φιλαϊδ“OῶA ν ἔ4 χουσιν,
ὅθεν ἦν Τ]εισίστρατος. ἔτι δὲ μᾶλλον ἐξελέγξαι
τοὺ\ς Μεγαρέα/ ς βουλόμ/ ενον ἰ> σχυρί/σ ασθαι περὶ \
τῶν νεκρῶν ὡς οὐχ ὃν τρόπον ἐκεῖνοι θάπτουσι
κεκηδευμένων, GAN ὃν αὐτοί. θάπτουσι δὲ Με-
yapetsa πρὸ\ς ἕ4 ω τοὺ\ς νεκροὺς\ στρέφ/ οντες, ’ ᾿Αθη-
vaiao . δὲ\ πρὸς\ ἑe σπέρ/ αν. € “Hpé/a s δὲ\ ὁ€ Μεγαρεὺς\
ἐνιστάμενος λέγει καὶ Μεγαρεῖς πρὸς ἑσπέραν
τετραμμένα τὰ σώματα τῶν νεκρῶν τιθέναι" καὶ
μεῖζον ἔτι τούτου, μίαν ἕκαστον ᾿Αθηναίων ἔχειν
θήκην, Μεγαρέων δὲ καὶ τρεῖς καὶ τέσσαρας ἐν
μιᾷa κεῖ- σθαι. τῷA μέ/ν τοι Σό4λ ωνι καὶ \ ἸΙυθικούς4
τινας βοηθῆaσ αι λέ/γ ουσι χρησμούς4, ἐ>]ν olΦs ὁe θεὸ\ς
᾿Ιαονίαν τὴν ΣαλαμῖνA α προσηγόρfε υσε. ταύτην
τὴν δίκην ἐδίκασαν Σπαρτιατῶν πέντε ἄνδρες,
Κριτολαΐδας, ᾿Αμομφάρετος, Ὑψηχίδας, ᾿Αναξί-
λας, Κλεομένης.
ΧΙ. Ἤδη μὲν οὖν καὶ ἀπὸ τούτων ἔνδοξος
ἣν ὁ Σόλων καὶ μέγας. ἐθαυμάσθη δὲ καὶ διε-
βοήθη μᾶλλον ἐν τοῖς “EXAnow εἰπὼν ὑπὲρ τοῦ
ἱεροῦ τοῦ ἐν Δελφοῖς, ὡς χρὴ βοηθεῖν καὶ μὴ
περιορᾶν Κιρραίους ὑβρίζοντας εἰς τὸ μαντεῖον,
ἀλλὰ προσαμύνειν ὑπὲρ τοῦ θεοῦ Δελφοῖς. πει-
σθέντες yap ὑπ᾽ ἐκείνου πρὸς\ τὸν πόλεμον ὥρμη-
σαν οἱ ᾿Αμφικτύονες, ὡς ἄλλοι τε μαρτυροῦσι καὶ
> Ἀριστοτέλ/ ης ἐ>ν τῇa τῶaν [Πυθιονικῶaν ἀ> ναγραφῇ a
428
SOLON, x. 2-χι. 1
to them, and took up their residence in Attica, one
at Brauron, and the other at Melité; and they have
a township named after Philaeus, namely Philaidae,
to which Peisistratus belonged. They say, too, that
Solon, wishing to refute the claims of the Megarians
still further, made the point that the dead on the
island of Salamis were not buried after the Megarian,
but after the Athenian fashion. For the Megarians
bury their dead facing the east, but the Athenians
facing the west. However, Hereas the Megarian
denies this, and says that the Megarians also turn
the faces of their dead to the west. And what is
still more important than this, he says that the
Athenians use one tomb for each body, whereas the
Megarians (like the early inhabitants of Salamis)
place three or four bodies in one tomb. However,
they say that Solon was further supported by sundry
Pythian oracles, in which the god spoke of Salamis
as Ionian. ‘This case was decided by five Spartans,
Critolaidas, Amompharetus, Hypsechidas, Anaxilas,
and Cleomenes.
XI. These events, then, presently made Solon
famous and powerful. But he was even more admired
and celebrated among the Greeks for what he said in
behalf of the temple at Delphi, namely, that the
Greeks must come to its relief, and not suffer the
people of Cirrha to outrage the oracle, but aid the
Delphians in maintaining the honour of the god.
For it was by his persuasion that the Amphictyons!
undertook the war, as Aristotle, among others,
testifies, in his list of the victors at the Pythian games,
1 The twelve peoples who had as common sanctuaries the
temple of Apollo at Delphi and the temple of Demeter at
Anthela, near Thermopylae.
VOL. 1. Pp 429
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
|
2 Σόλωνι τὴν γνώμην ἀνατιθείς. ov μέντοι oTpa- 84
τηγὸς ἐπὶ τοῦτον ἀπεδείχθη τὸν πόλεμον, ὡς
λέγειν φησὶν Ἕρμιππος KvavOn τὸν Σάμιον" οὔτε
γὰρ Αἰσχίνης ὁ ῥήτωρ τοῦτ᾽ εἴρηκεν, ἔν τε τοῖς β
Δελφῶν ὑπομνήμασιν ᾿Αλκμαίων, οὐ Σόλων,
᾿Αθηναίων στρατηγὸς ἀναγέγραπται.
XII. Τὸ δὲ Κυλώνειον ἄγος ἤδη μὲν ἐκ πολλοῦ
διετώραττε τὴν πόλιν, ἐξ οὗ τοὺς συνωμότας τοῦ
Κύλωνος ἱκετεύοντας τὴν θεὸν Μεγακλῆς ὁ ἄρχων
ἐπὶ δίκῃ κατελθεῖν ἔπεισεν" ἐξάψαντας δὲ τοῦ
ἕδους κρόκην κλωστὴν καὶ ταύτης ἐχομένους, ὡς
ἐγένοντο περὶ τὰς σεμνὰς\ θεὰς καταβαίνοντες,
αὐτομάτως τῆς κρόκης ῥαγείσης, ὥρμησε συλ-
λαμβάνειν ὁ Μεγακλῆς καὶ οἱ συνάρχοντες, ὡς
τῆς θεοῦ τὴν ἱκεσίαν ἀπολεγομένης" καὶ τοὺς μὲν
ἔ» ξω κατέλ/ ευσαν, οἱi d δὲ\ τοῖAς βωμοῖςn προσφυγόν/ τες
ἀ’ πεσφάγfdη σαν" μόν/ οι δ᾽9 3 ἀ» φεί, θησαν οἱ ες τὰ\ς yuvai-an
2 Kas αὐ3τ ῶQνn ἱid κετεύ͵ὔσ αντες. ἐ>κ} τού7τ ου δὲ\ κληθέν/ τες
ἐναγεῖς ἐμισοῦντο' καὶ τῶν Κυλωνείων οἱ περι-
γενόμενοι πάλιν ἦσαν ἰσχυροί, καὶ στασιάζοντες
ἀἀεχεὶδο διετέ/ λουν πρὸςΝ τοὺς\ ἀ3 πὸ Ν τοῦa n Μεγακλέο,υ ς.
ἐν δὲ τῷ τότε χρόνῳ τῆς στάσεως ἀκμὴν λα-
Bovἐoξ ns μά/λ ιστα καὶ \ τοῦf a δήueμ ου διαστάν7ὔτὕ ος, ἤ” δη
δό᾿ ξαν ἔ” χων ὁ« ΣόlλA ων παρῆnλ θεν ei’s μέ/σ ον ἅ(4 μα
τοῖς ἀρίστοις τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων, καὶ δεόμενος καὶ
διδάσκων ἔπεισε τοὺς ἐναγεῖς λεγομένους δίκην
430
SOLON, x1. 2-x1. 2
where he ascribes the measure to Solon. He was
not, however, appointed general for this war, as
Evanthes the Samian says (according to Hermippus),
for Aeschines the orator makes no such statement,!
and in the records of Delphi it is stated that
Alemaeon, and not Solon, commanded the Athenians.
XII. Now the Cylonian pollution had for a long
time agitated the city, ever since Megacles the
archon had persuaded Cylon and his fellow-con-
spirators, who had taken sanctuary in the temple of
Athena, to come down and stand their trial.2- They
fastened a braided thread to the image of the
goddess and kept hold of it, but when they reached
the shrine of the Erinyes on their way down, the
thread broke of its own accord, upon which Megacles
and his fellow-archons rushed to seize them, on the
plea that the goddess refused them the rights of
suppliants. Those who were outside of sacred pre-
cincts were stoned to death, and those who took
refuge at the altars were slaughtered there; only
those were spared who made supplication to the
wives of the archons. Therefore the archons were
called polluted men and were held in execration.
The survivors of the followers of Cylon also re-
covered strength, and were forever at variance with
the descendants of Megacles. At this particular
time the quarrel was at its height and the people
divided between the two factions. Solon, therefore,
being now in high repute, interposed between them,
along with the noblest of the Athenians, and by his
entreaties and injunctions persuaded the men who
were held to be polluted to submit to a trial, and to
1 In his speech Against Ctesiphon, § 109.
2 About 6368.0. Cf. Herod. v. 71; Thuc. i. 126.
431
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὑποσχεῖν Kal κριθῆναι τριακοσίων ἀριστίνδην
δικαζόντων. Μύρωνος δὲ τοῦ Φλυέως κατηγο-
ροῦντος ἑάλωσαν οἱ ἄνδρες, καὶ μετέστησαν οἱ
ζῶντες" τῶν δ᾽ ἀποθανόντων τοὺς νεκροὺς ἀνο-
ρύξαντες ἐξέρριψαν ὑπὲρ τοὺς ὅρους. ταύταις
δὲ ταῖς ταραχαῖς καὶ Μεγαρέων συνεπιθεμένων
ἀπέβαλόν τε Νίσαιαν οἱ ᾿Αθηναῖοι καὶ Σαλαμῖνος
ἐξέπεσον αὖθις. καὶ φόβοι τινὲς ἐκ δεισιδαι-
μονίας ἅμα καὶ φάσματα κατεῖχε τὴν πόλιν, οἵ
τε μάντεις ἄγη καὶ μιασμοὺς δεομένους καθαρμῶν
προφαίνεσθαι διὰ τῶν ἱερῶν ἠγόρευον.
Οὕτω δὴ μετάπεμπτος αὐτοῖς ἧκεν ἐκ Κρήτης
᾿Επιμενίδης ὁ Φαίστιος, ὃν ἕβδομον ἐν τοῖς σοφοῖς
καταριθμοῦσιν ἔνιοι. τῶν οὐ προσιεμένων τὸν
Περίανδρον. ἐδόκει δέ τις εἶναι θεοφιλὴς καὶ
σοφὸς περὶ τὰ θεῖα τὴν ἐνθουσιαστικὴν καὶ τε-
λεστικὴν σοφίαν, διὸ καὶ παῖδα νύμφης ὄνομα
Βάλτης καὶ Κούρητα νέον αὐτὸν οἱ τότε ἄνθρωποι
προσηγόρευον. ἐλθὼν δὲ καὶ τῷ Σόλωνι χρησά-
μενος φίλῳ πολλὰ προσυπειργάσατο καὶ προω-
δοποίησεν αὐτῷ τῆς νομοθεσίας. καὶ γὰρ εὐστα-
cu
λεῖς ἐποίησε τὰς ἱερουργίας καὶ περὶ τὰ πένθη
πρᾳοτέρους, θυσίας τινὰς εὐθὺς ἀναμίξας πρὸς
τὰ κήδη, καὶ τὸ σκληρὸν ἀφελὼν καὶ τὸ βαρβα-
ρικὸν ᾧ συνείχοντο πρότερον αἱ πλεῖσται γυ-
ναῖκες. τὸ δὲ μέγιστον, ἱλασμοῖς τισι καὶ καθ-
αρμοῖς καὶ ἱδρύσεσι κατοργιάσας καὶ καθοσιώ-
432
SOLON, xn. 2-5
abide by the decision of three hundred jurors selected
from the nobility. Myron of Phlya conducted the
prosecution, and the family of Megacles was found
guilty. Those who were alive were banished, and
the bodies of the dead were dug up and cast forth
beyond the borders of the country. During these
disturbances the Megarians also attacked the Athen-
ians, who lost Nisaea, and were driven out of Salamis
once more. The city was also visited with super-
stitious fears and strange appearances, and the seers
declared that their sacrifices indicated pollutions and
defilements which demanded expiation.
Under these circumstances they summoned to
their aid from Crete Epimenides of Phaestus, who is
reckoned as the seventh Wise Man by some of those
who refuse Periander a place in the list. He was
reputed to be a man beloved of the gods, and
endowed with a mystical and heaven-sent wisdom in
religious matters. Therefore the men of his time
said that he was the son of a nymph named Balte,
and called him a new τα 5.2 On coming to Athens
he made Solon his friend, assisted him in many ways,
and paved the way for his legislation. For he made
the Athenians decorous and careful in their religious
services, and milder in their rites of mourning, by
attaching certain sacrifices immediately to their
funeral ceremonies, and by taking away the harsh
and barbaric practices in which their women had
usually indulged up to that time. Most important of
all, by sundry rites of propitiation and purification,
and by sacred foundations, he hallowed and conse-
1 See note on iii. 5, and cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, i.
2 The Curetes were Cretan priests of Idaean Zeus, who took
their name from the demi-gods to whose care Rhea was said
to have committed the infant Zeus.
433
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
σας τὴAν πόλ/ ιν ὑe πήκ7 οον τοῦA δικαί/ο υ Kal \ μᾶcalλ λον
εὐ᾽ πειθῆa πρὸς\ ὁ« μόνοιαν κατέστησε. λέγεται δὲ
τὴ\ν Μουνυχία/ ν ἰ> δὼ\ ν καὶ \ καταμαθὼν\ πολὺν\
χρόν/ ον, εἰπεῖaν πρὸς\ τοὺς\ παρόντας ὡς τυφλόν
ἐστι τοῦ μέλλοντος ἄνθρωπος" ἐκφαγεῖν γὰρ ἂν
᾽ ΑθηναίοΨ υς τοῖaς αὑτῶ“ν ὀδοῦaσ ιν, εἰ προήδεσαν ὅ¢ σα
τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν ἀνιάσει τὸx χωρίον" - ὅδ μοιον δέ τι καὶ
Θαλῆν εἰκάσαι λέγουσι: κελεῦσαι γὰρ αὐτὸν ἔν
τινι τό4 πῳ τῆaς Μιλησία/ ς φαύ/λ ῳ καὶ \ Tapopwpév/ o
τελευτή/σ αντα θεῖaν αι, προειπὼ\ν ὡ«ς ἀ> γορά / ποτε
τοῦlaτl ο Μιλησίω/ ν ἔ7 σται τὸ\ χωρίο/ν . 3 ᾿Καἂπιμενί/ δης
μὲν οὖν μάλιστα θαυμασθείς, καὶ χρήματα δι-
δό/ ντων πολλὰ \ Kal \ τιμὰ\ς μεγάλ/ ας τῶlaνl ΕῚ᾿ Αθηναίω/ ν,
οὐ>δ ὲ\ν ἢKX θαλλὸν\ ἀ> πὸ Ν τῆaς ἱ€ ερᾶaς ἐΟῚλ αία, ς αἰ9 τησάμ͵7 ενος
καὶ λαβὼν ἀπῆλθεν.
XIII. Οἱ δ᾽ ᾿Αθηναῖοa ι τῆaς Κυλωνείο/ υ πεπαυ-
μένης ταραχῆςa καὶ μεθεστώτων, ὥ,σ περ εἴρηται,
τῶaν ἐναγῶνa , τὴν παλαιὰν\ αὖ9θ ις στάσιν ὑπὲρ τῆaς
πολιτείας ἐστασία, ζον, ὅu σας ἡ χώ,ρ α διαφορὰς\
εἶχεν, εἰς τοσαῦaτ α μέ/ρ η τῆaς πό/λ εως διαστάσ, ης.
ἦν yap τὸ μὲν τῶaν Διακρί/ω ν γέ/ν ος δημοκρατικώ-/ 85
τατον, ὀλιγαρχικώτατον δὲ τὸΝ τῶ-ν Ileduée, wy: Tpi-/
tot © οἱ ἸΠάραλοι μέ/σ ον τινὰ\ καὶ \ μεμιγμέν/ ον
αἱρούμενοι πολιτείας τρόπον, ἐμποδὼΝν ἦCrσ αν καὶ ᾿
διεκώλυον τοὺς ἑτέρους κρατῆσa αι. τό/τ ε δὲ\ τῆaς TOaV
πενήτων πρὸς τοὺς πλουσίους ἀνωμαλία/ ς ὥAσ περ
ἀ᾽ κμὴν\ λαβούσ/ ης παντάπ/ ασιν ἐ» πισφαλῶς[οἱ ἡ€ πόλ/ ις
διέκειτο, Kal μό/ν ως ἂν ἐδό/κ ει καταστῆνa αι Kal
434
SOLON, xu. 5—xul. 2
crated the city, and brought it to be observant of
justice and more easily inclined to unanimity. [0 is
said that when he had seen Munychia! and con-
sidered it for some time, he remarked to the by-
standers that man was indeed blind to the future;
for if the Athenians only knew what mischiefs the
place would bring upon their city, they would devour
it with their own teeth. A similar insight into
futurity is ascribed to Thales. They say that he
gave directions for his burial in an obscure and
neglected quarter of the city’s territory, predicting
that it would one day be the market-place of Miletus.
Well then, Epimenides was vastly admired by the
Athenians, who offered him much money and large
honours; but he asked for nothing more than a
branch of the sacred olive-tree, with which he
returned home.
XIII. But the Athenians, now that the Cylonian
disturbance was over and the polluted persons ban-
ished, as described,” relapsed into their old disputes
about the ferm of government, the city being divided
into as many parties as there were diversities in its
territory. The Hill-men favoured an _ extreme
democracy ; the Plain-men an extreme oligarchy;
the Sbore-men formed a third party,® which pre-
ferred an intermediate and mixed form of govern-
ment, was opposed to the other two, and prevented
either from gaining the ascendancy. At that time,
too, the disparity between the rich and the poor had
culminated, as it were, and the city was in an alto-
gether perilous condition ; it seemed as if the only
1 The acropolis of the Peiraeus, strategically commanding
not only that peninsula, but also Athens itself. It was often
garrisoned by conquerors of Athens. 2 Chapter xii. 3.
3 Cf, Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xiii. 4,
435
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
παύσασθαι ταραττομένη τυραννίδος γενομενης.
ἅπας μὲν γὰρ ὁ δῆμος ἦν ὑπόχρεως τῶν πλου-
σίων. ἢ γὰρ ἐγεώργουν ἐκείνοις ἕκτα τῶν γι-
νομένων τελοῦντες, ἑκτημόριοι προσαγορευόμενοι
καὶ θῆτες, ἢ χρέα λαμβάνοντες ἐπὶ τοῖς σώμασιν
ἀγώγιμοι τοῖς δανείζουσιν ἦσαν, οἱ μὲν αὐτοῦ
δουλεύοντες, οἱ δ᾽ ἐπὶ τὴν ξένην πιπρασκόμενοι.
πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ παῖδας ἰδίους ἠναγκάζοντο πωλεῖν
(οὐδεὶς γὰρ νόμος ἐκώλυε) καὶ τὴν πόλιν φεύγειν
διὰ τὴν χαλεπότητα τῶν δανειστῶν. οἱ δὲ πλεῖ-
στοι καὶ ῥωμαλεώτατοι συνίσταντο καὶ παρεκά-
Nouv ἀλλήλους μὴ περιορᾶν, ἀλλ᾽ ἑλομένους ἕνα
προστάτην ἄνδρα πιστὸν ἀφελέσθαι τοὺς ὑπερ-
ἡμέρους καὶ τὴν γῆν ἀναδάσασθαι καὶ ὅλως
μεταστῆσαι τὴν πολιτείαν.
XIV. ᾿Ενταῦθα δὴ τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων οἱ φρονιμώ-
TATOL συνορῶντες τὸν Σόλωνα μόνον μάλιστα τῶν
ἁμαρτημάτων ἐκτὸς ὄντα, καὶ μήτε τοῖς πλουσίοις
κοινωνοῦντα τῆς ἀδικίας μήτε ταῖς τῶν πενήτων
ἀνάγκαις ἐνεχόμενον, ἐδέοντο τοῖς κοινοῖς προσελ-
θεῖν καὶ καταπαῦσαι τὰς διαφοράς. καίτοι Φανίας
ὁ Λέσβιος αὐτὸν ἱστορεῖ τὸν Σόλωνα, χρησάμενον
ἀπάτῃ πρὸς ἀμφοτέρους ἐπὶ σωτηρίᾳ τῆς πόλεως,
ὑποσχέσθαι κρύφα τοῖς μὲν ἀπόροις τὴν νέμησιν,
τοῖς δὲ χρηματικοῖς βεβαίωσιν τῶν συμβολαίων.
ἀλλ᾽ αὐτὸς ὁ Σόλων ὀκνῶν φησι τὸ πρῶτον ἅψα-
σθαι τῆς πολιτείας, καὶ δεδοικὼς τῶν μὲν τὴν
φιλοχρηματίαν, τῶν δὲ τὴν ὑπερηφανίαν. ἡρέθη
δὲ ἄρχων μετὰ Φιλόμβροτον ὁμοῦ καὶ διαλλακτὴς
καὶ νομοθέτης, δεξαμένων προθύμως αὐτὸν ὡς μὲν
436
SOLON, xu. 2-xiv. 2
way to settle its disorders and stop its turmoils was
to establishatyranny. All the common people were
in debt tothe rich. For they either tilled their lands
for them, paying them a sixth of the increase (whence
they were called Hectemorioi and Thetes), or else
they pledged their persons for debts and could be
seized by their creditors, some becoming slaves at
home, and others being sold into foreign countries.
Many, too, were forced to sell their own children (for
there was no law against it), or go into exile, because
of the cruelty of the money-lenders. But the most and
sturdiest of them began to band together and exhort
one another not to submit to their wrongs, but to
choose a trusty man as their leader, set free the
condemned debtors, divide the land anew, and make
an entire change in the form of government.
XIV. At this point, the wisest of the Athenians
cast their eyes upon Solon. They saw that he was
the one man least implicated in the errors of the
time ; that he was neither associated with the rich
in their injustice, nor involved in the necessities of
the poor. They therefore besought him to come
forward publicly and put an end to the prevailing
dissensions. And yet Phanias the Lesbian writes
that Solon of his own accord played atrick upon both
parties in order to save the city, and secretly
promised to the poor the distribution of land which
they desired, and to the rich, validation of their
securities. But Solon himself says that he entered
public life reluctantly, and fearing one party’s greed
and the other party’s arrogance.1 However, he was
chosen archon? to succeed Philombrotus, and made
mediator and legislator for the crisis, the rich
1 Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, y. 3. 2 594 B.c.
437
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
εὔπορον τῶaν πλουσίω, ν, ὡς δὲ χρηστὸν τῶaν πενή-
των. λέ/γ εται δὲ καὶ \ φωνή τις αὐτοῦn περιφερομένη
πρότερον, εἰ’ πό,ν τος WS TOΝ ἴσον πό/λ εμον οὐ ποιεῖ,lal
καὶ τοῖaς κτηματικοῖςtal ἀρέAσ κειν καὶ τοῖaς ἀκτήμοσι,
τῶlaνl μὲ\ν ἀ» ξί’ᾳ καὶ i ἀρετῇ,a τῶaν δὲ\ μέ/τ ρῳ καὶ eeἀ ριθμῷa
τὸ\ ἴ» σον ἕ“ ξειν προσδοκών΄ των: ὅ“ θεν ἐ5π. ᾽ 3...ἐ λπίδ,ὔ ος
μεγάλ΄, ης ἑκατέ,ρ ων γενομέaνi ων οἱ προϊ”σ τάμενοι
προσέκειντο τῷaA Σό/λ ωνι τυραννί/δ α προξενοῦνa τες
καὶ ἀναπείθ, οντες εὐτολμότ, ερον ἅψασθαι τῆAς
πόλεως ἐγκρατῆa n γενόμ“ ενον. πολλοὶ δὲ καὶ τῶaν
διὰ μέσου πολιτῶνa , TH\Y ὑe πὸ \ λό/γ ου Kal νόμου
μεταβολὴν\ ὁCC.ρ ῶuνa τες ἐ> ργώὃδη Kal \ χαλεπὴνA οὖ9Sσ αν,
οὐκ ἔφευγον ἕνα τὸ\ν δικαιό, τατον Kal φρονιμώτα-
τον ἐπιστῆAσ αι τοῖaς“ πράγ4 μασιν. ἔνιοι δέ φασι
καὶ \ μαντεία/ ν γενέ‘Aσ θαι τῷa Σό,λ ωνι Πυθοῖ - τοιαύ-΄ὕ
τὴν"
Ὄ Hoo μέ΄σ ην κατὰ \ νῆa α κυβερνητήρ/ ιον ἔx ργον
evb Ovv4 av: πολλοί / τοι > ᾿Αθηναί/ω ν ἐ’ πί/κ ουροι.
μάλιστα δὲ οἱ συνήθεις ἐκάκιζον εἰ διὰ τοὔνομα
δυσωπεῖται τὴν μοναρχίαν, ὥσπερ οὐκ ἀρετῇ τοῦ
λαβόντος εὐθὺς ἂν βασιλείαν γενομένην, καὶ
γεγενημένην πρότερον μὲν ὐβοεῦσι Τυννών-
dav, νῦν δὲ Μιτυληναίοις Πιττακὸν npnpévors
τύραννον.
Τούτων οὐδὲν ἐξέκρουσε τὸν Σόλωνα τῆς αὑτοῦ
προαιρέσεως, ἀλλὰ πρὸς μὲν τοὺς φίλους εἶπεν,
ὡς λέγεται, καλὸν μὲν εἶναι τὴν τυραννίδα χωρίον,
οὐκ ἔχειν δὲ ἀπόβασιν, πρὸς δὲ Φῶκον ἐν τοῖς
ποιήμασι γράφων"
438
SOLON, xiv. 2-5
accepting him readily because he was _ well-to-do,
and the poor because he was honest. [ is also said
that a certain utterance of his which was current
before his election, to the effect that equality bred
no war, pleased both the men of substance and
those who had none; the former expecting to have
equality based on worth and excellence, the latter
on measure and count. Therefore both parties were
in high hopes, and their chief men persistently
recommended a tyranny to Solon, and tried to
persuade him to seize the city all the more
confidently now that he had it completely in his
power. Many citizens, too, who belonged to neither
party, seeing that it would be a laborious and difficult
matter to effect a change by means of argument and
law, were not reluctant to have one man, the justest
and wisest of all, put at the head of the state.
Furthermore, some say that Solon got an oracle at
Pytho which ran as follows :—
“Take thy seat amidships, the pilot’s task is thine ;
Perform it ; many in Athens are thine allies.”
And above all, his familiar friends chid him for
being averse to absolute power because of the name
of tyranny, as if the virtues of him who seized it
would not at once make it a lawful sovereignty.
Euboea (they argued) had formerly found this true
of Tynnondas, and so had the Mitylenaeans, now
that they had chosen Pittacus to be their tyrant.
None of these things shook Solon from his
resolution. To his friends he said, as we are told,
that a tyranny was a lovely place, but there was
no way down from it. And in his poems he writes
to Phocus ;:—
439
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Ei δὲ γῆς (φησίν) ἐφεισάμην 86
πατρίδ’ ος, τυραννίδ/ ος δὲ\ καὶ \ βίΥῆ ς ἀ» μειλί’χ ου
οὐ καθηψάμην μιάνας καὶ καταισχύνας κλέος,
οὐOδvὲ ν αἰ>δ εῦ- μαι' πλέον γὰ\ρ ὧφ᾿δ ε νική/σ ειν δοκέ7ω
πάντας ἀνθρώπους.
ὅΨ θεν εὔ” δηλον ὅ“ τι καὶ \ πρὸN τῆaς νομοθεσία/ ς μεγά-,
6 λην δόξαν εἶχεν. ἃ δὲ φυγόντος αὐτοῦ τὴν τυραν-
νίδα πολλοὶ καταγελῶντες ἔλεγον, γέγραφεν
οὕτως"
Οὐκ ἔφυ Σόλων βαθύφρων οὐδὲ βουλήεις ἀνήρ'
ἐσθλὰ γὰρ θεοῦ διδόντος αὐτὸς οὐκ ἐδέξατο.
περιβαλὼ\ν δ᾽᾿] ἄ” γραν ἀ> γασθεὶς\ οὐ3κ ἐ> πέ/σ πασεν
μέγα
δίκτυον, θυμοῦ θ᾽ ἁμαρτῇ καὶ φρενῶν ἀπο-
σφαλείς.
ἤθελον γάρ κεν κρατήσας, πλοῦτον ἄφθονον
λαβὼν
καὶ τυραννεύiσis ας > ᾿Αθηνῶaν μοῦlνal ον ἡμέραν μίαν,
ἀ9 σκὸςΝ ἢ1 ὕ eeσ τερον ὃ δεὃδ ά/ ρθθα ι κἀ’π ιτετρῖaφ θαι γέ7ν ος.
XV. Ταῦτα τοὺς πολλοὺς καὶ φαύλους περὶ
αὐτοῦa πεποίη(A κε λέ/γ οντας. οὐ μὴν ἀπωσάμενός
γε τὴν τυραννί/δ α τὸ\ν πρᾳότ/ ατον ἐχρήσατο τρόπον
τοῖaς πράγμασιν, οὐδὲ\ μαλακῶςa οὐδ᾽ ὑπείκων τοῖaς
δυναμέν/ οις οὐ+δgὲ\ πρὸς\ ἡε δονὴ\ν τῶaν ἑe λομέ/ν ων ἔ4 θετο
1 ἤθελον, ἀσκὸς Bergk, with the better MSS. : ἤθελεν, αὐτός
(he (Solon) would have been willing ; himself).
440
SOLON, xiv. 5-xv. 1
« And if,” he says, “I spared my land,
My native land, and unto tyranny and _ violence
implacable
Did not set hand, polluting and disgracing my fair
fame,
I’m not ashamed ; in this way rather shall my name
be set above
That of all other men.” !
From this it is clear that even before his legislation
he was in high repute. And as for the ridicule
which many heaped upon him for refusing the
tyranny, he has written as follows ;—
“ Solon was a shallow thinker and a man of counsel
void ;
When the gods would give him blessings, of his own
will he refused.
When his net was full of fish, amazed, he would
not pull it in,
All for lack of spirit, and because he was bereft of
sense.
I had certainly been willing, for the power, and
boundless wealth,
And to be tyrant over Athens no more than a
single day,
Then to have a pouch flayed from me, and my
lineage blotted out.” 2
XV. Thus he represents the multitude and men
of low degree as speaking of him. However, though
he rejected the tyranny, he did not administer affairs
in the mildest possible manner, nor in the enactment
of his laws did he show a feeble spirit, nor make
concessions to the powerful, nor consult the pleasure
1 Fragment 32 (Bergk). 2 Fragment 33 (Bergk).
441
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τοὺς νόμους" ἀλλ᾽ 7 μὲν ἄριστον ἦν, οὐκ ἐπήγαγεν
ἰατρείαν οὐδὲ καινοτομίαν, φοβηθ els μὴ συγχέας
παντάπασι καὶ ταράξας τὴν πόλιν ἀσθενέστερος
γένηται τοῦ καταστῆσαι πάλιν καὶ συναρμό-
σασθαι πρὸς τὸ ἄριστον: ἃ δὲ καὶ λέγων ἤλπιζε
πειθομένοις καὶ προσάγων ἀνάγκην ὑπομένουσι
χρήσασθαι, ταῦτ᾽ ἔπραττεν, ὥς φησιν αὐτός,
ὋὉ μοῦ βίην τε καὶ δίκην συναρμόσας.1
ὅθεν ὕστερον sie εἰ τοὺς ἀρίστους ᾽᾿Αθη-
ναίοις νόμους ἔγραψεν, “ὯΩων av,” ἔφη, “προσεδέ-
Eavto τοὺς ἀἀ ρίστους.
“A δ᾽ οὖν οἱ νεώτεροι τοὺς ᾿Αθηναίους λέγουσι
τὰς τῶν πραγμάτων δυσχερείας ὁὀ νόμασι χρηστοῖς
καὶ φιλανθρώποις, ἐπικαλύπτοντας ἀστείως ὑπο-
κορίζεσθαι, τὰς μὲν πόρνας ἑταίρας, τοὺς δὲ φό-
ρους συντάξεις, φυλακὰς δὲ τὰς φρουρὰς τῶν
πόλεων, οἴκημα δὲ τὸ δεσμωτήριον καλοῦντας,
πρώτου Σόλωνος ἣν, ὡς ἔοικε, σόφισμα τὴν τῶν
χρεῶν ἀποκοπὴν σεισάχθειαν ὀνομάσαντος. τοῦτο
γὰρ ἐποιήσατο πρῶτον πολίτευμα, γράψας τὰ
μὲν ὑπάρχοντα τῶν χρεῶν ἀνεῖσθαι, πρὸς δὲ τὸ
λοιπὸν ἐπὶ τοῖς “σώμασι μηδένα δανείξειν. καίτοι
τινὲς ἔγραψαν, aὧν ἐστὶν ᾿Ανδροτίων, οὐκ ἀποκοπῇ
χρεῶν, ἀλλὰ τόκων μετριότητι κουφισθέντας ἀἀ γα-
πῆσαι τοὺς πένητας, καὶ σεισάχθειαν ὀνομάσαι
τὸ φιλανθρώπευμα τοῦτο καὶ τὴν ἅμα τούτῳ
γενομένην τῶν τε μέτρων ἐπαύξησιν καὶ τοῦ νομί-
σματος τιμήν. ἑκατὸν γὰρ ἐποίησε δραχμῶν τὴν
1 Fragment 36, verse 14 (Bergk); verse 16 of the longer
fragment now found in Aristotle’ s Const. of Athens, chapter
xii. 4, where we have κράτει) νόμου, βίην τε κτλ.
442
SOLON, xv. 1-4
of his electors. Nay, where a condition was as good
as it could well be, he applied no remedy, and intro-
duced no innovation, fearing lest, after utterly con-
fusing and confounding the city, he should be too
weak to establish it again and recompose it for the
best. But those things wherein he hoped to find
them open to persuasion or submissive to compulsion,
these he did,
“ Combining both force and justice together,”
as he says himself. Therefore when he was after-
wards asked if he had enacted the best laws for
the Athenians, he replied, “The best they would
receive.”
Now later writers observe that the ancient
Athenians used to cover up the ugliness of things
with auspicious and kindly terms, giving them
polite and endearing names. ‘Thus they called
harlots “companions,” taxes “ contributions,’ the
garrison of a city its “ guard,’ and the prison a
“chamber.” But Solon was the first, it would seem,
to use this device, when he called his cancelling of
debts a “disburdenment.” For the first of his
public measures was an enactment that existing
debts should be remitted, and that in future no one
should lend money on the person of ἃ borrower.
Some writers, however, and Androtion is one of them,
affirm that the poor were relieved not by a can-
celling of debts, but by a reduction of the interest
upon them, and showed their satisfaction by giving
the name of “ disburdenment” to this act of humanity,
and to the augmentation of measures and the pur-
chasing power of money which accompanied it.! For
1 See Aristotle, Const. of Athens, x. 1, with Sandys’ note.
443
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μνᾶAν πρό[τ/ ερον ἑβδομήκοντα καὶ τριῶAν οὖσαν,
ὥ“σ τ᾽ ? ἀ3 ριθμῷA μὲ\ν ἴ” σον, δυνάμ4 ει δ᾽9) ἔESF: λαττον ἀ2 πο-
διδό’ ντων, ὠ’ φελεῖ-σ θαι μὲ\ν τοὺ\ς ἐ> κτί,ν οντας μεγάλ4 α,
μηδὲν δὲ βλάπτεσθαι τοὺς κομιζομένους. οἱ δὲNi
πλεῖaσ τοι πάντων ὁμοῦla l φασι τῶaν συμβολαίω, ν
ἀναίρεσιν γενέσθαι τὴν σεισάχθειαν, καὶ τούτοις
συνάδ' ει pacrk Nov τὰ\ ποιή“μ ατα. Σεμνύν7 εται ya\p
Σόλων ἐ>ν τούτοις ὅ“ τι τῆaςn τε προὐποκειμένης γῆrςn
“Opous ἀνεῖλε πολλαχῆ πεπηγότας'
ρ x” nY
πρόσθεν δὲ δουλεύουσα, νῦaν ἐλευθέρ/ α"
καὶ TOAV ἀγωγίμων πρὸς ἀργύριον γεγονό/τ ων πολι-
τῶν τοὺς μὲν ἀνήγαγεν ἀπὸ ξένης,
γλῶA σσαν οὐκκυρέῖδτε,᾽ 9-% ᾿Αττικὴ\ν
LδῷE VTAS, W6S ἂx ν πολλαχῆ Qn πλανωμέν/ο υς"
τοὺ\ς δ᾽2 .)ἐ νθάδA᾽NS ) αὐ’τ οῦ a δουλί,η ν ἀ> εικέ4α
ἔχοντας
ἐλευθέρους φησὶ ποιῆσαι.
ΠρῶnγA μα δ᾽ αὐτῷt al συμπεσεῖνa λέ4γ εται πάντων
ἀνιαρότατον ἀπὸ τῆς πράξεως ἐκείνης. ὡς γὰρ
ὥρμησεν ἀνιέναι TAx χρέα Kal λόγους ἁρμότ/ τοντας
ἐζήτει καὶ πρέπουσαν ἀρχήν, ἐκοινώσατο τῶν
φίλων οἷς μάλιστα πιστεύων καὶ χρώμενος
ἐτύγχανε, τοῖaς περὶ Κόν‘ ωνα καὶ Κλεινίαν καὶ
€ Ἱππόνικον, ὅ¢ τι γῆAν μὲν ov μέλλει κινεῖlνal, χρεῶlνal
δὲ ποιεῖν ἀποκοπὰς ἔγνωκεν. οἱ δὲ προλαβόντες 87
εὐθὺς καὶ φθάσ΄ αντες ἐ3 δανείheσ αντο συχνὸν\ ἀργύριον
444
SOLON xv. 4-6
he made the mina to consist of a hundred drachmas,
which before had contained only seventy-three, so
that by paying the same amount of money, but
money of a lesser value, those who had debts to dis-
charge were greatly benefiteda,nd those who accepted
such payments were no losers. But most writers
agree that the “disburdenment” was a removal of
all debt, and with such the poems of Solon are more
in accord. For in these he proudly boasts that from
the mortgaged lands
“He took away the record-stones that everywhere
were planted ;
Before, Earth was in bondage, now she is free.’’}
And of the citizens whose persons had been seized
for debt, some he brought back from foreign lands,
“uttering no longer Attic speech,
So long and far their wretched wanderings ;
And some who here at home in shameful servitude
Were held ”’ 2
he says he set free.
This undertaking is said to have involved him in
the most vexatious experience of his life. For when
he had set out to abolish debts, and was trying to
find fitting arguments and a suitable occasion for the
step, he told some of his most trusted and intimate
friends, namely, Conon, Cleinias, and Hipponicus,
that he was not going to meddle with the land, but
had determined to cancel debts. ‘They immediately
took advantage of this confidence and anticipated
1 Fragment 36, verses 4 f. (Bergk), with adaptation from
the first person ; verses 6 f. in Aristotle’s citation.
* Fragment 36, verses 9-12 (Bergk); verses 11-14 in
Aristotle.
445
PLUTARCH’S |L IVES
Tapa τῶAν πλουσίων Kal μεγάλας συνεωνήσ, αντο
χώρας. εἶτα τοῦr n δόγματος ἐξενεχθέντος τὰ\ μὲ\ν
κτήματα καρπούμενοι, τὰ δὲ χρήματα τοῖaς δανεί-/
σασιν οὐκ ἀποδιδόντες, ELS αἰτίαν τὸ\ν Σό/λ ωνα
μεγάλ΄ ην καὶ Ν διαβολήν/, ὥ4 σπερ οὐ> συναδικούμ΄ ενον,
ἀλλὰ συναδικοῦντα, κατέστησαν. ἀλλὰ τοῦτο
μὲΝν εὐ> θὺ\ς ἐ> λύ/θ η TOA rseἔ γκλημα τοῖaς πέVνe τε ταλάν,τ οις"
τοσαῦτα γὰρ εὑρέθη δανείζων, καὶ ταῦτα πρῶτος
ἀφῆaκ ε κατὰ τὸν νόμον. ἔνιοι δὲ πεντεκαίδ, εκα
λέγο. υσιν, ὧν καὶ ἸΠολύζηλος ὁ« ς Ῥόδιός/ ἐστι.
τοὺς μέντοι φίλους αὐτοῦ χρεωκοπίδας καλοῦντες
διετέλεσαν.
XVI. Ἤρεσε δ᾽ οὐδετέροις, ἀλλ᾽ 3 ἐλύπησε καὶ
TOUS πλουσίο/ υς ἀνελὼν τὰ συμβόλαια, καὶ μᾶrnλ λον
ἔτι τοὺς πένητας, ὅτι γῆς ἀναδασμὸν οὐκ ἐποίησεν
ἐλπίσασιν αὐτοῖς, οὐδὲ παντάπασιν, ὥσπερ ὁ
Λυκοῦργος, ὁμαλοὺς τοῖς βίοις καὶ ἴσους κατέ-
στησεν. ἀ>]λ λ᾽ ’ ἐ᾽ κεῖ“ν ος μὲΝν ἑCs νδέ/ κατος ὧxXν a> d >
Ἡρακλέους καὶ βεβασιλευκὼς ἔτη πολλὰ τῆς
Λακεδαίμονος, ἀξί/ ωμα μέγα καὶ φίλους καὶ
δύναμιν ols ἔ7 γνω καλῶςa περὶ \ τῆaς πολιτείας
ὑς πηρετοῦanσ αν εἶ> χε, Kal \ Bi/a μᾶa)λ λον ἢA πειθοῖ a
χρησάμενος, ὥefσ τε καὶ τὸν ὀφθαλμὸν ἐκκοπῆνna αι,
κατειργάσατο τὸΝ μέ“γ ιστον εἰς σωτηρίαν πόλεως
Kal ὁ- μόνοιαν, μηδέ/ν α πέ,ν ητα μηδὲ πλούσιον εἶναι
TOaV πολιτῶνna" 6 Σόλων δὲὃὲ τού/τ ου μὲ\ν οὐ>κ’ ἐ> φί/κ ετο
τῇa πολιτείiᾳ δημοτικὸXςN ὧA ν καὶ\ μέ,σ ος, ἐ> νδεέ, στερον
δὲδὴ τῆLaςl ὑ€ παρχούσης δυνάμεως οὐ>δ ὲν ἔ᾽ πραξεν,
446
SOLON, xv. 6—xvi. 2
Solon’s decree by borrowing large sums from the
wealthy and buying up great estates. Then, when
the decree was published, they enjoyed the use of
their properties, but refused to pay the moneys due
their creditors. This brought Solon into great con-
demnation and odium, as if he had not been imposed
upon with the rest, but were a party to the im-
position.!. However, this charge was at once dis-
sipated by his well-known sacrifice of five talents.
For it was found that he had lent so much, and he
was the first to remit this debt in accordance with
his law. Some say that the sum was fifteen talents,
and among them is Polyzelus the Rhodian. But his
friends were ever after called “ chreocopidae,” or debt-
cutters.
XVI. He pleased neither party, however; the
rich were vexed because he took away their secur-
ities for debt, and the poor still more, because he
did not re-distribute the land, as they had expected,
nor make all men equal and alike in their way of
living, as Lycurgus did. But Lycurgus was eleventh
in descent from Heracles, and had been king in
Lacedaemon for many years. He therefore had
great authority, many friends, and power to support
his reforms in the commonwealth. He _ also
employed force rather than persuasion, insomuch
that he actually lost his eye thereby,? and most
effectually guaranteed the safety and unanimity of
the city by making all its citizens neither poor nor
rich. Solon, on the contrary, could not secure this
feature in his commonwealth, since he was a man of
the people and of modest station; yet he in no wise
1 Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, vi.
ὃ Cf. Lycurgus, xi.
447
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὁρμώμενος ἐκ μόνου τοῦ βούλεσθαι καὶ πιστεύειν
αὐτῷ τοὺς πολίτας. ὅτι δ᾽ οὖν προσέκρουσε τοῖς
πλείστοις ἕτερα προσδοκήσασιν, αὐτὸς εἴρηκε
περὶ αὐτῶν, ὡς
Χαῦνα μὲν τότ᾽ ἐφράσαντο, νῦν δέ μοι χολού-
μενοι
λοξὸν ὀφθαλμοῖς ὁρῶσι πάντες ὥστε δήϊον.
καίτοι φησὶν ws, εἴ τις ἄλλος ἔσχε τὴ\ν αὐτὴν
δύναμιν,
Οὐκ ἂν κατέσχε δῆμον, οὐδ᾽ ἐπαύσατο,
πρὶ\ν ἀ> νταράξ/ ας, πῖaα ρ ἐ3 ξεῖvalλ εν γάλ/ α. τὶ
Ταχὺ μέντοι τοῦa συμφέρ/ οντος αἰσθόμ, ενοι καὶ
Ta\s ἰ20δ7ί ας αὑeτoῶn ν μέ,μὕ ψεις ἀδ.)φ έν9) τες ἔ” θυσάν, τε
κοινῇ, σεισάχθειαν τὴν θυσίαν ὀνομάσαντες, καὶ
τὸ\ν Σό,λ ωνα τῆaςn πολιτεία/ ς διορθωτὴδν καὶ Ν νομο-
θέ/τ ην ἀ> πέδ/ ειξαν, οὐ> τὰ\ μέν/ , τὰ\ δ᾽>} οὐbχ] ί,/ πάν/ τα ὃ 3
ὁ€ μαλῶnς ἐ2 πιτρέ/ψ αντες, ἀ2 ρχάς/, ἐ2 κκλησία/ ς, δικα-
στήρια, βουλάς, Kal τί/ μημα τού/τ ων ἑκάστου
καὶ ἀριθμὸν καὶ καιρὸν ὁ€ ρίσαι, λύοντα καὶ φυ-
λάττοντα τῶaν ὑπαρχόνf. των Kal καθεστώτων 6 TL
δοκοίη, .
XVII. Πρῶτan ον μὲ\ν οὖν τοὺς\ Δράκ, οντος νόμους
ἀ3ν εῖλε πλὴ\ν τῶnν φονικῶaν ἅA παντας, διὰ\ τὴ\ν
χαλεπότ, ητα καὶ TO\ μέ/γ εθος τῶfaνl ἐπιτιμίω/ ν. μί/α
yap ὀλίγου δεῖn ν ἅΨ πασιν ὥ(4ρ ιστο τοῖrς ἁμαρτάνουσι
1 So the verses are now more correctly found in Aristotle
(Const. of Athens, xii. 5, Sandys).
448
SOLON, xvi. 2—xvil. 1
acted short of his real power, relying as he did only
on the wishes of the citizens and their confidence in
him. Nevertheless he gave offence to the greater
part of them, who expected different results, as he
himself says of them in the lines :—
“Then they had extravagant thoughts of me, but
now, incensed,
All look askance at me, as if I were their foe.” 1
And yet had any other man, he says, acquired the
same power,
“ He had not held the people down, nor made an
end
Until he had confounded all, and skimmed the
cream.”
Soon, however, they perceived the advantages of
his measure, ceased from their private fault-finding,
and offered a public sacrifice, which they called
Seisactheia, or Disburdenment. They also appoint-
ed Solon to reform the constitution and make new
laws, laying no restrictions whatever upon him, but
putting everything into his hands, magistracies,
assemblies, courts-of-law, and councils. He was to
fix the property qualification for each of these, their
numbers, and their times of meeting, abrogating and
maintaining existing institutions at his pleasure.
XVII. In the first place, then, he repealed the
laws of Draco, all except those concerning homicide,?
because they were too severe and their penalties too
heavy. For one penalty was assigned to almost all
transgressions, namely death, so that even those
1 Fragment 34 (Bergk); now verses 4f. of a fragment of
nine verses cited by Aristotle (Const. of Athens, xii. 3).
2 Cf. Aristotle, op. cit. vii. 1.
449
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ζημί4α θά/ν ατος, ὥ“ στε Kal Ν τοὺ\ς ἀBJρ γία, ς ἁδ,λ όν, τας
ἀποθνήσ/κ ειν, καὶ \ τοὺ\ς λά΄χ ανα κλέ4 ψαντας ἢᾺ
ὀτ πώρ΄ αν ὁς μοί“ω ς KoNab/ ecOat τοῖaς ἱe εροσύ4λ οις Kal \
ἀb νδροφόν/ο ις. διὸ\ Δημάδ/ ης ὕe/ στερον εὐ> δοκί’μ, η-
σεν εἰ> πὼ\ν ὅ“ τι δι’ ᾽ αἵ“μ ατος, ov> διὰΝ μέAλ ανος,
τοὺ\ς νόs μους ςὁ Δράκ, ων ἔ»Μ γραψεν. αὐ>τ ὸς\ δ᾽3. ἐκεῖaν ος,
ὥς φασιν, ἐρωτώμενος διὰ τί τοῖaς πλείσ, τοις
ἀb δική/μ ασι ζημία/ ν ἔΜ ταξε θά/ν ατον, ἀ> πεκρίν/ ατο TaN
μὲν μικρὰ\ ταύτης ἄ” ξια νομίζ/ ειν, τοῖaςA δὲ μεγάλ/ οις
οὐκ ἔχειν μείζονα.
XVIII. Δεύτερον δὲ Σό/λ ων tas μὲ‘ν ἀρχὰ\ς
ἁπάσας, ὥ“ σπερ ἧ> σαν, τοῖtςal εὐπόρ, οις ἀπολιπεῖνa
βουλόμ‘ ενος, τὴν δ᾽> ἄλλην μῖἴωξ αι πολιτεία/ ν, ἧς ὁ€
δῆμος οὐ μετεῖχεν, ἔλαβε τὰ τιμήματα τῶν πολι-
τῶν, καὶ τοὺς μὲν ἐν ξηροῖς ὁμοῦ καὶ ὑγροῖς
μέτρα πεντακόσ/ ια ποιοῦlaνl τας πρώτους ἔταξε Kal
πεντακοσιομεδίμΤΑ νους προσηγόρευσε" δευτέρους δὲ 88
τοὺς ἵ1gπ πον τρέφειν δυναμένους ἢ μέτρα ποιεῖaν
τριακόσια καὶ τούτους ἱππάδα τελοῦντας ἐκά-
λουν" ζευγῖaτ αι δ᾽᾽ οἱ Tovl al τρί/τ ου τιμήματος ὠνο-
μάσθησαν, οἷς μέ,τ ρον ἣ3 ν συναμφοτέρων διακοσίων.
οἱ « δὲΝ λοιποὶ Ν πάν/ τες ἐ3 καλοῦlνal το θῆaτn ες, οἷaς οὐ> δεμί[α4 ν
ἄ” ρχειν ἔ” δωκεν ἀb}ρ χήν/, ἀ» λλὰ Ν τῷa συνεκκλησιάζ͵ε7 ιν
καὶ δικάζειν μό,ν ον μετεῖaχ ον τῆaς πολιτείας. ὃ
κατ᾽ ἀρχὰς μὲν οὐδέν, ὕστερον δὲ παμμέγεθες
ἐφάνη: Ta γὰρ πλεῖστα τῶν διαφόρων ἐνέπιπτεν
εἰς τοὺς δικαστάς. καὶ γὰρ ὅσα ταῖς ἀρχαῖς
ἔταξε κρίνειν, ὁμοίως καὶ περὶ ἐκείνων εἰς τὸ
450
SOLON, xvu. 1--ΧΡΠ]. 2
convicted of idleness were put to death, and those
who stole salad or fruit received the same punish-
ment as those who committed sacrilege or murder.
Therefore Demades, in later times, made a hit when
he said that Draco’s laws were written not with ink,
but blood. And Draco himself, they say, being
asked why he made death the penalty for most
offences, replied that in his opinion the lesser ones
deserved it, and for the greater ones no heavier
penalty could be found.
XVIII. In the second place, wishing to leave all
the magistracies in the hands of the well-to-do, as
they were, but to give the common people a share
in the rest of the government, of which they had
hitherto been deprived, Solon made an appraisement
of the property of the citizens.!_ Those who enjoyed
a yearly increase of five hundred measures (wet and
dry), he placed in the first class, and called them
Pentakosiomedimnoi ; the second class was com-
posed of those who were able to keep a horse, or
had a yearly increase of three hundred measures,
and they were called Hippada Telountes, since
they paid a Knight’s tax; the members of the third
class, whose yearly increase amounted to two
hundred measures (wet and dry together), were
called Zeugitai. All the rest were called Thetes;
they were not allowed to hold any office, but took
part in the administration only as members of the
assembly and as jurors. This last privilege seemed
at first of no moment, but afterwards proved to be
of the very highest importance, since most disputes
finally came into the hands of these jurors. For
even in cases which Solon assigned to the magistrates
1 Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, vii. 3f.
451
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δικαστήρ/ ιον ἐφέ,σ εις ἔδωκε τοῖaς βουλομένοις.
3 λέΨγ εται δὲ\ καὶ \ τοὺς\ νό/μ ους ἀ> σαφέσ/ τερον γρά/ψ ας
καὶ \ πολλᾶς\ ἀb ντιλήψ/ εις ἔ” χοντας αὐ> ξῆaσn αι τὴ\ν
τῶaν δικαστηρί/ω ν ἰσχύν: μὴ δυναμένους yap ὑπὸ
τῶaν νό, μων ὃ διαλυθOῆFν αι περὶ \ ὧ©.ν ὃ διεφέ7 ροντο, συνέ-“
βαινεν ἀεὶ δεῖσθαι δικαστῶν καὶ πᾶν ἄγειν
ἀJ μφισβήτ/ ημα πρὸς\ ἐ> κεί»νἍἍ ους, τρό,π ον τινὰ τῶaν
νό, μων κυρί’οὔ υς ὄντας. ἐπισημαίν’ εται δ᾽ αὐτὸς
αὑτῷa τὴ\ ν ἀξί,ω σιν οὕδ τως"
A ἥ/ μῳ μὲ\ν yaNp ἔἊδΝ ωκα τόsσ ον κράτ/ ος ὅeeσ σον
ἀπαρκεῖ,
τιμῆAς οὔτee ᾽ ἀee φελὼ\ν οὔτV᾽3 ἐ59 πορεξάμ΄ὔ ενος"
οἱ δ᾽ εἶχον δύναμιν καὶ χρήμασιν ἦσαν ayntol,
καὶ τοῖς ἐφρασάμην μηδὲν ἀεικὲς ἔχειν.
ἔΜ στην δ᾽>] ἀ> μφιβαλὼν\ κρατερὸν\ σάκ/ ος ἀ3 μφοτέ-/
ροισι"
νικᾶAν δ᾽’ οὐ>κ εἴ»α σ᾽ » οὐ’ δετέ,ρ ους ἀ> δί’κ ως.
v Ete μέν/ τοι μᾶa λλον οἰ4ό μενος δεῖa ν ἐ2 παρκεῖνa THA
τῶν πολλῶν ἀσθενείᾳ, παντὶ λαβεῖν δίκην ὑπὲρ
τοῦ κακῶς πεπονθότος ἔδωκε. καὶ γὰρ πληγέντος
ἑτέρου καὶ βιασθέντος ἢ βλαβέντος ἐξῆν TO
δ υναμέ4ν ῳ καὶ \ βουλομέν4 ῳ γρά΄φ εσθθα ι τὸ\ν aLoOi -
κοῦντα καὶ διώκειν, ὀρθῶς ἐθίζοντος τοῦ νομοθέτου
τοὺς πολίτας ὥσπερ ἑνὸς μέρη σώ, ματος ' συναι-
σθάνεσθαι καὶ συναλγεῖνal ἀλλήλοις. τού,τ ῳ δὲ\ TOA
νόμῳ συμφωνοῦcνe τα λό“γ4 ον αὐτοῦa διαμνημονεύο/ υ-
1 μέρη σώματος (or σώματος μέρη) Coraés and Bekker, after
Xylander: ἑνὸς pépous.
452
SOLON, xvi. 2-5
for decision, he allowed also an appeal to a popular
court when any one desired it. Besides, it is said
that his laws were obscurely and ambiguously worded
on purpose to enhance the power of the popular
courts. For since parties to a controversy could not
get satisfaction from the laws, the result was that
they always wanted jurors to decide it, and every
dispute was laid before them, so that they were in a
manner masters of the laws. And he himself claims
the credit for this in the following words :—
«For to the common people I gave so much power
as is sufficient,
Neither robbing them of dignity, nor giving them
too much ;
And those who had power, and were marvellously
rich,
Even for these I contrived that they suffered no
harm.
I stood with a mighty shield in front of both classes,
And suffered neither of them to prevail unjustly.” 1
Moreover, thinking it his duty to make still
further provision for the weakness of the multitude,
he gave every citizen the privilege of entering suit
in behalf of one who had suffered wrong. If a man
was assaulted, and suffered violence or injury, it was
the privilege of any one who had the ability and the
inclination, to indict the wrong-doer and prosecute
him. The law-giver in this way rightly accustomed
the citizens,as members of one body, to feel and
sympathize with one another’s wrongs. And we are
told of a saying of his which is consonant with this
1 Fragment 5 (Bergk); Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xii. 1;
cf. also ix. 1 f.
453
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
σιν. ἐ> ρωτηθεὶς\ yap/ , w€s ἔΜ οικεν, ἥ4 τις οἰ» κεῖAτ αι
κάλλιστα τῶΓνΟ πόλ/ εων, “Ἐ’ κείν’ η, ’ εἶπεν, “ἐν ἡ
τῶν ἀδικουμένων οὐχ ἧττον οἱ μὴ ἀδικούμενοι
προβάλλονται καὶ κολάζουσι τοὺς ἀδικοῦντας."
XIX. Συστησάμ/ε νος δὲ\ τὴ\ν ἐ2ν , ᾿Αρεί’ὔῳ πά4γ ῳ
βουλὴν ἐκ τῶfaνl Kat ’ ἐνιαυτὸ\ν ἀ> ρχόν/ των, ἧς διὰ
τὸ ἄρξαι καὶ αὐτὸ\ς μετεῖaχ εν, Ete δ᾽ ὁρῶ“ ν τὸν
δῆA μον οἰδοῦa ντα καὶ θρασυνόμ/ ενον THa τῶaν χρεῶAν
ἀ? φέσ/ ει, δευτέleρ αν προσκατέν/ε ιμε βουλήν/, ἀ> πὸ Χ
φυλῆς ἑκάστης, τεττάρων οὐσῶν, ἑκατὸν ἄνδρας
ἐπιλεξάμενος, ods προβουλεύειν ἔταξε τοῦ δήμου
καὶ \ μηδὲ\ν ἐbiᾶa)ν ἀἢ προβούλ/ ευτον εἰ>ς ἐ>’κ κλησία4 ν
εἰ> σφέ/ρ εσθαι. τὴ\ν δ᾽᾽ ἄΨ νω βουλὴAν ἐ’ πί/ σκοπον
πάν“ των Kal \ φύ4λ ακα τῶ“ν νό, μων ἐ> κά/θ ισεν, οἰDόE-
μενος ἐ5 πὶ \ δυσὶ\ βουλαῖςaA ὥΨ σπερ ἀ> γκύρ, αις oidp pod-a
σαν ἧKaτ τον ἐ>ν’ σά/λ ῳ τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν ἔΜ σεσθαι καὶ \ μᾶ“ λλον
ἀτρεμοῦAν τα To\v δῆan μον παρέξειν.
Οἱ μὲν οὖν πλεῖ-σ τοι τὴ\ν ἐξ ᾿Αρεί/ο υ πάγου
βουλήν/, ὥ“ σπερ εἴ” ρηται, Σό/λ ωνα συστή»σ ασθαί /
φασι" καὶ μαρτυρεῖν αὐτοῖς δοκεῖ μάλιστα τὸ
μηδαμοῦl al τὸ\ν Δράκ’ὔ οντα λέἥγ. ειν μηδ᾽ ’ ὀ’ νομάζ΄ ειν
᾿Αρεοπαγίτας, ἀλλὰ τοῖ-ς ἐφέ/τ αις ἀεὶ διαλέγεσθαι
περὶ τῶaν φονικῶνA . ὁe δὲ\ τρισκαιδέAκ ατος ἄ,ξ ων
τοῦf al Σόλωνος τὸν ὄγδοον ἔχει TOlaVl νό, μων οὕτως
αὐτοῖςa ὀνόμασι γεγραμμέν/ο ν. ““2᾿ Ατί, μων ὅidσ οι
ἄ” τιμοι ἦ9 σαν πρὶ\ν ἢἊ Σό,λ ωνα ἄ”ρ ξαι, ἐbdπ ιτί/μ ους
εἶ> ναι πλὴ\ν ὅ“ σον E? E ᾽ Ἀρείο΄ υ πάγ/ ου ἢA ὅofσ οι ἐ2κ τῶlaνl
454
SOLON, xvi. 5—x1x. 3
law. Being asked, namely, what city was best to
live in, “ That city,”, he replied, “in which those
who are not wronged, no less than those who are
wronged, exert themselves to punish the wrong-
doers.”
XIX. After he had established the council of the
Areiopagus, consisting of those who had been archons
year by year (and he himself was a member of this
body, since he had been archon), he observed that the
common people were uneasy and bold in consequence
of their release from debt, and therefore established
another council besides, consisting of four hundred
men, one hundred chosen from each of the four tribes.!
These were to deliberate on public matters before
the people did, and were not to allow any matter to
come before the popular assembly without such
previous deliberation. Then he made the upper
council a general overseer in the state, and guardian
of the laws, thinking that the city with its two
councils, riding as it were at double anchor, would
be less tossed by the surges, and would keep its
populace in greater quiet.
Now most writers say that the council of the
Areiopagus, as I have stated, was established by
Solon. And their view seems to be _ strongly
supported by the fact that Draco nowhere makes
any mention whatsoever of Areiopagites, but always
addresses himself to the “ephetai’’ in cases of
homicide. Yet Solon’s thirteenth table contains the
eighth of his laws recorded in these very words :
“As many of the disfranchised as were made such
before the archonship of Solon, shall be restored to
their rights and franchises, except such as were
1 Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, viii. 4.
455
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐφετῶaν ἢ ἐκ πρυτανείου καταδικασθέν/τ ες ὑπὸ\
τῶν βασιλέων ἐπὶ φόνῳ ἢ σφαγαῖσιν ἢ ἐπὶ
τυραννίδ/ ι ἔyy φευγον ὅ“ τε ὁe θεσμὸς\ ἐ2)φ άν/ η ὅ“δ ε." 3) ταῦaτ α
δὴ πάλιν ὡς πρὸ τῆς Σόλωνος ἀρχῆς καὶ νομο-
θεσίας τὴν ἐξ ᾿Αρείου πάγου βουλὴν οὖσαν
ἐ’ νδεί, κνυται. τί/ν ες γὰ\ρ ἦΦ σαν οἱ e πρὸΝ Σό/λ ωνος
ἐν ᾿Αρείῳ πάγῳ καταδικασθέντες, εἰ3 πρῶAτ ος
Σόλων ἔδωκε τῇA ἐξ ᾿Αρείο/ νυ πάγου βουλῇA τὸ\
κρίνειν; εἰ μὴ νὴ Δία γέγονέ τις ἀσάφεια τοῦ 89
γρά[μ4 ματος ἢrx ἐ» κλείψις, ὥσ στε TOUS\ ἡς λωκότ, ας ἐsπi s
αἰτίαις αἷς κρίνουσι νῦν οἱ ᾿Αρεοπαγῖται καὶ
ἐ3 φέ/τ αι καὶ \ πρυτάν4ε ις, ὅ“ τε ςὁ θεσμὸς\ ἐ3 φά͵ν η ὅ“ δε,
μένειν ἀτίμους, τῶν ἄλλων ἐπιτίμων γενομένων.
ταῦaτ α μὲν οὖν Kal αὐτὸ\ς ἐπισκόπει.
XX. Τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων αὐτοῦ νόμων ἴδιος μὲν
μά΄λ ιστα Kal \ παράδ/ οξος ὁς κελεύ/ω ν ἄΝΜτ ιμον εἶs ναι
TOV ἐν στάσει μηδετέρας μερίδος γενό/μ ενον. βού-
λεται δ᾽, ὡς ἔοικε, μὴ ἀπαθῶς μηδ᾽ ἀναισθήτως
ἔ»Ψχ ειν πρὸς\ TO\ κοινόν/ , ἐ3ν ἀ? σφαλεῖ a θέ/μ ενον τὰ
οἰκεῖaα Kal τῷa l μὴ\ συναλγεῖνa μηδὲ συννοσεῖνa THlo )
πατρίδ/ ι καλλωπιζόμενον, GAN αὐτόθεν τοῖaς τὰ
βελτίω καὶ δικαιότερα πράττουσι προσθέμενον,
συγκινδὃυ νεύε΄ὔιὕ ν καὶ Ν βοηθεθῖ νa , μᾶA λλον ἢA περιμέν΄ ειν
ἀκινδύ4ν ως τὰ τῶlaνl κρατούντων. ἄτοπος δὲ δοκεῖ-
Kal \ γελοῖ“οὉ ς ὁe THa n ἐ> πικλή/ρ ῳ διδούς, , ἂxXν ὁὉ κρατῶlνal
καὶ κύριος γεγονὼς κατὰ τὸν νόμον αὐτὸς μὴ
Suvatos 4> πλησιάζειν, ὑπὸ τῶ“ν ἔ, γγιστα τοῦa
456
SOLON, x1x. 3-xx. 2
condemned by the Areiopagus, or by the ephetai, or
in the prytaneium by the kings, on charges of murder
or homicide, or of seeking to establish a tyranny, and
were in exile when this law was published.” This
surely proves to the contrary that the council of the
Areiopagus was in existence before the archonship
and legislation of Solon. For how could men have
been condemned in the Areiopagus before the time
of Solon, if Solon was the first to give the council of
the Areiopagus its jurisdiction? Perhaps, indeed,
there is some obscurity in the document, or some
omission, and the meaning is that those who had been
convicted on charges within the cognizance of those
who were Areiopagites and ephetai and prytanes
when the law was published, should remain dis-
franchised, while those convicted on all other charges
should recover their rights and franchises. ‘This
question, however, my reader must decide for himself.
XX. Among his other laws there is a very peculiar
and surprising one which ordains that he shall be
disfranchised who, in time of faction, takes neither
5146.1 He wishes, probably, that a man should not be
insensible or indifferent to the common weal,
arranging his private affairs securely and glorying in
the fact that he has no share in the distempers and
distresses of his country, but should rather espouse
promptly the better and more righteous cause, share
its perils and give it his aid, instead of waiting in
safety to see which cause prevails. That law, too,
seems absurd and ridiculous, which permits an
heiress, in case the man under whose power and au-
thority she is placed by law is himself unable to con-
sort with her, to be married by one of his next of kin.
1 Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, viii. 5.
457
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀνδρὸς ὀπύεσθαι. καὶ τοῦτο 8 ὀρθῶς ἔχειν
τινές φασι πρὸς τοὺς μὴ δυναμένους συνεῖναι,
χρημάτ/ ων δ᾽Ss ἕof νεκα λαμβάν/ οντας ἐ2 πικλήρ/ ους Kal x
TOa n νό, μῳ καταβιαζομέν/ο υς τὴ\ν φύfσa ιν. ὁ¢€ρ ῶaν τες
γὰ\ρ ᾧ2 βούλ΄ εται τὴ\ν ἐchπiaί. κληρον συνοῦaσ αν ἢΝΑ
προήσονται τὸν γάμον ἢ μετ᾽ αἰσχύνης καθέξουσι,
φιλοπλουτία’ ς καὶ \ ὕc βρεως δί/ κην διδό,ν τες. εὖ>
δ᾽ ἔχει καὶ τὸ μὴ πᾶσιν, ἀλλὰ τῶν συγγενῶν
τοῦa ἀ> νδρὸ\ ς ᾧe βού4λ εται διαλέ7γ εσθαι τὴ\ ν ἐbπ] ί’κὔ λη-
ρον, ὅπως οἰκεῖον ἦ καὶ μετέχον τοῦ γένους τὸ
τικτόμενον. εἰς τοῦτο δὲ συντελεῖ καὶ τὸ τὴν
νύμφην τῷ νυμφίῳ. συγκαθείργνυσθαι μήλου
κυδωνίου κατατραγοῦσαν, καὶ τὸ τρὶς ἑκάστου
μηνὸς ἐντυγχάνειν πάντως τῇ ἐπικλήρῳ τὸν
λαβόντα. καὶ γὰρ εἰ μὴ γένοιντο παῖδες, ἀλλὰ
τιμή τις ἀνδρὸς αὕτη πρὸς σώφρονα γυναῖκα, καὶ
φιλοφροσύνη πολλὰ τῶν συλλεγομένων ἑκάστοτε
δυσχερῶν ἀφαιροῦσα, καὶ ταῖς διαφοραῖς οὐκ
ἐ1Aῶ σα Pπ αντάπ/ ασιν ἀ2 ποστραφῆνAα ι.
Τῶν δ᾽ ἄλλων γάμων ἀφεῖλε τὰς φερνάς,ἱ ἱμ άτια
τρία καὶ σκεύη μικροῦ νομίσματος ἄξια κελεύσας,
ἕτερον δὲ μηδὲν ἐπιφέρεσθαι τὴν γαμουμένην. οὐ
γὰρ ἐβούλετο “μισθοφόρον οὐδ᾽ ὦνιον εἶναι τὸν
γάμον, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπὶ τεκνώσει, καὶ χάριτι καὶ φιλότητι
γίνεσθαι, τὸν ἀνδρὸς καὶ γυναικὸς συνοικισμόν.
ὁ μὲν γὰρ Διονύσιος, ἀξιούσης τῆς μητρὸς αὐτοῦ
δοθῆναί τινι τῶν πολιτῶν πρὸς γάμον, ἔφη τοὺς
μὲν τῆaAς πόλεως νό/ μους λελυκέναι τυραννῶν“ , τοὺς
δὲ τῆς φύσεως οὐκ εἶναι δυνατὸς βιάξεσθαι γά-
μους νυμφαγωγῶν παρ᾽ ἡλικίαν' ἐν δὲ ταῖς πόλεσι
τὴν ἀταξίαν ταύτην οὐ δοτέον, οὐδὲ περιοπτέον
458
SOLON, xx. 2-5
Some, however, say that this was a wise provision
against those who are unable to perform the duties
of a husband, and yet, for the sake of their property,
marry heiresses, and so under cover of law, do
violence to nature. For when they see that the
heiress can consort with whom she pleases, they will
either desist from such a marriage, or make it to their
shame, and be punished for their avarice and
insolence. It is a wise provision, too, that the
heiress may not choose her consort at large, but only
from the kinsmen of her husband, that her offspring
may be of his family and lineage. Conformable to
this, also, is the requirement that the bride eat a
quince and be shut up in a chamber with the bride-
groom; and that the husband of an heiress shall
approach her thrice a month without fail. For even
though they have no children, still, this is a mark of
esteem and affection which a man should pay to a
chaste wife; it removes many of the annoyances
which develop in all such cases, and prevents their
being altogether estranged by their differences.
In all other marriages he prohibited dowries; the
bride was to bring with her three changes of raiment,
household stuffof small value, and nothing else. For
he did not wish that marriage should be a matter of
profit or price, but that man and wife should dwell
together for the delights of love and the getting of
children. Dionysius,indeed, when his mother asked
him to give her in marriage to one of his citizens,
said that, although he had broken the laws of the
city by being its tyrant, he could not outrage the
laws of nature by giving in marriage where age
forbade. And so our cities should not allow this
irregularity, nor tolerate unions which age forbids
459
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀ>aώ ρους Kal Ar ἀ3 χαρίτ, ους ἐ3 πιπλοκὰς\ Kal \ μηδὲ\ν ἔ7 ργον
γαμήλ/ ιον ἐ2 χού΄σ ας μηδὲ\ τέ,λ ος. ἀ> λλὰ \ γέ/ρ οντι νέidα ν
ἀγομένῳ φαίη τις ἂν ἐμμελὴς ἄρχων ἢ νομοθέτης
τὸ πρὸς τὸν Φιλοκτήτην'
EUi YOUAY We€S γαμεῖνA ἔ” χεις τά/λ ας,
καὶ νέον ἐν δωματίῳ πλουσίας πρεσβύτιδος,
ὥσπερ οἱ πέρδικες, ἀπὸ συνουσίας παχυνόμενον
ἐξανευρὼν μετοικίσει πρὸς παρθένον νύμφην
ἀνδρὸς δεομένην. ταῦaτn α μὲν οὖν περὶ τού/τ ων.
ΧΧΙ. ᾿Επαινεῖται δὲ τοῦ Σόλωνος καὶ ὁ κωλύων
νόμος τὸν τεθνηκότα κακῶἴςω ἀγορεύειν. Kal yaa)p
ὅσιον τοὺς μεθεστῶτας ἱεροὺς νομίζειν, καὶ δίκαιον
ἀπέχεσθαι τῶν οὐχ ὑπαρχόντων, καὶ πολιτικὸν
ἀ> φαιρεῖνa τῆaς ἔ” χθρας τὸ\ ἀ>ΐ,δ ιον. ζῶa ντα dé\ κακῶςa
λέγειν ἐκώλυσε πρὸς ἱεροῖς καὶ δικαστηρίοις καὶ
ἀρχείοις καὶ θεωρίiα“ ς οὔ> σης ἀγώνων: ἢ τρεῖaς
δραχμὰς\ τῷrn ἰΤΣ διώ,τ ῃ, δύ΄ο δ᾽δ} . ἄἘΨλ λας ἀbyπ οτίν,ε ιν εἰ>ς
TOΝ δημόσιον ἔταξε. τὸ yap μηδαμοῦn κρατεῖνn
ὀργῆς ἀπαίδευτον καὶ ἀκόλαστον" τὸ δὲ πανταχοῦ
χαλεπόνl,e ἐ>beν ίfοd ις δὲA ἀionδ ύν4 ατον" δεῖA dé\ πρὸς\ τὸ\ δυνα-
To\v γρά΄φ εσθαι τὸΝν νό,μ ον, εἰ> βούλA εται χρησί/μ ως
ὀλίἪγ ους, ἀλλὰ μὴ\ πολλοὺς ἀχρήστως κολάζειν.
ΕὐἽ.2δ οκί/μ ησε δὲ\ κἀ>ν τῷn περὶ\ διαθηκῶnνa νό/ μῳ"
πτρεροόν τγγὰὰερ ρ οροὐὐκκ ο ἐἐξξνῆῆνν, , ἀἀλλλλ᾽᾽ ἐἐν ν ττῷῷ γέγνένεειι τοτοῦῦ
τεθνηκότhe ος ἔ» δει τὰ χρή7μ ατα καὶ \ τὸΝν οἶ3 κον κατα-
μένΛ ειν, ὁς © ’ ᾧK a βούλ/ εταί , τις ἐΟἹπ ιτρέ/ψ ας, εἰ> μὴ\
46ο
SOLON, xx. 5--χχι. 2
and love does not invite, which do not fulfil the
function of marriage, and defeat its object. Nay,
to an old man who is marrying a young wife, any
worthy magistrate or lawgiver might say what is
said to Philoctetes!:
“Indeed, poor wretch, thou art in fine state for
marrying !”’
And if he discovers a young man in the house of a
rich and elderly woman, waxing fat, like a cock-
partridge, in her service, he will remove him and
give him to some marriageable maid that wants a
husband. Thus much, then, on this head.
XXI. Praise is given also to that law of Solon which
forbids speaking ill of the dead. For it is piety
to regard the deceased as sacred, justice to spare
the absent, and good policy to rob hatred of its
perpetuity. He also forbade speaking ill of the
living in temples, courts-of-law, public offices, and
at festivals ; the transgressor must pay three drachmas
to the person injured, and two more into the public
treasury. For never to master one’s anger is a
mark of intemperance and lack of training; but
always to do so is difficult, and for some, impossible.
And a law must regard the possibilities in the case,
if its maker wishes to punish a few to some purpose,
and not many to no purpose.
He was highly esteemed also for his law con-
cerning wills. Before his time, no will could be
made, but the entire estate of the deceased must
remain in his family. Whereas he, by permitting a
1 In a play of this name, of uncertain authorship. See
Nauck, Z'rag. Graec. Frag.”, p. 841. Plutarch cites two
entire verses in Morals, p. 789 a.
VOL I. Q 461
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
παῖδA ες εἶεν αὐτῷA, δοῦAν αι τὰ αὑτοῦ,A φιλίZαZ ν τε
συγγενείας ἐτίμησε μᾶλλον καὶ χάριν ἀνάγκης,
καὶ τὰ χρήματα κτή/μ ατα τῶaν ἐχόντων ἐποίησεν.
οὐ > μὴ\ν ἀ2 νέ“δὃη ν ye πάλ, ιν οὐδ᾽δ ᾽ ἁ€ πλῶςA τὰ\ς δό/σ εις
ἐ5 φῆaκ εν, G> AN 5 εἰ3 μὴM N νό/ σων ἕσ νεκεν ἢA φαρμάκ/ ων ἢA
δεσμῶν! ἢ ἀνάγκῃ κατασχεθεὶς ἢ γυναικὶ πιθό-
μενος, εὖ πάνυ Kal προσηκόν/ τως τὸ πεισθῆνA αι
παρὰ \ τὸἊ ς βέ,λ τιστον οὐOδeὲν ἡe γούfμg ενος TOUA βιασθῆνA αι
διαφέρ͵7εὔ ιν, ἀ3λ λ᾽ ᾽ εἰ᾿ς ταὐΕτῚ ὸ \ τὴ\ν ἀ> πάfτo ην τῇa ἀ> νά7γ κῃ
Kal τῷa πόνῳ τὴ\ν ἡδονὴν θέμενος, ὡς οὐχ ἧττον
ἐκστῆσαι λογισμὸν ἀνθρώπου δυναμένων.
"EB πέ/σ τησε δὲδὲ Kal \ ταῖaς ἐ2 ξόὃδο ις TOAY γυναικῶAν
καὶ τοῖς πένθεσι καὶ ταῖς ἑορταῖς νόμον ἀπείρ-
γοντα τὸ ἄτακτον καὶ ἀκόλαστον' ἐξιέναι μὲν
ἱματίων τριῶν μὴ πλέον ἔχουσαν κελεύσας, μηδὲ
βρωτὸν ἢδ ποτὸν πλείο/ νος ἢ ὀβολοῦa φερομένην,
μηδὲ κάνητα πηχυαίο/ υ μείζονα, μηδὲ νύκτωρ
πορεύ’ε’ σθαι πλὴΝν ἁς μάξ/ ῃ κομιζομένip ην λύ,χ νου προ-
φαίνοντος. ᾿Αμυχὰς\ δὲ κοπτομένων καὶ τὸ\ θρη-
νεῖaνl πεποιημέν/ α καὶ \ TO\ κωκύεhiι ν ἄyyλ λον ἐ3ν ταφαῖςa
ἑLτsέ ρων ἀ) φεῖaλ εν. ἐ2 ναγίζΛ ειν δὲδὲ βοῦaν οὐ>κ εἴ” ασεν,
οὐ5δ ὲ\ συντιθέν/ αι πλέο΄ ν ἱe ματί,ω ν τριῶAν , οὐδ50᾽7 ἐ5 π 2
ἀλλότρια μνήματα βαδίξ/ ειν χωρὶς ἐκκομιδῆςa . ὧν
τὰ πλεῖστα καὶ τοῖς ἡμετέροις νόμοις ἀπηγόρευ-
Tat πρόσκειται δὲ τοῖς ἡμετέροις ζημιοῦσθαι
1 δεσμῶν Bekker adopts Schaefer’s correction to δεσμῷ.
2 πιθόμενος Cobet : πειθόμενοϑ.
462
SOLON, xx. 2-5
man who had no children to give his property to
whom he wished, ranked friendship above kinship,
and favour above necessity, and made a man’s
possessions his own property. On the other hand,
he did not permit all manner of gifts without re-
striction or restraint, but only those which were not
made under the influence of sickness, or drugs,
or imprisonment, or when a man was the victim of
compulsion or yielded to the persuasions of his wife.
He thought, very rightly and properly, that being
persuaded into wrong was no better than being
forced into it, and he placed deceit and compulsion,
gratification and affliction, in one and the same
category, believing that both were alike able to
pervert a man’s reason.
He also subjected the public appearances of the
women, their mourning and their festivals, to a law
which did away with disorder and licence. When
they went out, they were not to wear more than
three garments, they were not to carry more than
an obol’s worth of food or drink, nor a pannier more
than a cubit high, and they were not to travel about
by night unless they rode in a waggon with a lamp
to light their way. Laceration of the flesh by
mourners, and the use of set lamentations, and the
bewailing of any one at the funeral ceremonies of
another, he forbade. The sacrifice of an ox at the
grave was not permitted, nor the burial with the
dead of more than three changes of raiment, nor the
visiting of other tombs than those of their own
family, except at the time of interment. Most
of these practices are also forbidden by our laws,
but ours contain the additional proviso that such
463
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
TOU\S TA τοιαῦaτ α ποιοῦaν τας ὑπὸ\ τῶAν γυναικονόμων,
ὡς ἀνάνδροις καὶ γυναικώδεσι τοῖς περὶ τὰ πένθη
πάθεσι καὶ ἁμαρτήμ΄ ασιν ἐνεχομέν/ ους.
XXII. Ὁρῶν- δὲ τὸ μὲν ἄfσ τυ πιμπλάμενον ἀν-
θρώπων ἀεὶ συρρεό,ν των πανταχόθ/ εν ἐπ᾽ ἀδείας
εἰς τὴν ᾿Αττικήν, τὰ\ δὲ\ πλεῖaσ τα τῆaς χώρας ἀγεννῆa
καὶ \ φαῦaλ α, τοὺ\ς δὲ0€ χρωμέν, ους τῇa @ θαλάthτ τῃ μηὸδὲὲν
εἰωθότας εἰσάγειν τοῖς μηδὲν ἔχουσιν ἀντιδοῦναι,
πρὸς Tas τέχνας ἔ, τρεψε τοὺς πολίτ/ ας, καὶ νόμον
ἔ” γραψεν vitda τρέ/φ ειν τὸ\ν πατέρ/ α μὴx διδαξά4μ ενον
τέχνην ἐπάναγκες μὴ\ εἶ“4ν αι. τῷa μὲ\ν ya\p Λυκούργῳ
Kal πόλιν οἰκοῦaν τι καθαρὰἂνν ὄ5 χλου ξενικοῦa l καὶ
χώρ, αν κεκτημέν/ ῳ
Πολλοῖσι πολλήν, δὶς τοσοῖς δὲ πλείονα,Ϊ
κατ᾽ Εὐριπίδην, καὶ τὸ μέγιστον, εἱλωτικοῦ πλή-
θους, ὃὃ βέλτιον ἣἢ ν μὴ σχολάζειν, ἀλλὰ τριβόμενον
ἀεὶ καὶ πονοῦν ταπεινοῦσθαι, περικεχυμένου τῇ
Λακεδαίμονι, καλῶς εἶχεν ἀσχολιῶν ἐπιπόνων
καὶ βαναύσων ἀπαλλάξαντα τοὺς πολίτας συνέ-
χειῖν ἐν τοῖς ὅπλοις, μίαν τέχνην ταύτην ἐκμανθά-
νοντᾶς καὶ ἀσκοῦντας" Σόλων δὲ τοῖς πράγμασι
τοὺς νόμους μᾶλλον. ἢ τὰ πράγματα τοῖς νόμοις
προσαρμόζων, καὶ τῆς χώρας τὴν φύσιν ὁρῶν τοῖς
γεωργοῦσι γλίσχρως διαρκοῦσαν, ἀργὸν δὲ καὶ
σχολαστὴν ὄχλον οὐ δυναμένην τρέφειν, ταῖς
τέχναις ἀξίωμα περιέθηκε, καὶ τὴν ἐξ ᾿Αρείου
πάγου βουλὴν ἔταξεν ἐπισκοπεῖν ὅθεν ἕκαστος
ἔχει τὰ ἐπιτήδεια, καὶ τοὺς ἀργοὺς κολάζειν.
1 Following Nauck (Trag. Graec. Frag.”, p. 680): πολλοῖς,
τοσοῖσδε,
464
SOLON, xx, 5-xxi1. 3
offenders shall’b e punished by the board of censors
for women, because they indulge in unmanly and
effeminate extravagances of sorrow when they mourn.
XXII. Observing that the city was getting full of
people who were constantly streaming into Attica
from all quarters for greater security of living, and
that most of the country was unfruitful and worth-
less, and that seafaring men are not wont to import
goods for those who have nothing to give them in
exchange, he turned the attention of the citizens to
the arts of manufacture, and enacted a law that no
son who had not been taught a trade should be com-
pelled to support his father. It was well enough for
Lycurgus, whose city was free from swarms of
strangers, and whose country was, in the words of
Euripides,
“For many large, for twice as many more than
large,”
and because, above all, that country was flooded
with a multitude of Helots, whom it was better not
to leave in idleness, but to keep down by continual
hardships and toil,—it was well enough for him to
set his citizens free from laborious and mechanical
occupations and confine their thoughts to arms,
giving them this one trade to learn and practice.
But Solon, adapting his laws to the situation, rather
than the situation to his laws, and observing that
the land could give but a mere subsistence to those
who tilled it, and was incapable of supporting an
unoccupied and leisured multitude, gave dignity to
all the trades, and ordered the council of the Areio-
pagus to examine into every man’s means of liveli-
hood, and chastise those who had no occupation.
465
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 Ἐκεῖνο δ᾽ ἤδη σφοδρότερον, τὸ μηδὲ τοῖς ἐξ
ἑταίρας γενομένοις ἐπάναγκες εἶναι τοὺς πατέρας
τρέ/φ ειν, ὡeς ¢ Ηρακλείδ/ ης ἱe στό,ρ ηκεν ὁe Ἰ]οντικός,. ὁ€
γὰρ ἐν γάμῳ παρορῶν τὸ καλὸν οὐ τέκνων ἕνεκα
δῆn λός ἐστιν, GAN ἡδονῆaς ἀγό,μ ενος γυναῖκa α, τόν
τε μισθὸν ἀπέχει, καὶ παρρησίαν αὑτῷ πρὸς τοὺς
γενομένους οὐκ ἀπολέλοιπεν, οἷς αὐτὸ τὸ γενέσθαι
πεποίηκεν ὄνειδος.
XXIII. “Ὅλως δὲ πλείστην ἔχειν ἀτοπίαν οἱ
περὶ τῶν γυναικῶν νόμοι τῷ Σόλωνι δοκοῦσι.
μοιχὸΧν μὲΝν ya\p ἀ> νελεῖνa τῷan λαβόν, τι δέ, δωκεν"
ἐSὰENν δ᾽? ἁe ρπάσ/ ῃ τις ἐλευθέlρg αν γυναῖaκ α καὶ \ βιά-,
σηται, ζημίαν ἑκατὸν δραχμὰς ἔταξε: κἂν προ-
αγωγεύῃ, δραχμὰς εἴκοσι, πλὴν ὅσαι πεφασμένως 9]
πωλοῦνται, λέγων δὴ τὰς ἑταίρας. αὗται γὰρ
ἐΗ μφανῶ=ς φοιτῶAσ ι πρὸς\ τοὺς\ διδό,ν τας. ἔ” τι δ᾽᾽ οὔ"τ ε
θυγατέρας πωλεῖν οὔτ᾽ ἀδελφὰς δίδωσι, πλὴν
ἂKAν μὴ\ λά/β ῃ παρθέν/ ον ἀ» νδρὶ\ συγγεγενημέν7η ν.
τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ πρᾶγμα ποτὲ μὲν πικρῶς καὶ ἀπαραι-
TH/T OS κολάζ/ ειν, ποτὲ\ δ᾽’ εὐ2 κό/λ ως καὶ \ παίζ/ οντα,
πρόστιμον ξημίαν τὴν τυχοῦσαν ὁρίζοντα, ἄλογόν
ἐστι: πλὴν εἰ μὴ σπανίζοντος τότε τοῦ νομίσματος
ἐν τῇ πόλει μεγάλας ἐποίει τὰς ἀργυρικὰς ζημίας
τὸ δυσπόριστον. εἰς μέν γε τὰ τιμήματα τῶν
θυσιῶν λογίξεται πρόβατον καὶ δραχμὴν ἀντὶ
μεδίμνου" τῷ δ᾽ Ἴσθμια νικήσαντι ραχμὰς ἔταξεν
ἑκατὸν δίδοσθαι, τῷ δ᾽ ᾿Ολύμπια πεντακοσίας"
λύκον δὲ τῷ κομίσαντι πέντε δραχμὰς ἔδωκε,
λυκιδέα δὲ μίαν, ὧν φησιν ὁὸ Φαληρεὺς Δημήτριος
τὸ μὲν βοὸς εἶναι, τὸ δὲ προβάτου τιμήν. ἃς γὰρ
466
SOLON, xxn. 4-xxut. 3
But that provision of his was yet more severe, which,
as Heracleides Ponticus informs us, relieved the sons
who were born out of wedlock from the necessity of
supporting their fathers at all. For he that avoids
the honourable state of marriage, clearly takes a
woman to himself not for the sake of children, but
of pleasure; and he has his reward, in that he robs
himself of all right to upbraid his sons for neglecting
him, since he has made their very existence a reproach
to them.
XXIII. But in general, Solon’s laws concerning
women seem very absurd. For instance, he_per-
mitted an adulterer caught in the act to be killed;
but if a man committed rape upon a free woman, he
was merely to be fined a hundred drachmas ; and if
he gained his end by persuasion, twenty drachmas,
unless it were with one of those who sell themselves
openly, meaning of course the courtesans. For
these go openly to those who offer them their price.
Still further, no man is allowed to sell a daughter or
a sister, unless he find that she is no longer a virgin.
But to punish the same offence now severely and
inexorably, and now mildly and pleasantly, making
the penalty a slight fine, is unreasonable; unless
money was scarce in the city at that time, and the
difficulty of procuring it made these monetary punish-
ments heavy. In the valuations of sacrificial offerings,
at any rate, a sheep and a bushel of grain are reckoned
at a drachma; the victor in the Isthmian games was
to be paid a hundred drachmas, and the Olympic
victor five hundred ; the man who brought in a wolf,
was given five drachmas, and for a wolf’s whelp,
one; the former sum, according to Demetrius the
Phalerian, was the price of an ox, the latter that of
467
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐ>ν τῷA ἑ€ κκαιδεκά,τ ῳ TOLaVl ἀ’ ξό’ν ων ὁὉ ρειί ἡζ ει τιμὰΝς TOAY
ἐ2 κκρί,τ ων ἱ8 ερεί,ω ν, εἰ᾽ κὸΝς μὲxν εἰ39ν αι πολλαπλασίας, ,
ἄΕΣ λλως δὲ\ κἀ>κ εῖnνa αι πρὸς\ τὰ\ς νῦAν εὐ> τελεῖςa εἰ>σ ιν.
ἀρχαῖοa ν δὲ τοῖnςa ᾿Αθηναίοις τὸἣ ν πολεμεῖνA τοῖaς
λύfκd οις, βελτίο, να νέ/μ ειν ἢnr γεωργεῖνa χώρ, αν ἔ» χουσι.
καὶ Ν τὰ\ς φυλὰς\ εἰIσpcὶn ν οἱe λέfγe οντες οὐbκy ἀ> πὸ \ τῶAν
ft| ὠ νος υἱeῶnν , ἀ»λ λ᾽ eleἀ) πὸ \ τῶaν γενῶaν , εἰ8ς. 2 ἃἘτδ ὃ διῃηρ4έ0θ ησαν
οἱ ς βίtοA ι TON X πρῶlτal ον, ὠ᾽ νομάσ/ θαι, TO\ μὲxν μάχιμον
€ Οπλίτ,α ς, τὸ δ᾽ ἐργατικὸνX ? “Epyddes: δυεῖnν δὲ
τῶAν λοιπῶAν L'ehéovtas μὲAν τοὺς γεωργούς,, Αὐγε-
Kopelsa δὲ\ τοὺς\ ἐ5π ὶ i\ νομαῖςA καὶ \ προβατεία/ι ς δια-
τρίβοντας.
᾽ Ἐπεὶ \ δὲ\ πρὸς\ ὕA δωρ οὔxτ ε ποταμοῖςa ἐ3 στιν ἀ»ε νάο, ις
οὔ”τ ε λί’μ ναις τισὶ\ν οὔνυτ 9 ἀ᾽ φθόνU οις πηγαῖςa ἡe
χώρ, α διαρκής΄ , G3 AN > οἱ € πλεῖaσ τοι φρέα/ σι ποιητοῖςa
ἐχρῶlνal το, νό, μον ἔγραψεν, ὅπου μέν“ ἐστι δημόσ, ιον
φρέ,α ρ ἐντὸς ἱππικοῦ,- χρῆaσ θαι τούτῳ" τὸ\ δ᾽’ imm-
κὸν διάστημα τεσσάρων ἣν σταδίων" ὅπου δὲ
πλεῖον ἀπέχει, ζητεῖν ὕδωρ ἴδιον" ἐὰν δὲ ὀρύξαντες
ὀb]ρ γυιῶaν δέκα βάθος παρ᾽ ἑαυτοῖςa μὴ\ εὕρωσι,
τότε λαμβάνειν Tapa τοῦn γείτονος ἑξά/ χουν
ὑὑὸδρρίίανα ν δὶςδ ὶς ἑἑκκάσάτσητς ης ἡἡμμέέρρααςς πλπηληρροοῦῦννττααςς" ἀπορpίlᾳa
ya\p weto δεῖa ν βοηθεῖν“-“, οὐ>κ ἀ> ργίfαi ν ἐ> φοδιάζειν.
ὥefρ ισε δὲ\ καὶ \ φυτειῶlaν) μέ/τ ρα μάλὅτῳ ᾽ 9 ἐ3 μπείρ, ως, TOUS\
μὲ\ν G” AO TL φυτεύοἋ ντας ἐ>ν ἀ> γρῷl al πέν/ τε πό,δ ας
468
SOLON, xxu1. 3-6
asheep. For although the prices which Solon fixes
in his sixteenth table are for choice victims, and
naturally many times as great as those for ordinary
ones, still, even these are low in comparison with
present prices. Now the Athenians were from of
old great enemies of wolves, since their country was
better for pasturage than for tillage. And there are
those who say that their four tribes were originally
named, not from the sons of Ion, but from the
classes into which occupations were divided; thus
the warriors were called Hoplitai, the craftsmen
Ergadeis ; and of the remaining two, the farmers
were called Geleontes, the shepherds and herdsmen
Aigikoreis.}
Since the country was not supplied with water by
ever-flowing rivers, or lakes, or copious springs, but
most of the inhabitants used wells which had been
dug, he made a law that where there was a public
well within a “hippikon,” a distance of four furlongs,
that should be used, but where the distance was
greater than this, people must try to get water of
their own ; if, however, after digging to a depth of
ten fathoms on their own land, they could not get
water, then they might take it from a neighbour's
well, filling a five gallon jar twice a day; for he
thought it his duty to aid the needy, not to provision
the idle. He also showed great experience in the
limits which he set to the planting of trees ; no one
could set out a tree in a field within five feet of his
1 This is strained etymology to explain the ancient tribal
names of Hopletes, Argadeis, Geleontes, and Aigikoreis,
which are derived, in Herodotus v. 66, from the names of the
four sons of Ion. The first has nothing to do with ‘‘ hopla,”
arms; nor the second with ‘‘ergon,” work; nor the third
with ‘‘ ge,” earth; nor the fourth with ‘‘aix,” goat.
469
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀπέχειν τοῦ γείτονος κελεύσας, τοὺς δὲ συκῆν
ἢ ἐλαίαν ἐννέα. πορρωτέρω γὰρ ἐξικνεῖται
ταῦτα ταῖς ῥίζαις, καὶ οὐ πᾶσι γειτνιᾷ τοῖς
φυτοῖς ἀσινῶς, ἀλλὰ καὶ τροφὴν παραιρεῖται
καὶ βλάπτουσαν ἐνίοις ἀπορροὴν ἀφίησι. βό-
θρους δὲ καὶ τάφρους τὸν βουλόμενον ἐκέλευσεν
ὀρύσσειν, ὅσον ἐμβάλλει βάθος, ἀφιστάμενον
μῆκος τἀλλοτρίου' καὶ μελισσῶν σμήνη καθιστά-
μενον ἀπέχειν τῶν ὑφ᾽ ἑτέρου πρότερον ἱδρυμένων
πόδας τριακοσίους.
XXIV. Τῶν δὲ γινομένων διάθεσιν πρὸς ξένους
ἐλαίου μόνον ἔδωκεν, ἄλλα δ᾽ ἐξάγειν ἐκώλυσε"
καὶ κατὰ τῶν ἐξαγόντων ἀρὰς τὸν ἄρχοντα ποι-
εἶσθαι προσέταξεν, ἢ ἐκτίνειν αὐτὸν ἑκατὸν
δραχμὰς εἰς τὸ δημόσιον. καὶ πρῶτος ἄξων
ἐστὶν ὁ τοῦτον περιέχων τὸν νόμον. οὐκ ἂν οὖν
τις ἡγήσαιτο παντελῶς ἀπιθάνους τοὺς λέγοντας
ὅτε καὶ σύκων ἐξαγωγὴ τὸ παλαιὸν ἀπείρητο,
καὶ τὸ φαίνειν ἐνδεικνύμενον τοὺς ἐξάγοντας
κληθῆναι συκοφαντεῖν. ἔγραψε δὲ καὶ βλάβης
τετραπόδων νόμον, ἐἐν ᾧ καὶ κύνα δακόντα παρα-
δοῦναι κελεύει κλοιῷ τριπήχει δεδεμένον" τὸ μὲν
ἐνθύμημα χάριεν πρὸς ἀσφάλειαν.
͵Παρέχει δ᾽ ἀπορίαν καὶ ὁ τῶν δημοποιήτων
νόμος, ὅτι γενέσθαι πολίταις οὐ δίδωσι πλὴν
τοῖς φεύγουσιν ἀειφυγίᾳ τὴν ἑαυτῶν ἢ πανεστίοις
᾿Αθήναξε μετοικιξομένοις ἐπὶ τέχνῃ. τοῦτο δὲ
ποιῆσαί φασιν αὐτὸν οὐχ οὕτως ἀπελαύνοντα
τοὺς ἄλλους ὡς κατακαλούμενον ᾿Αθήναζξε τούτους
ἐπὶ βεβαίῳ τῷ μεθέξειν τῆς πολιτείας, καὶ ἅμα
470
SOLON, xxi. 6-xxIVv. 2
neighbour’s field, or, in case it was a fig-tree or an
olive-tree, within nine. For these reach out farther
with their roots, and injure some trees by their
proximity, taking away their nourishment, and
emitting an exhalation which is sometimes noxious.
He that would dig a pit or a trench, must dig it at
the distance of its own depth from his neighbour’s ;
and he that would set out hives of bees, must put
them three hundred feet away from those which
another had already installed.
XXIV. Of the products of the soil, he allowed oil
only to be sold abroad, but forbade the exportation
of others; and if any did so export, the archon was
to pronounce curses upon them, or else himself pay
a hundred drachmas into the public treasury. His
first table is the one which contains this law. One
cannot, therefore, wholly disbelieve those who say
that the exportation of figs also was anciently for-
bidden, and that the one who showed up, or pointed
out such exporters, was called a “sycophant,”’ or
Jig-shower. He also enacted a law concerning
injuries received from beasts, according to which a
dog that had bitten anybody must be delivered up
with a wooden collar three cubits long fastened to it;
a happy device this for promoting safety.
But the law concerning naturalized citizens is of
doubtful character. He permitted only those to be
made citizens who were permanently exiled from
their own country, or who removed to Athens with
their entire families to ply a trade. This he did,
as we are told, not so much to drive away other
foreigners, as to invite these particular ones to
Athens with the full assurance of becoming citizens;
he also thought that reliance could be placed both
471
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πιστοὺς\ νομί,ζ οντα τοὺ\ς μὲ\ν ἀ» ποβεβληκότ, ας TH\Y
ἑς αυτῶAν διὰN i τὴ\ν ἀ᾽ νάγ/ κην, TOUS\ δ᾽τ p reeἀs πολελοιπότ, ας
ὃ La\ TH\Y γνώμ, ην. ἴtδoι ον δὲδὲ τοῦA SΣfό λωνος καὶ Ν τὸ\
περὶ τῆς ἐν δημοσίῳ σιτήοεως, ὅπερ αὐτὸς
παρασιτεῖνA κέκληκε. TO\V γὰ\ρ αὐτὸ\ν οὐκ ἐᾷan
σιτεῖanσ θαι πολλάκις, ἐὰ\ ν δὲ ᾧ καθήκει μὴ\ βού-
Antal, κολάζ/ε ι, TO\ μὲ\ν ἡe γούμUA ενος πλεονεξίαigν , TO\
δ᾽ ὑπεροψίαν τῶν κοινῶν.
XXV. ᾿Ισχὺν δὲ τοῖaς νόfμ οις πᾶAσ ιν εἰς ἑκατὸν
ἐ2 νιαυτοὺς\ ἔ» δωκε" Kal \ κατεγρά,φ ησαν ei᾽s ξυλί,ν ους
ἄξονας ἐν πλαισίοις περιέ,χ ουσι στρεφομένους,
ὧν ἔτι καθ᾽ ἡμᾶaς ἐν ἸΙρυτανείῳ λεί/ ψανα μικρὰ
διεσώζ, ετο" καὶ προσηγορεύθis ησαν, ὡς ᾽ ᾿Αριστοτέ
Ans φησί,, κύ4ρ βεις. καὶ \ Κρατῖνa ος ὁς κωμικὸς\
εἴ’ ρηκέ , που"
Πρὸς τοῦ Σόλωνος καὶ Δράκοντος οἷσι νῦν
φρύγουσιν ἤδη τὰς κάχρυς τοῖς κύρβεσιν.
ἔνιοι δέ φασιν ἰδίως ἐν οἷς ἱερὰ καὶ θυσίαι
περιέ/χ ονται, κύ,ρ βεις, ἄ» ξονας δὲ\ τοὺς\ ἄ” λλους
ὠb)ν ομάσ4 θαι. κοινὸΝν μὲ\ν οὖsνs ὥΜ μνυεν ὅΨ ρκον ἡς βουλὴ \
τοὺ\ς Σmdόe λd ωνος νό, μους ἐb]μ πεδώσ, ειν, »ἴ διον δ᾽> ἕτοῦ καστος
τῶ“ν θεσμοθετῶaν ἐ5ν ἀ> γορᾷ[ 2] πρὸςΝ TOa λί/θ ῳ, KaTa-
φατίζ/ ων, εἴY τι TapaBain{4 τῶaν θεσμῶνa , ἀνδριάντα
χρυσοῦν ἰσομέτρητον ἰ ἀναθήσειν ἐν Δελφοῖς.
1 ἰσομέτρητον and ἐν Δελφοῖς are not in the text of Aristotle,
472
SOLON, xxiv. 2—xxv. 2
on those who had been forced to abandon their own
country, and on those who had left it with a fixed pur-
pose. Characteristic of Solon also was his regulation
of the practice of eating at the public table in the
townhall, for which his word was “ parasitein.”. 1} The
same person was not allowed to eat there often, but
if one whose duty it was to eat there refused, he was
punished. Solon thought the conduct of the first
grasping; that of the second, contemptuous of the
ublic interests.
XXV. All his laws were to have force for a
hundred years, and they were written on “ axones,”
or wooden tablets, which revolved with the oblong
frames containing them. Slight remnants of these
were still preserved in the Prytaneium when I was
at Athens, and they were called, according to
Aristotle,? “ kurbeis.”” Cratinus, also, the comic poet,
somewhere says :—
“ By Solon, and by Draco too I make mine oath,
Whose kurbeis now are used to parch our barley-
corns.’ 8
But some say that only those tablets which relate to
sacred rites and sacrifices are properly called “ kur-
beis,’ and the rest are called “axones.” However
that may be, the council took a joint oath to ratify
the laws of Solon, and each of the “ thesmothetai,”
or guardians of the statutes, swore separately at the
herald’s stone in the market-place, vowing that if
he transgressed the statutes in any way, he would
dedicate at Delphi a golden statue of commensurate
worth.
1 Hence, with scornful meaning, the word parasite,
2 Cf. Const. of Athens, vii. 1, with Sandys’ notes.
% Kock, Com. Att. Frag. i. p. 94.
473
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
3 Συνιδὼ\ν δὲ\ τοῦa μηνὸς\ τὴ\ν ἀ> νωμαλία,ν , καὶ τὴ\ν
κί, νησιν τῆ-ς σελήν΄ ης οὔxτ ε δυομέ/ν ῳ τῷa ἡeyλ ί/ῳ
πάν΄ τως OUSfTp SAVEἀS νίOP,σ χοντι συμφερομένJη ν, ἀ> λλὰ N πολ-
λάκις τῆς αὐτῆς ἡμέρας καὶ καταλαμβάνουσαν
καὶ παρερχομένην τὸν ἥλιον, αὐτὴν μὲν ἔταξε
ταύτην ἕνην καὶ νέαν καλεῖσθαι, τὸ μὲν πρὸ
συνόδου μόριον αὐτῆς τῷ παυομένῳ μηνί, τὸ δὲ
λοιπὸν\ ἤδη τῷa ἀρχομένῳ προσήκειν ἡγούμ/ ενος,
πρῶτa ος, ὡςς ἔΜ οικεν, ὀbdρ θῶaς ἀ> κού΄σ ας € “Ομή/ρ ου λέ-“
γοντος,
Τοῦ μὲν φθίνοντος μηνός, τοῦ δ᾽ ἱσταμένοιο,
τὴν δ᾽ ἐφεξῆaς ἡμέ,ρ αν νουμηνίαt ν ἐκάλεσε. τὰ\ς δ᾽
ἀ3π ᾽ ’ εἰ᾽ κάεδὐ ος ov᾽ προστιθείς»,, ἀ>λ λ᾽ ᾽ ἀ> φαιρῶaν καὶ\
ἀ᾽ ναλύω’ὔν , w“o TEep τὰ\ φῶnτa α τῆaς σελήν/ ης ECiWe. PA,
μέχρι τριακάδος ἠρί/θ μησεν.
᾽ Emel \ δὲ\ τῶaν νό’ μων εἰ᾽ σενεχθέ,ν των ἔ» νιοι τῷa
Σόλωνι: ) καθ᾽ ἑκάστην προσήε, σαν ἡμέραν, ἐπαι-
vαoὐo vtes ἢ ψέγοντες ἢA συμβουλεύοντες ἐμβάλλειν
τοῖaςl γεγραμμένοις ὅ TL τύ/χ οιεν ἢKX ἀφαιρεῖνa , πλεῖ-A
oto. δ᾽ ἦσαν οἱ πυνθανόμi ενοι καὶ ἀνακρίν/ οντες
καὶ κελεύοντες αὐτὸν ὅπως ἕκαστον ἔχει καὶ
πρὸςΝ ἣA ν κεῖ“ ται διά4ν οιαν ἐ> πεκδιδάσ/ κειν καὶ \ σαφη-
vier, ὁe ρῶ“ν ὅτι ταῦlaτl α Kal TO πράττειν ἄτοπον
Kal \ TO\ μὴ\ πράτ, τειν ἐ3 πί’φ θονον, ὅ[τέλ ως δὲ\ ταῖaς
ἀ> πορία/ ις ὑe πεκστῆνan αι βουλόμ, ενος καὶ \ διαφυγεῖν-“
414
SOLON, xxv. 3-5
Observing the irregularity of the month, and that
the motion of the moon does not always coincide
with the rising and setting of the sun, but that often
she overtakes and passes the sun on the same day,
he ordered that day to be called the Old and
New, assigning the portion of it which preceded
the conjunction to the expiring month, and the
remaining portion to the month that was just
beginning. He was thus the first, as it would seem,
to understand Homer's verse,! which speaks of a day
when
“This month is waning, and the next is setting in,”
and the day following this he called the first of the
month. After the twentieth he did not count the
days by adding them to twenty, but by subtracting
them from thirty, on a descending scale, like the
waning of the moon.?
No sooner were the laws of Solon put into operation
than some would come to him every day with praise
or censure of them, or with advice to insert some-
thing into the documents, or take something out.
Very numerous, too, were those who came to him
with inquiries and questions about them, urging him
to teach and make clear to them the meaning and
purpose of each several item. He saw that to do
this was out of the question, and that not to do it
would bring odium upon him, and wishing to be
wholly rid of these perplexities and to escape from
1 Odyssey, xiv. 162=xix. 307, of the day when Odysseus
would return to Ithaca.
2 Thus the twenty-first was called the tenth, the twenty-
second the ninth, and so on, ‘‘of the waning month.” The
twenty-ninth was the second of the waning month, the
thirtieth the Old and New
475
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τὸ δυσάρεστον καὶ φιλαίτιον τῶν πολιτῶν (Epry-
μασι γὰρ ἐν μεγάλοις πᾶσιν ἁδεῖν χαλεπόν,
ὡς αὐτὸς εἴρηκε), πρόσχημα τῆς πλάνης τὴν
ναυκληρίαν ποιησάμενος ἐξέπλευσε, δεκαετῆ παρὰ
τῶν ᾿Αθηναίων ἀποδημίαν αἰτησάμενος. ἤλπιζε
γὰρ ἐν τῷ χρόνῳ τούτῳ καὶ τοῖς νόμοις αὐτοὺς1
ἔσεσθαι συνήθεις.
XXVI. Πρῶτον μὲν οὖν εἰς Αἴγυπτον ἀφίκετο
καὶ διέτριψεν, ὡς αὐτός φησι,
Νείλου ἐπὶ προχοῇσι KavwBidos ἐγγύθεν ἀκτῆς.
χρόνον δέ τινα καὶ τοῖaς περὶ \ Ψέν/ ωφιν τὸ\ν € ‘Hrxov-
πολίτην καὶ Σῶaγ χιν τὸ\ν Laitof nv, λογιωτάτοις
οὖσι TOaAV ἱερέων, συνεφιλοσόφ, ησε' Tap ὧν καὶ
τὸΝν » ᾿Ατλαντικὸν\ ἀ’ κούσ/ ας λόγU ον, ὡeς Πλάτ΄, ων
φησίν, ἐπεχεί,ρ ησε διὰ\ ποιή/μ ατος ἐξενεγκεῖAν εἰς
τοὺς\ e/ “ἔλληνας. ἔ» πειτα πλεύσ7 ας εἰ᾽ς Κύπ"ἢ ρον
ἠγαπήθη διαφερόUν τως ὑπὸx Φιλοκύ/π ρου τινὸς τῶ-ν
ἐbκd εὶ “ βασιλέω/ ν, ὃἃ ς ε“ἶ5 χεν οὐ> μεγά/λ ην πόλ, ιν,
ὠκισμένην ὑπὸ Δημοφῶντος τοῦ Θησέως, περὶ
τὸν Κλάριον ποταμὸν\ ἐν χωρίο/ι ς ὀχυροῖςa μέν,
ἄλλως δὲ δυσχερέσ4 ι καὶ \ φαύλ΄ οις κειμένην.
ἔπεισεν οὖν αὐτὸν ὁ« Σόλων ὑποκειμένου καλοῦ lol
pio)
πεδίου μεταθέντα TH\Y πόλ/ ιν ἡδί/ο να Kal μείζονα
κατασκευάσαι. Kal παρὼ\ν ἐπεμελήθη τοῦa συν-
OlKLT LOUa,n καὶ συνδιεκό“iσ μησε πρός/ τε διαγωγὴν
ἄριστα καὶ πρὸς ἀσφάλειαν, ὥ[4σ τε πολλοὺς μὲν
οἰκήτορας τῷ Φιλοκύπρῳ συνελθεῖν, ζηλῶσαι δὲ
τοὺς ἄλλους βασιλέας" διὸΝ καὶ THaA Σόλωνι τιμὴν
1 rots νόμοις αὐτοὺς after MSS. cited by Stephanus ; Bekker
has τοὺς νόμους αὐτοῖς, the conjecture of Stephanus (the laws
would be familiar to them).
476
SOLON, xxv. 5-xxvi. 3
the captiousness and censoriousness of the citizens
(for “in great affairs,’ as he says himself,! “it is
difficult to please all ’’), he made his ownership of a
vessel an excuse for foreign travel, and set sail, after
obtaining from the Athenians leave of absence for
ten years. In this time he hoped they would be
accustomed to his laws.
XXVI. In the first place, then, he went to Egypt,?
and lived, as he himself says,®
“Where Nile pours forth his floods, near the Canobic
shore.”
He also spent some time in studies with Psenophis
of Heliopolis and Sonchis of Sais, who were very
learned priests. From these, as Plato says,‘ he
heard the story of the lost Atlantis, and tried to
introduce it in a poetical form to the Greeks.> Next
he sailed to Cyprus, and was greatly beloved of
Philocyprus, one of the kings of the island. This
prince had a small city, founded by Demophon, the
son of Theseus, and lying near the river Clarius, in a
position which was strong, but otherwise incom-
modious and sorry. Solon therefore persuaded him
to remove the city to the fair plain which lay below
it, and make it more spacious and pleasant. He also
remained and took charge of the new city’s con-
solidation, and helped to arrange it in the best
possible manner both for convenience of living and
for safety. The result was that many colonists flocked
to Philocyprus, and he was the envy of the other
kings. He therefore paid Solon the honour of
4 Fragment 7 (Bergk).
* Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xi. 1.
3. Fragment 28 (Bergk). 4 Timaeus, p. 22 ἃ.
5 Cf. chapters xxxi. 3; xxxii. 1 f.
477
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀποδιδοὺς Αἰπεῖαν τὴν πόλιν καλουμένην πρό-
4 τερὸν ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου Σόλους προσηγόρευσε. καὶ
αὐτὸς δὲ μέμνηται τοῦ συνοικισμοῦ" προσαγο-
ρεύσας γὰρ ἐν ταῖς ἐλεγείαις τὸν Φιλόκυπρον,
Nov δὲ (φησί) σὺ μὲν Σολίοισι πολὺν χρόνον
ἐνθάδ᾽ ἀνάσσων
τή,ν δε πόλ, ιν ναίο΄,ι ς καὶ x γέ/ν ος ὑe μέτ/ ερον"
αὐ>τ ὰ\ρ ἐEμNὲ Ev\ y νηὶi. θοῇa κλεινῆAς ἀ> πὸ \ νήUyσ ου
ἀσκηθῆ πέμποι Κύπρις ἰοστέφανος"
οἰ» κισμῷw n δ᾽3 ἐ9π. ὶ \ τῷὉδ ε χάρ4 ιν Kal \ κῦrnδ ος ὀ>)π άξ/ζ οι
ἐ}]σ θλὸν\ καὶ \ νό/ στον πατρίδZ᾽ I és ἡe μετέρ/ ην.
XXVII. Τὴ\ν δὲ πρὸςΝ Κροῖaσ ον ἔντευξιν αὐτοῦA
δοκοῦaσ ιν ἔνιοι τοῖaς χρόν/ οις ὡς πεπλασμένην
ἐ> λέΥγ χειν. ἐbdγ ὼ\ δὲ\ λό/γ ον ἔΨ, νδοξον οὕ«“τ ω καὶ \ To-
σούτους μάρτυρας ἔχοντα, καί,» ὃἃ μεῖA ζόν ἐστι,
πρέποντα τῷ Σόλωνος ἤθει καὶ τῆς ἐκείνου με-
γαλοφροσύνidη ς καὶ \ σοφία/ ς ἄBAξ ιον, ov7 μοι δοκῶn
προήσεσθαι χρονικοῖς τισι λεγομένοις κανόύσιν,
ods μυρίο, ι διορθοῦaν τες ἄ,χ ρι σήμερον εἰς οὐδὲν
αὑGτ οῖςa ὁμολογούμ/ ενον δύνανται καταστῆσn αι τὰς
2 ἀντιλογίας. τὸἊν δ᾽ οὖν Σό/λ ωνά φασιν εἰς Σάρδεις
δεηθέντι THa Κροί/σ ῳ παραγενόμ/ε νον, παθεῖνa τι
παραπλήσιον ἀνδρὶ χερσαίῳ κατιόντι πρῶτον ἐπὶ
θάλατταν. ἐκεῖ“ἅνμ ός τε γὰΝρ ὁρῶ-“ ν ἄλλον ἐξ ἄλλου
ποταμὸν\ ῴvε το THἉ Y θά/λ ασσαν ε“ἶ-ν αι, καὶ \ TOa n Σό,λ ωνι
τὴν αὐλὴ\ν διαπορευομένῳ καὶ πολλοὺς ὁρῶAν τι
τῶaν βασιλικῶaνn κεκοσμημέν/ ους πολυτελῶςfal, Kal
478
SOLON, xxvi. 3-xxvu. 2
naming the new city after him, and called it Soli;
its name had been Aipeia. Solon himself also makes
mention of this consolidation. In his elegies, namely,
he addresses Philocyprus, and says ! :-—
“ Now mayest thou long time be lord and master for
the Solii here,
Dwelling in this city thyself, and thy family after
thee;
But may I and my swift ship, as we leave this
storied isle,
Be brought upon our way in safety by Cypris of the
violet crown.
Upon this settlement of thine may she bestow
favour and glory ;
And upon me an auspicious return to my father-
land.”
XXVII. As for his interview with Croesus, some
think to prove by chronology that it is fictitious.
But when a story is so famous and so well-attested,
and, what is more to the point, when it comports so
well with the character of Solon, and is so worthy of
his magnanimity and wisdom, I do not propose to
reject it out of deference to any chronological canons,
so called, which thousands are to this day revising,
without being able to bring their contradictions into
any general agreement. So then, they say that
Solon, on visiting Sardis at the invitation of Croesus,?
had much the same experience as an inland man who
goes down for the first time to the sea. For just as
such a man thinks each successive river that he sees
to be the sea, so Solon, as he passed through the
court and beheld many of the king’s retainers in
1 Fragment 19 (Bergk). 2 Cf. Herodotus, i. 30-33.
479
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
σοβοῦντας ἐν ὄχλῳ προπομπῶν καὶ δορυφόρων,
ἕκαστος ἐδόκει Κροῖσος εἶναι, μέχρι πρὸς αὐτὸν
ἤχθη, πᾶν ὅσον ἐν λίθοις, ἐν βαφαῖς ἐσθῆτος, ἐν
τέχναις χρυσοῦ περὶ κόσμον ἐκπρεπὲς ἔχειν ἢ
περιττὸν ἢ ζηλωτὸν ἐδόκει περικείμενον, ὡς δὴ
θέαμα σεμνότατον ὀφθείη καὶ ποικιλώτατον.
ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ὁ Σόλων ἄντικρυς καταστὰς οὔτ᾽ ἔπαθεν
οὐδὲν οὔτ᾽ εἶπε πρὸς τὴν ὄψιν ὧν ὁ Κροῖσος προσ-
εδόκησεν, ἀλλὰ καὶ δῆλος ἣν τοῖς εὖ φρονοῦσι
τῆς ἀπειροκαλίας καὶ μικροπρεπείας καταφρονῶν,
ἐκέλευσεν αὐτῷ τούς τε θησαυροὺς ἀνοῖξαι τῶν
χρημάτων, καὶ τὴν ἄλλην ἄγοντας ἐπιδεῖξαι
μηδὲν δεομένῳ κατασκευὴν καὶ πολυτέλειαν.
ἤρκει γὰρ αὐτὸς ἐν ἑαυτῷ τοῦ τρόπου κατανόησιν
παρασχεῖν. ὡς δ᾽ οὖν αὖθις ἤχθη γεγονὼς ἁπάν-
TOV θεατής, ἠρώτησεν αὐτὸν ὁ Κροῖσος εἴ τινα
οἶδεν ἀνθρώπων αὐτοῦ μακαριώτερον. ἀποφηνα-
μένου δὲ τοῦ Σόλωνος ὅτι οἷδε Τέλλον αὑτοῦ πολί-
την, καὶ διεξελθόντος ὅτι χρηστὸς ἀνὴρ ὁ Τέλλος
γενόμενος καὶ παῖδας εὐδοκίμους καταλιπὼν καὶ
βίον οὐδενὸς ἐνδεᾶ τῶν ἀναγκαίων, ἐτελεύτησεν
ἐνδόξως ἀριστεύσας ὑπὲρ τῆς πατρίδος, ἤδη μὲν
ἀλλόκοτος ἐδόκει εἶναι τῷ Κροίσῳ καὶ ἄγροικος,
εἰ μὴ πρὸς ἀργύριον πολὺ μηδὲ χρυσίον τῆς εὐδαι-
μονίας ποιεῖται τὴν ἀναμέτρησιν, ἀλλὰ δημο-
τικοῦ καὶ ἰδιώτου βίον καὶ θάνατον ἀνθρώπου
μᾶλλον ἢ τοσαύτην ἀγαπῴη δύναμιν καὶ ἀρχήν.
οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ πάλιν ἠρώτησεν αὐτὸν εἰ μετὰ
Τέλλον ἄλλον ἔγνωκεν ἀνθρώπων εὐδαιμονέστε-
ρον. πάλιν δὲ τοῦ Σόλωνος εἰπόντος εἰδέναι
Κλέοβιν καὶ Βίτωνα, φιλαδέλφους καὶ φιλομή-
480
SOLON, χχνιι. 2-5
costly apparel and moving proudly amid a throng
of couriers and armed guards, thought each in turn
to be Croesus, until he was brought to the king him-
self, who was decked out with everything in the
way of precious stones, dyed raiment, and wrought
gold that men deem remarkable, or extravagant, or
enviable, in order that he might present a most
august and gorgeous spectacle. But when Solon, in
this presence, neither showed any astonishment at
what he saw, nor made any such comments upon it
as Croesus had expected, but actually made it clear
to all discerning eyes that he despised such vulgarity
and pettiness, the king ordered his treasure chambers
to be thrown open for the guest, and that he should
be led about to behold the rest of his sumptuous
equipments. Of this there was no need, for the man
himself sufficed to give Solon an understanding of
his character. However, when Solon had seen every-
thing and had been conducted back again, Croesus
asked him if he had ever known a happier man than
he. Soion said he had, and that the man was Tellus, a
fellow-citizen of his own; Tellus, he went on to say,
had proved himself an honest man, had left reputable
sons behind him, and had closed a life which knew
no serious want with a glorious display of valour in
behalf of his country. Croesus at once judged Solon
to be a strange and uncouth fellow, since he did not
make an abundance of gold and silver his measure of
happiness, but admired the life and death of an
ordinary private man more than all this display of
power and sovereignty. Notwithstanding, he asked
him again whether, next to Tellus, he knew any
other man more fortunate than he. Again Solon
said he did, naming Cleobis and Bito, men surpass-
481
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Topas ὃ διαφερό, ντως ἄ»ν δὃρ ας, of« “ὋΔ τὴ\ν μητέρ, α τῶAν
βοῶν βραδυνόντων ὑποδύντες αὐτοὶ τῷ ζυγῷ τῆς 94
ἁe μάξ/ ης ἐ> κό, μισαν πρὸςΝ τὸ\ τῆaς ef “Ηρας ἱe ερὸ\ν ev> dai-
μονιζομένην ὑπὸ τῶν πολιτῶν καὶ χαίρουσαν, εἶτα
θύσαντες καὶ πιό,ν τες οὐκ ἔτι μεθ᾽ Ε ἡμέραν ἀνέστη-
σαν, ἀλλὰ τεθνηκότες ἀναλγῆ καὶ ἄλυπον ἐπὶ
δό/ ξη τοσαύiτf ῃ θά/ν ατον ὥ» φθησαν, “Ἡ¢ μᾶς“Ὁ δέ4,%
εἶ. πεν ἤ" δη πρὸς\ ὀ᾽ ργὴ\ν ὁς Κροῖσn ος, ‘a“ε ἰς οὐOδsέ να
τί/ θης εὐ> δαιμό,ν ων ἀ>?ρ ιθμὸΝν ἀ> νθρώUsπ ων; ”" καὶ ὁς
Σόλων οὔτε κολακεύε4ι ν βουλόμενος αὐτὸΝν οὔτε
περαιτέρω παροξύνειν, ““/Ἐ λλησιν," εἶ9 πεν, “ὦ
βασιλεῦ n Λυδῶνa , πρός τε τἄλλα μετρί/ω ς ἔχειν ὁΦ
θεὸἈΝς ἔ4 δωκε, καὶ \ σοφία/ ς τινὸεςὐ ἀ> θαρσοῦς“ , wes ἔBAο ικε,
καὶ \ δημοτικῆςa , οὐ» βασιλικῆςA οὐ>δ ὲ\ λαμπρᾶς“ , ὑigπ ὸ Ν
μετριό,τ ητος ἡμῖaν μέτεστιν, ἣ τύSχ. αις ὁς ρῶan σα παν-
τοδαπαῖς χρώμενον ἀεὶ τὸν βίον, οὐκ ἐᾷ τοῖς
παροῦσa ιν ἀ> γαθοῖςaA μέ/γ α φρονεῖνa , οὐQδVὲ θαυμάζ/ ειν
ἀνδρὸς εὐτυχί’α ν μεταβολῆςa χρόνον ἔχουσαν.
ἔ» πεισι γὰ\ρ ἑe κά/ στῳ ποικί/λ ον ἐ> ξ ἀ> δή/λ ου τὸΝ μέ7λ λον"
ᾧφ δ᾽3 εἰ»ς τέ/λ ος ὁW s δαί, μων ἔ” θετο τὴ\ν εὐ> πραξία7 ν,
τοῦ“τ ον εὐ> δαί/μ ονα νομίζ, ομεν. ὁς δὲ\ ζῶA ντος ἔ7 τι Kal \
κινδυνεύοντος ἐ>ν τῷA βί/ ῳ μακαρισμός/, ὥ“ σπερ
ἀγωνιζομένου κή,ρ υγμα καὶ στέφανος, ἐστὶν
ἀ> βέβ/ αιος καὶ \ ἄ»κ υρος." 7) ταῦτa᾽n? εἰ> πὼ\ν ὁe Σό,λ ων
ἀ> πηλλάτ/τ ετο λυπήσ/ ας μέν/ , οὐ3 νουθετή7σ ας δὲ\
τὸν Κροῖσον.
XXVIII. Ὁ δὲ λογοποιὸς Αἴσωπος, ἐτύγχανε
482
SOLON, xxvil. 5-Xxvul. I
ing all others in brotherly love and in dutiful
affection towards their mother; for once, he said,
when the car in which she was riding was delayed
by the oxen, they took the yoke upon their own
shoulders and brought their mother to the temple of
Hera, where her countrymen called her a happy
woman and her heart was rejoiced; then, after
sacrifice and feasting, they laid themselves to rest,
and never rose again, but were found to have died a
painless and tranquil death with so great honour
fresh upon them. ‘ What!” said Croesus, who by
this time was angered, “dost thou not count us
among happy men at all?” Then Solon, who was
unwilling to flatter him and did not wish to exasperate
him further, said: “ O king of Lydia, as the Deity has
given us Greeks all other blessings in moderation, so
our moderation gives us a kind of wisdom which is
timid, in all likelihood, and fit for common people,
not one which is kingly and splendid. This wisdom,
such as it is, observing that human life is ever
subject to all sorts of vicissitudes, forbids us to be
puffed up by the good things we have, or to admire
a man’s felicity while there is still time for it to
change. For the future which is advancing upon
every one is varied and uncertain, but when the Deity
bestows prosperity on a man up to the end, that
man we consider happy ; to pronounce any one happy,
however, while he is still living and running the
risks of life, is like proclaiming an athlete victorious
and crowning him while he is still contending for
the prize; the verdict is insecure and _ without
authority.” When he had said this, Solon departed,
leaving Croesus vexed, but none the wiser for it.
XXVIII. Now it so happened that Aesop, the
483
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ya\p εἰ?ς Σάρ, δεις μετά4π εμπτος γεγονὼ\ς ὑeπeὸl Kpoi-,
σου καὶ τιμώμενος, ἠχθέσθη τῷ Σόλωνι μηδεμιᾶς
τυχόντι φιλανθρωπίας: καὶ προτρέπων αὐτόν,
“7, Σόλων, ἔφη, “τοῖς βασιλεῦσι δεῖ ὡς
ἥΨ κιστα ἢx ὡeς ἥefδ ιστα ὁςμ ιλεῖνa. " 9 καὶ ν ὁe Σόἢλ ων,
“Ma ΔΙ᾽, εἶπεν, “ ἀλλ᾽ ὡς ἥκιστα ἢ ὡς ἄριστα."
Τότε μὲν οὖν ὁ Κροῖσος οὕτω τοῦ Σόλωνος
κατεφρόνησεν" ἐπεὶ δὲ Κύρῳ συμβαλὼν ἐκρατήθη
μάχ/ ῃ, καὶ \ TH\Y πόλ/ ιν ἀ᾽ πώλ/ εσε, καὶ \ ζῶa ν ἁς λοὺς\
αὐτὸς ἔμελλε καταπίμπρασθαι, καὶ γενομένης
πυρᾶς ἀνεβιβάσθη δεδεμένος θεωμένων Περσῶν
ἁπάντων καὶ Κύρου παρόντος, ἐφ᾽ ὅσον ἐξικνεῖτο
καὶ δυνατὸς ἦν τῇ φωνῇ φθεγξάμενος ἀνεβόησε
τρίς, ‘TO, Σόλων." θαυμάσας οὖν ὁ Κῦρος ἔπεμψε
τοὺς ἐρησομένους ὅστις ae ἢ θεῶν οὗτός
ἐστιν ὁ Σόλων, ὃν ἐν τύχαις} ἀπόροις μόνον
ἀνακαλεῖται. καὶ ὁ Κροῖσος οὐδὲν ἀποκρυψά-
μενος εἶπεν ὅτι “ Τῶν παρ᾽ “Ελλησι σοφῶν εἷς
οὗτος ἣν ὁ ἀνήρ, ὃν ἐγὼ μετεπεμψάμην οὐκ
ἀ» κοῦaσ αί , τι βουλόμ/ ενος οὐ>δ ὲ\ μαθεῖaν ὧAaν ἐ3 νδεὴ\ ς
ἤμην, ἀλλ᾽ ὡς δή μοι θεατὴς γένοιτο καὶ μάρτυς
ἀπίοι τῆς εὐδαιμονίας ἐκείνης, ἣν ἀποβαλεῖν ἄἄ ρα
μεῖζον ἦἢ ν κακὸν ἢ λαβεῖν ἀγαθόν. λόγος γὰρ ἣν
καὶ δόξα τἀγαθὸν παρούσης" αἱ μεταβολαὶ δέ μοι
αὐτῆς εἰς πάθη δεινὰ καὶ συμφορὰς ἀνηκέστους
ἔργῳ τελευτῶσι. καὶ ταῦτ᾽ ἐκεῖνος ὁ ἀνὴρ ἐκ τῶν
τότε τὰ νῦν τεκμαιρόμενος, ἐκέλευε τὸ τέλος τοῦ
βίου σκοπεῖν καὶ μὴ θρασυνόμενον ἀβεβαίοις
ὑς πονοία/ ις ὑicβ ρίζ/ε ιν." ” ἐbdπ εὶ \ δὲΝ τοῦτἂν ᾽ 5 Ὁἀ ΤΉ νηνέὔχ θη πρὸς\
τὸν Κῦρον, ἅτε δὴ σοφώτερος ὧν τοῦ Κροίσου καὶ
1 ἐν τύχαις Coraés, Cobet, and ὃ : τύχαις.
484
SOLON, xxvin. 1-4
writer of fables, was in Sardis, having been summoned
thither by Croesus, and receiving much honour at his
hands. He was distressed that Solon met with no
kindly treatment, and said to him by way of advice:
“Ὁ Solon, our converse with kings should be either
as rare, or as pleasing asis possible.’ ‘ No, indeed !”’
said Solon, “ but either as rare or as beneficial as is
possible.”
At this time, then, Croesus held Solon in a contempt
like this; but afterwards he encountered Cyrus, was
defeated in battle, lost his city, was taken alive and
condemned to be burnt; and then, as he lay bound
upon the pyre in the sight of all the Persians and of
Cyrus himself, with all the reach and power of which
his voice was capable, he called out thrice :! “O
Solon!” Cyrus, then, astonished at this, sent men to
ask him what man or god this Solon was on whom
alone he called in his extremity. And Croesus, without
any concealment, said: “This man was one of the
sages of Greece, and I sent for him, not with any
desire to hear or learn the things of which I stood in
need, but in order that he might behold, and, when
he left me, bear testimony to the happiness I then
enjoyed, the loss of which I now see to be a greater
evil than its possession wasa good. For when it was
mine, the good I derived from it was matter of repor
and men’s opinion, but its departure from me issues
in terrible sufferings and irreparable calamities which
arereal. And that man, conjecturing this future from
what he then saw, bade me look to the end of my
life, and not let insecure conjectures embolden me to
be proud and insolent.”” When this was reported to
Cyrus, since he was a wiser man than Croesus, and
1 Cf. Herodotus, i. 86.
485
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὃν λόγον τοῦ Σόλωνος ἰσχυρὸν ἐν τῷ Tmapadely-
τὸν λόγον τοῦ Σόλωνος ἰσχυρὸν ἐν τῷ παραδείγ-
ματι βλέπων, ov> μόνον ἀ> φῆfκol ε τὸν Κροῖσr ον, ἀλλὰ
καὶ \ τιμῶaν ἐohφp ᾽ Sil ὅtle σον ἔ" ζη διετέ[λi εσε' καὶ \ δό, ξαν
ἔ3 σχεν ὁ6 Σό/λ ων ἑoνgὶ λό, γῳ τὸ\ν μὲ\ν σώσ, ας, τὸ\ν δὲΝ
παιδεύ’σὔ ας τῶaν βασιλέων.
XXIX. Οἱ δὲ ἐν ἄστει πάλιν ἐστασίαζον ἀπο-
δημοῦντος τοῦ Σόλωνος" καὶ προειστήκει τῶν μὲν
ΠΠεδιέων Λυκοῦργος, τῶν δὲ ΠΠαράλων Μεγακλῆς
ὁὉ 9 ᾿Αλκμαίω, νος, Πεισί,σ τρατος δὲ\ τῶ“ν Διακρίω, ν, ἐ>ν
oi-s ἦ4 ν ὁς θητικὸ\ς ὄ" χλος Kal \ μάfλ ιστα τοῖlςos πλου-
cious ἀχθόμ, ενος: ὥστε χρῆaσn θαι μὲν ἔτι τοῖaς
νόμοις τὴν πόλ, ιν, ἤδη δὲ πράγματα νεώτερα προσ-
δοκᾶν καὶ ποθεῖν ἅπαντας ἑτέραν κατάστασιν,
οὐκ ἴσον ἐλπίζ/ οντας, ἀλλὰ πλέον ἕξειν ἐν τῇA
μεταβολῇ καὶ κρατήσειν παντάπασι τῶν διαφερο-
μένων. οὕτω δὲ τῶν πραγμάτων ἐχόντων ὁ Σόλων
παραγενόμενος εἰς τὰς ᾿Αθήνας, αἰδῶ μὲν εἶχε καὶ
τιμὴν παρὰ πᾶσιν, ἐν δὲ κοινῷ λέγειν καὶ πράσ- 95
σειν ὁ€ μοί΄ω ς οὐ’κ Eὃν.T > ἦ4%ν δυνατὸς\ οὐ2δOὲ\ πρόrθ υμος ὑ¢ πὸ XN
γήρως, ἀλλ᾽ ἐντυγχάνων ἰδίᾳ τοῖς προεστῶσι τῶν
στάσεων ἀνδράσιν ἐπειρᾶτο διαλύειν καὶ συναρ-
μόττειν, μάλιστα τοῦ [Πεισιστράτου προσέχειν
δοκοῦντος αὐτῷ. καὶ γὰρ αἱμύλον τι καὶ προσ-
φιλὲς\ εἶedχ εν ἐ>ν τῷa διαλέ/γ εσθαι, καὶ \ βοηθητικὸς\
ἣν τοῖaς πένησι καὶ πρὸς τὰς ἔχθρας ἐπιεικὴ\ς Kal
μέτριος. ἃ δὲ φύσει μὴ προσῆν αὐτῷ, καὶ ταῦτα
μιμούμενος ἐπιστεύετο μᾶanλ λον τῶ“ν ἐχό,ν των, ὡς
εὐλαβὴς καὶ κόσμιος ἀνὴρ καὶ μάλιστα δὴ τὸ ἴσον
ἀγαπῶν, καὶ δυσχεραίνων εἴ τις τὰ παρόντα
486
SOLON, χχνπι. 4—xx1x. 3
saw the word of Solon confirmed in the example
before him, he not only released Croesus, but actually
held him in honour as long as he lived. And thus
Solon had the reputation of saving one king and
instructing another by means of a single saying.
XXIX. But the people of Athens were again
divided into factions while Solon was away. The
Plain-men were headed by Lycurgus; the Shore-men
by Megacles the son of Alemaeon, and the Hill-men
by Peisistratus.!- Among the last was the multitude of
Thetes, who were the bitter enemies of therich. As
a consequence, though the city still observed the
new laws, yet all were already expecting a revolution
and desirous of a different form of government, not in
hopes of an equality, but each party thinking to be
bettered by the change, and to get the entire
mastery of its opponents. Such was the state of
affairs when Solon returned to Athens. He was
revered and honoured by all, but owing to his years
he no longer had the strength or the ardour to speak
and act in public as before. He did, however, confer
privately with the chiefs of the opposing factions,
endeavouring to reconcile and harmonize them, and
Peisistratus seemed to pay him more heed than the
others. For Peisistratus had an insinuating and agree-
able quality in his address, he was ready to help the
poor, and was reasonable and moderate in his enmities.
Even those virtues which nature had denied him
were imitated by him so successfully that he won more
confidence than those who actually possessed them.
He was thought to be a cautious and order-loving
man, one that prized equality above all things, and
would take it ill if any one disturbed the existing
1 Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xiii. 4.
487
PLUTARCR’S LIVES
κινοίη Kal νεωτέρων ὀρέγοιτο' τούτ, οις ya\p ἐξη-
πάτα τοὺς πολλούς. ὁ δὲ Σόλων ταχὺ τὸ ἦθος
ἐφώρασεν αὐτοῦ καὶ τὴν ἐπιβουλὴν πρῶτος
ἐγκατεῖδεν: οὐ μὴν ἐμίσησεν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐπειρᾶτο
Tpaiavf. ew Kal νουθετεῖνa , καὶ πρὸς αὐτὸ\ν ἔλεγε Kal
mposΝ ἑ€ τέ/ρ ους wςs εἴΜ τις ἐ5ξφῳέ} λοι TO\ φιλό, πρωτον αὐ3τ οῦ an
τῆς ψυχῆς καὶ τὴν ἐπιθυμίαν ἰάσαιτο τῆς τυραν-
vildd os, οὐ5κ ἔ+ στιν ἄx λλος εὐ3 φυέ/σ τερος πρὸς\ ἀ> ρετὴ\ν
οὐ0δ.ὲ" βελτίΨω ν “τολί’τ ης.
᾿Αρχομένων δὲ τῶν περὶ Θέσπιν ἤδη τὴν
τραγῳδίαν κινεῖνa , καὶ διὰ τὴν καινό,τ ητα τοὺς
πολλοὺς ἄγοντος τοῦ πράγματος, οὔπω δ᾽ εἰς
aefp idrav ἐ’ ναγών΄ ιον ἐ5 ξηγμένου, φύσ4 ει φιλήκ’ οος ὧA ν
καὶ \ φιλομαθὴAς 0ς Σό/λ ων, e”r t ERa NOY ε>ν γή/ρ ᾳ
σχολῇ καὶ παιδιᾷ καὶ νὴ Δία πότοις καὶ μουσικῇ
παωραπέμπων ἑαυτόν, ἐθεάσατο-τὸν Θέσπιν αὐτὸν
ὑποκρινόμ, ενον, ὥσπερ ἔθος ἦν τοῖaς παλαιοῖςa.
μετὰ δὲ τὴν θέαν προσαγορεύσας αὐτὸν ἠρώτησεν
ao
εἰ τοσούτων ἐναντίον οὐκ αἰσχύνεται τηλικαῦτα
ψευδόμενος. φήσ΄ αντος δὲ\ τοῦn Θέσ4 πιδος μὴ\ δεινὸΝν
εἶναι τὸ μετὰ παιδιᾶς λέγειν τὰ τοιαῦτα καὶ
πράσσειν, σφόδρα τῇ βακτηρίᾳ τὴν γῆν ὁ Σόλων
πατάξας" ii ᾿Ῥαχὺ μέντοι τὴν παιδιάν," ἔφη, “ ταύ-
τὴν ἐπαινοῦντες οὕτω καὶ τιμῶντες εὑρήσομεν ἐν
τοῖaςl συμβολαίοι/ ς. ”
XXX. Ἐπεὶ δὲ κατατρώ, σας αὐτὸΝ ς ἑαυτὸ\ν ὁe
Πεισίστρατος ἧκεν εἰς ἀγορὰν ἐπὶ ξεύγους κομι-
ζόμενος, καὶ παρώξυνε τὸν δῆμον ὡς διὰ τὴν
πολιτείαν ὑπὸ τῶν ἐχθρῶν ἐπιβεβουλευμένος,
488
SOLON, xxix. 3-xXxX. 1
order and attempted a change. On these points,
indeed, he completely deceived most people. But
Solon quickly detected his real character, and was
the first to perceive his secret designs. He did not,
however, treat him as an enemy, but tried to soften
and mould him by his instructions. He actually said
to him and to others that if the desire for pre-
eminence could but be banished from his soul, and
his eager passion for the tyranny be cured, no other
man would be more naturally disposed to virtue, or a
better citizen.
Thespis was now beginning to develop tragedy,
and the attempt attracted most people because of its
novelty, although it was not yet made a matter of
competitive contest. Solon, therefore, who was
naturally fond of hearing and learning anything new,
and who in his old age more than ever before in-
dulged himself in leisurely amusement, yes, and in
wine and song, went to see Thespis act in his own
play, as the custom of the ancient poets was. After
the spectacle, he accosted Thespis, and asked him if
he was not ashamed to tell such lies in the presence
of so many people. Thespis answered that there
was no harm in talking and acting that way in play,
whereupon Solon smote the ground sharply with his
staff and said: “Soon, however, if we give play of
this sort so much praise and honour, we shall find it
in our solemn contracts.”
XXX. Now when Peisistratus, after inflicting a
wound upon himself,} came into the market-place
riding in a chariot, and tried to exasperate the
populace with the charge that his enemies had
plotted against his life on account of his political
1 Cf. Herodotus, i. 59; Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xiv. 1.
489
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
καὶ πολλοὺς εἶχεν ἀγανακτοῦντας καὶ βοῶντας,
προσελθὼν ἐγγὺς ὁ Σόλων καὶ παραστάς, “Οὐ
καλῶς," εἶπεν, “ὦ παῖ Ἱπποκράτους, ὑποκρίνῃ
τὸν Ὁμηρικὸν ᾽Οδυσσέα: ταῦτα γὰρ ποιεῖς τοὺς
πολίτας παρακρουόμενος οἷς ἐκεῖνος τοὺς πολε-
pious ἐξηπάτησεν, αἰκισάμενος ἑαυτόν." ἐκ τούτου
τὸ μὲν πλῆθος ἦν ἕτοιμον ὑπερμαχεῖν τοῦ Πει-
σιστράτου, καὶ συνῆλθεν εἰς ἐκκλησίαν ὁ δῆμος.
᾿Αρίστωνος δὲ γράψαντος ὃὅ πως δοθῶσι πεντήκοντα
κορυνηφόροι͵ τῷ Πεισιστράτῳ φυλακὴ τοῦ σώ-
ματος, ἀντεῖπεν ὁ Σόλων ἀναστὰς καὶ πολλὰ
διεξῆλθεν ὅμοια τούτοις οἷς διὰ τῶν ποιημάτων
γέγραφεν"
Εἰς γὰρ γλῶσσαν ὁρᾶτε καὶ εἰς ἔπη αἱμύλον
ἀνδρός.
ὑ. μῶν δ᾽ εἷς μὲν ἕ4 καστος ἀb)λ ώπ΄ εκος ἴ» χνεσι βαίν,ε ι,
σύμπασιν δ᾽ ὑμῖν χαῦνος ἔνεστι νόος.
ὁρῶν δὲ τοὺς μὲν πένητας ὡρμημένους χαρίζεσθαι
τῷ [Πεισιστράτῳ καὶ θορυβοῦντας, τοὺς δὲ πλου-
σίους ἀποδιδράσκοντας καὶ ἀποδειλιῶντας, ἀπ-
ῆλθεν εἰπὼν ὅτι τῶν μέν ἐστι σοφώτερος, τῶν δὲ
ἀνδρειότερος" σοφώτερος μὲν τῶν μὴ συνιέντων τὸ
πραττόμενον, ἀνδρειότερος δὲ τῶν συνιέντων μέν,
ἐναντιοῦσθαι δὲ τῇ τυραννίδι φοβουμένων. τὸ δὲ
ψήφισμα κυρώσας ὁ δῆμος οὐδὲ περὶ τοῦ πλήθους
ἔτι τῶν κορυνηφόρων διεμικρολογεῖτο πρὸς τὸν
Πεισίστρατον, ἀλλ᾽ ὅσους ἐβούλετο τρέφοντα καὶ
συνάγοντα φανερῷς περιεώρα, μέχρι τὴν ἀκρό-
πολιν κατέσχε.
Γενομένου δὲ τούτου καὶ τῆς πόλεως συντα-
499
SOLON, xxx. 1-4
opinions, and many of them greeted the charge with
angry cries, Solon drew near and accosted him,
saying: “O son of Hippocrates, thou art playing
the Homeric Odysseus badly; for when he dis-
figured himself it was to deceive his enemies,}
but thou doest it to mislead thy fellow-citizens.”’
After this the multitude was ready to fight for
Peisistratus, and a general assembly of the people
was held. Here Ariston made a motion that Peisi-
stratus be allowed a body-guard of fifty club-bearers,
but Solon formally opposed it, and said many things
which were like what he has written in his poems :-—
“Ye have regard indeed to the speech and words of
a wily man.
Yet every one of you walks with the steps of a fox,
And in you all dwells an empty mind.” 2
But when he saw that the poor were tumultuously
bent on gratifying Peisistratus, while the rich were
fearfully slinking away from any conflict with him,
he left the assembly, saying that he was wiser than
the one party, and braver than the other; wiser
than those who did not understand what was being
done, and braver than those who, though they
understood it, were nevertheless afraid to oppose the
tyranny.? So the people passed the decree, and then
held Peisistratus to no strict account of the number
of his club-bearers, but suffered him to keep and
lead about in public as many as he wished, until at
last he seized the acropolis.
When this had been done, and the city was in an
1 Odyssey, iv. 244-264. :
2 Fragment 11 (Bergk), verses 7, ὅ, and 6, Plutarch has
changed the order; Bekker and Cobet restore it.
3 Cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xiv. 2.
491
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ραχθείσης, €ὁ μὲν Μεγακλῆςlo} εὐθὺ\ς ἔφυγε μετὰ
τῶν ἄλλων ᾿Αλκμαιωνιδῶν, ὁ δὲ Σόλων ἤδη μὲν 90
ἣ> ν σφόδ, ρα γέ,ρ ων καὶ \ τοὺς\ βοηθοῦaν τας οὐ9κ εἶ. χεν,
ὅὉ μως δὲ\ προῆaλn θεν εἰ>ς ἀ» γορὰνA καὶ \ διελέ/ χθη πρὸαςὐ
τοὺς\ πολίτ/ ας, Ta\ μὲ\ν κακί/ζ ων τὴ\ν ἀ» βουλία/ ν av->
τῶaνl καὶ οὶ μαλακία/ν , τὰ\ δὲ\ παροξύν4 ων ἔ” τι Kal »,|
5 παρακαλῶνA μὴ\ προέ᾿σς θαι τὴ\ν ἐλευθερία, ν" ὅὉ τε Kal \
TO μνημονευόμ/ ενον εἶπεν, ὡς πρώην μὲν ἦν εὐ-
μαρέστερον αὐτοῖςa TOΝ κωλῦaσ αι TH\Y τυραννίδα
συνισταμένην, νῦν δὲ μεῖζόν ἐστι καὶ λαμπρότερον
ἐ᾽ κκό, ψαι Kal \ ἀ’ νελεῖlνol συνεστῶlaσl αν ἤ» δη Kal \ πεφυ-
κυῖαν. οὐδενὸς δὲ προσέχοντος αὐτῷ διὰ τὸν
φόβον ἀ> πῆAλ θεν ei>s τὴAν οἰ> κίSJα ν τὴ\ν ἑe αυτοῦ,fa l καὶ \
λαβὼν τὰ ὅπλα καὶ πρὸ\ τῶaν θυρῶ-ν θέμενος εἰς
\ ἢ PAS \ , 99 54 (rec ὃ \
Tov otevwtrov, “μοὶ μέν, εἶπεν, “ ὡς δυνατὸν
6 ἣ= ν βεβοήθηται THa πατρίδ, ι καὶ \ τοῖaςA νό,μ οις."3 καὶ
TOΝ λοιπὸ\ν ἡς συχία/ ν ἦ9 γε, καὶ \ TOaVn φί/ λων φεύγre ειν
παραινούντων οὐ προσεῖχεν, ἀλλὰ ποιήματα γρά-
φων ὠΕῚν είδ, ιζε τοῖAς > ᾿Αθηναίο/ι ς"
Εἰ δὲ πεπόνθατε λυγρὰ δι᾿ > ὑμετέρην κακότητα,
μή τι θεοῖς τούτων μῆνιν ἐπαμφέρετε.
αὐτοὶ γὰρ τούτους ηὐ> ξήσατε ῥύματα δό΄ν τες,
καὶ διὰ ταῦAτ α κακὴ\ν ἔσχετε δουλοσύνην.
XXXI. Ἐπὶ τούτοις δὲ\ πολλῶνr νουθετούντων
αὐτὸν ws ἀποθανούμa ενον ὑπὸ\ τοῦ~ τυράννου, Kal
492
SOLON, xxx. 4—xxXxI. I
uproar, Megacles! straightway fled, with the rest of
the Alemaeonidae. But Solon, although he was now
a very old man, and had none to support him, went
nevertheless into the market-place and reasoned
with the citizens, partly blaming their folly and
weakness, and partly encouraging them still and
exhorting them not to abandon their liberty. Then
it was, too, that he uttered the famous saying, that
earlier it had been easier for them to hinder the
tyranny, while it was in preparation ; but now it was
a greater and more glorious task to uproot and
destroy it when it had been already planted and was
grown. No one had the courage to side with him,
however, and so he retired to his own house, took
his arms, and placed them in the street in front of
his door, saying : “I have done all I can to help my
country and its laws.” 2 From that time on he lived
in quiet retirement, and when his friends urged him
to fly, he paid no heed to them, but kept on writing
poems, in which he heaped reproaches on the Athe-
nians :—
“If now ye suffer grievously through cowardice all
your own,
Cherish no wrath against the gods for this,
For ye yourselves increased the usurper’s power by
giving him a guard,
And therefore are ye now in base subjection.” 3
XXXI. In view of this, many warned him that the
tyrant would put him to death, and asked him on
1 Grandson of the Megacles who brought the taint of
pollution upon the family (chapter xii. 1-3). He had been
allowed to return from banishment.
2 It was for others now to dothe same. Cf. Aristotle, Const.
of Athens, xiv. 2. 5 Fragment 11 (Bergk), verses 1-4.
Vol. 7, R 493
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πυνθανομένων tive πιστεύων οὕτως ἀπονοεῖται,
“Τῷ“ γήρᾳ, εἶπεν. ov μὴν ἀλλ᾽ ὁe Πεισίστρατος
ἐγκρατὴς γενό,μ ενος τῶanν πραγμάτων οὕτως ἐξε-
θεράπευσε τὸ\ν Σόλωνα, τιμῶanν καὶ φιλοφρονού-
μενος Kal μεταπεμπόμ/ε νος, ὥ° στε Kal σύμβουλον
εἶναι καὶ πολλὰ τῶν πρασσομένων ἐπαινεῖν.
Kal \ yaὯΝp ε24φ ύ4λ αττε TOUS\ πλεισ, τοὺυς νο’ μοὺς τοῦn r
Σόλωνος, ἐμμένων πρῶτος αὐτὸς καὶ τοὺς φίλους
ἀ’ ναγκάζ/ ων: ὅ7 ς γε καὶ ὃ φό[ν2 ου προσκληθεὶς\ εἰ᾿ς]
Αρειον πάγον, ἤδη τυραννῶνa , ἀπήνΨ τησε κοσμίω, ς
ἀπολογησόμενος, ὁ«ς δὲ κατήγορος οὐχ ὑπήκουσε:
καὶ νόμους αὐτὸς ἑτέ,ὔρ ους ἔ» γραψεν, ὧν ἐστι καὶ
ὁ€ τοὺς¥ πηρωθέν/ τας ἐSν πολέ-μ ῳ δημοσίᾳ? τρέ,φ εσθαι
κελεύω, ν. τοῦAτn ο δὲ’ φησιν Ἡρακλείδ7 ης καὶ πρό-
τερον ἐ5 πὶ \ Θερσί/ ππῳ πηρωθέν7τ ι τοῦf o Σό,λ ωνος
ψηφισαμένου μιμήσασθαι τὸν Ἰ]εισίστρατον. ὡς
δὲ Θεόφραστος ἱστόρηκε, καὶ τὸν τῆς ἀργίας
νόμον οὐ Σόλων ἔθηκεν, ἀλλὰ Πεισίστρατος,
ᾧὦ τήν τε χώραν ἐνεργοτέραν καὶ τὴν πόλιν
ἠρεμαιοτέραν ἐποί/η σεν.
‘O δὲ Σό/λ ων ἁψάμενος μεγάλης τῆAς περὶ
τὸΝν ᾽ ΑτλαντικὸνἈ λό΄γ ον ἢKA μῦr θον πραγματεία’ςὔ ,
ὃν διήκουσε τῶν περὶ Σάϊν λογίων προσήκοντα
τοῖfςn ᾽ ᾿Αθηναίο/ι ς, ἐ5 ξέ, καμεν, οὐ> δι’᾽ ἀ> σχολία/ ν, ὡςς
Πλάτων φησίν, ἀλλὰΝ μᾶn λλον ὑπὸ\ γήρως, φοβη-
θεὶξ τὸ μέγεθος τῆς γραφῆς. ἐπεὶ σχολῆς
494
SOLON, xxxt. 1-3
what he relicd that he was so lost to all sense,
to which he answered, ‘‘ My old age.” However,
when Peisistratus had become master of the situation,
he paid such court to Solon by honouring him,
showing him kindness, and inviting him to his palace,
that Solon actually became his counsellorand approved
of many of his acts. For he retained most of Solon’s
laws, observing them first himself, and compelling
his friends to do so. For instance, he was summoned
before the Areiopagus on a charge of murder, when
he was already tyrant, and presented himself there
to make his defence in due form, but his accuser did
not put in an appearance. He also made other
laws himself, one of which provides that those who
are maimed in war shall be maintained at the
public charge. But Heracleides says that even
before that Solon had caused a decree to be passed
to this effect in the case of Thersippus, who had
been so maimed, and that Peisistratus was following
his example. Moreover, Theophrastus writes that
the law against idleness, in consequence of which
the country became more productive and the city
more tranquil, was not made by Solon, but by Peisis-
tratus.
Now Solon, after beginning his great work on the
story or fable of the lost Atlantis, which, as he had
heard from the learned men of Sais,! particularly
concerned the Athenians, abandoned it, not for
lack of leisure, as Plato says, but rather because of
his old age, fearing the magnitude of the task. For
1 Cf. chapter xxvi.1. There is no trace of any such work
of Solon’s, and the attribution of it to him is probably a play
of Plato’s fancy.
495
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γε περιουσίαν αὐτοῦA μηνύο4 υσιν al id τοιαῦnτ αι
φωναί"Ἅ
Γηράσκω δ᾽ αἰεὶ πολλὰ διδασκόμενος"
καΐ,
Ἔργα δὲ Κυπρογενοῦς νῦν μοι φίλα καὶ Διο-
νύσου
καὶ Μουσέων, ἃ τίθησ᾽ ἀνδράσιν εὐφροσύνας.
XXXII. ‘Os δὲ χώρας καλῆς ἔδαφος ὁ ἸΓλάτων
ἔΜ ρημον, αὐ> τῷa A δέν ᾿ πως κατὰt y συγγέν"4ε ιαν προσῆκQn ον,
ἐξεργάσασθαι καὶ διακοσμῆσαι φιλοτιμούμενος
τὴ\ν > ᾿Ατλαντικὴ\ν ὑe πόθ/ εσιν, πρό/θ υρα μὲ\ν μεγά/λ α
καὶ \ περιβόλ/ ους καὶ \ αὐ>λ ὰς\ τῇn ἀ» ρχῇ A περιέ΄θ ηκεν,
οἷα λόγος οὐδεὶς ἄλλος ἔσχεν οὐδὲ μῦθος οὐδὲ
ποίη’ὔσ ις, ὀ5 ψὲ\ δὲΝ ἀ> ρξάμ/ ενος προκατέλ/ υσε τοῦA
ἔ» ργου τὸ\ν βίο, ν, ὅvd σῳ μᾶἴωλ λον εὐ᾽ φραίν, ει τὰΝ γε-
γραμμένα, τοσούτῳ μᾶλλον τοῖς ἀπολειφθεῖσιν
ἀ᾽ νιά,σ ας. ὡςς γὰnfρ ἡς πό[λ4 ις τῶἴνω > ᾿Αθηναίω‘ ν τὸΝ
Ὀλυμπιεῖον, οὕτως ἡ Πλάτωνος σοφία τὸν
3 Ατλαντικὸν\ ἐν πολλοῖςfal καλοῖςa μόνον ἔργον ate-
λὲς ἔσχηκεν.
Ἐπεβίωσε δ᾽ οὖν ὁ Σόλων ἀρξαμένου τοῦ
Πεισιστράτου τυραννεῖν, ὡς μὲν Ἡρακλείδης ὁ
Ποντικὸςx ἱστορεῖ,a συχνὸν χρόνον, ὡς δὲ Φανίας
ὁὌ ΛΟ ‘Epé/c tos, ἐλά,τ τονα δυοῖaν ἐ’ τῶ“ν . ἐ(gaπ ὶ 5 Κωμίοbe υ 97
μὲ\ν ya\p ἤby ρξατο τυραννεῖνrn Ileciotpatos, ἐφ ’
€ Ηγεστράτου δὲ Σόλωνά φησιν ὁ Φανίας ἀπο-
496
SOLON, xxxt. 3-xXxxIl. 3
that he had abundant leisure, such verses as these
testify :—
“ But I grow old ever learning many things ;” 1
and again,
“* But now the works of the Cyprus-born goddess are
dear to my soul,
Of Dionysus, too, and the Muses, which impart
delights to men.”’?
XXXIT. Plato, ambitious to elaborate and adorn
the subject of the lost Atlantis, as if it were the soil
of a fair estate unoccupied, but appropriately his by
virtue of some kinship with Solon,’ began the work
by laying out great porches, enclosures, and court-
yards, such as no story, tale, or poesy ever had
before. But he was late in beginning, and ended
his life before his work. Therefore the greater
our delight in what he actually wrote, the greater
is our distress in view of what he left undone.
For as the Olympicium in the city of Athens, so the
tale of the lost Atlantis in the wisdom of Plato is
the only one among many beautiful works to remain
unfinished.
Well, then, Solon lived on after Peisistratus had
made himself tyrant, as Heracleides Ponticus states,
a long time; but as Phanias of Eresos says, less than
two years. For it was in the archonship of Comeas 5
that Peisistratus began his tyranny, and Phanias says
that Solon died in the archonship of Hegestratus,
1 Cf. chapter ii. 2. 2 Fragment 26 (Bergk).
5. Plato mentions the relationship of Critias, his maternal
uncle, with Solon (Charmides, p. 155a).
* Plato’s Critias is a splendid fragment. 5 561-60 B.c.
497
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 θανεῖν τοῦ μετὰ Κωμίαν ἄρξαντος. ἡ δὲ δια-
σπορὰ κατακαυθέντος αὐτοῦ τῆς τέφρας περὶ
τὴν Σαλαμινίων νῆσον ἔστι μὲν διὰ τὴν ἀτοπίαν
ἀπίθανος παντάπασι καὶ μυθώδης, ἀναγέγραπται
δ᾽ ὑπό τε ἄλλων ἀνδρῶν ἀξιολόγων καὶ ᾿Δριστο-
τέλους τοῦ φιλοσόφου.
498
SOLON, xxxn. 4
the successor of Comeas. The story that his
body was burned and his ashes scattered on the
island of Salamis is strange enough to be altogether
incredible and fabulous, and yet it is given by
noteworthy authors, and even by Aristotle the
philosopher.
499
4
véNoug Wel dheaod oot,
Late SW ily
ΠΡ ΠΝ μἢ] Sieh
uy]
! ΚΡ ΛΠ ἢ τ
ἐπ ‘
δ]4; 7 "ἢ ' ν΄ ΟΠ ΡΝ ἘΝ ΠῚ i
AT ‘im ἄν ὌΝ, apd Ci gu arn aI iit ΡΝ ΤῊ
iid Pug rea unii e le di: Au Ἱ ἘΣ OA OU
ἢ Oe a ab δῆ SRN: mute speeeela eld “ie
ΝΠ. A ; ie
Ae
TCR ce ae Ue, ΡῈ. Naat ΑΨ. ΠΣ ee
ὶ
POA COr A
TIOMAIKOAAD
I. Τοιούτῳ δὴ γενομένῳ τῷ Σόλωνι τὸν Ποπλι-
κόλαν παραβάλλομεν, ᾧ τοῦτο μὲν ὕστερον ὁ
Ῥωμαίων δῆμος ἐξεῦρεν ἐπὶ τιμῇ τοὔνομα, πρὸ
τοῦ δὲ Πόπλιος Οὐαλλέριος ἐκαλεῖτο, Οὐαλλερίου
δοκῶν ἀπόγονος εἶναι τῶν παλαιῶν ἀνδρὸς αἰτιω-
τάτου γενομένου Ῥωμαίους καὶ Σαβίνους ἐκ
πολεμίων ἕνα γενέσθαι δῆμον: ὁ γὰρ μάλιστα
τοὺς βασιλεῖς εἰς ταὐτὸ πείσας συνελθεῖν καὶ
διαλλάξας ἐκεῖνός ἐστι. τούτῳ δὴ κατὰ γένος
προσήκων ὁ Οὐαλλέριος, ὥς φασι, βασιλευομένης
μὲν ἔτι τῆς Ῥώμης ἐπιφανὴς ἣν διὰ λόγον καὶ
πλοῦτον, ὧν τῷ μὲν ὀρθῶς καὶ μετὰ παρρησίας
ἀεὶ χρώμενος ὑπὲρ τῶν δικαίων, ἀφ᾽ οὗ δὲ τοῖς
δεομένοις ἐλευθερίως καὶ φιλανθρώπως ἐπαρκῶν,
δῆλος ἣν εὐθύς, εἰ γένοιτο δημοκρατία, πρω-
τεύσων.
᾿Επεὶ δὲ Ταρκύνιον Σούπερβον οὔτε λαβόντα
τὴν ἀρχὴν καλῶς, ἀλλ᾽ ἀνοσίως καὶ παρανόμως,
οὔτε χρώμενον αὐτῇ βασιλικῶς, ἀλλ᾽ ὑβρίξοντα
καὶ τυραννοῦντα, μισῶν ὁ δῆμος καὶ βαρυνόμενος,
ἀρχὴν ἀποστάσεως ἔλαβε τὸ Λουκρητίας πάθος
αὑτὴν ἐπὶ τῷ βιασθῆναι διεργασαμένης, καὶ
Λεύκιος Βροῦτος ἁπτόμενος τῶν πραγμάτων
502
PUBLICOLA
I. Sucn was Solon, and with him we compare
Publicola, to whom the Roman people gave this
surname later as a mark of honour. Before that he
was called Publius Valerius, and was reputed to be a
decendant of that ancient Valerius who was most
instrumental in making the Romans and the Sabines
one people instead of enemies ; for it was he more
than anyone else that persuaded their kings to come
together, and settled their differences. Such being
his lineage, Valerius, as we are told, while Rome was
still a kingdom, was conspicuous for his eloquence
and wealth, always employing the one with integrity
and boldness in the service of justice, while with the
other he gave liberal and kindly aid to the poor and
needy. It was therefore clear that, should Rome
become a democracy, he would at once be one of its
foremost men.
Now Tarquinius Superbus had not acquired his
power honourably, but by the violation of divine and
human laws; nor did he exercise it in kingly
fashion, but after the manner of an insolent and
haughty tyrant. The people therefore hated him,
resented his oppressions, and found occasion for
revolt in the fate of Lucretia, who made away
with herself after violence had been done to her.
Lucius Brutus, engaging in the revolution, came to
323
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τῆAς μεταβολῆςA ἐπὶ πρῶaτ“ ον ἦλθε τὸΝν Οὐαλλέριον
καὶ χρησάμενος αὐτῷ προθυμοτάτῳ συνεξέβαλε
τοὺ\ς βασιλεῖςa , μέ/χ ρι μὲ\ν ἐ> πί(δὃο ξος ἣ95ν ὁi d δῆδ ῆμος ἕ4 να
χειροτονήσειν ἀντὶ τοῦA βασιλέω͵ ς στρατηγόν,
ἡσυχίαν ἦγεν ὁς Οὐαλλέρι/ ος, ws τῷA Βρούτῳ
μᾶa λλον ἄρχειν προσῆκa ον ἡγεμόνf ι τῆAς ἐλευθερίας
γεγενημένῳ: δυσχεραινομέν/ ου δὲ τοῦa τῆaς povap-
χίας ὀνόματος, καὶ δοκοῦfoν) τος ἂA ν ἀλυπότ/ ερον τοῦA
δήμου μερισθεῖAσ αν ὑς πομεῖνA αι THANY ἀρχὴν Kal δύο
προβαλλομένου Kal καλοῦνfolτ ος, ἐλπί/ζ ων μετὰ τὸν
Βροῦτον αἱρεθήσεσθαι καὶ συνυπατεύσειν διήμαρ-
tev. ἡἠρέθη yap axovte τῷa Βρού4τ ῳ συνάρχων
ἀντὶ τοῦn r Οὐαλλερίου Ταρκύν4ι ος Κολλατῖνaο ς, ὁ
Λουκρητίας ἀνήρ, οὐδὲν ἀρετῇ Οὐαλλερίου δια-
φέρων, ἀλλ᾽ οἱ δυνατοὶ δεδιόῇτ ες τοὺς\ βασιλεῖςa ἔτι
πολλὰ \ πειρῶA ντας ἔ» ξωθεν καὶ \ μαλάσf σοντας τὴAν
πόλ/ ιν, ἐ’ βού/λ οντο τὸ\ν ἐ9 ντονώ,τ ατον αὐBτT οῖςA ἐ9 χθρὸν
ἔχειν στρατηγὸν ὡς οὐχ ὑφησόμ/ ενον.
II. ᾿Αγανακτῶaν οὖν ὁ€ Οὐαλλέριος, εἰ μὴ
πιστεύεται πάντα πράττειν ἕνεκα τῆς πατρίδος,
ὅτι μηδὲν ἰδίᾳ κακὸν ὑπὸ τῶν τυράννων πέπονθε,
τῆnς τε βουλῆςa ἀπέστη Kal Ta\s συνηγορία/ ς ἀπεῖAπ ε
καὶ τὸ πράττειν τὰ κοινὰ παντελῶς ἐξέλιπεν,
ὥστε καὶ λόγον τοῖς πολλοῖς παρασχεῖν καὶ
φροντίδ/ α, φοβουμέν/ο ις μὴ\ du 2.9ὀ ργὴ\ν προσθέμ/ ενος
τοῖaς βασιλεῦσa ιν ἀνατρέ,ψ ῃ τὰ\ πράγματα Kal τὴν 98
πόλ/ ιν ἐ’ πισφαλῶLςal ἔ4 χουσαν. ἐ3 πεὶ \ δὲ\ καὶ x πρὸ\ς
504
PUBLICOLA, 1. 3-11. 2
Valerius first of all, and with his most zealous assist-
ance drove out the kings.1 Then, as long as the
people was likely to elect one man as their com-
mander in place of the king, Valerius acquiesced,
thinking it more fitting that Brutus should have the
office, because he had led the way to freedom. But
the very name of monarchy was odious to the people,
who thought that it would be less vexatious to submit
to an authority which was divided, and therefore
proposed and demanded that two men should be
elected to the highest office. Then Valerius, who
hoped that he would be chosen next to Brutus, and
would be consul with him, was disappointed. For
against the wishes of Brutus, Tarquinius Collatinus,
the husband of Lucretiaw,as elected as his colleague,?
instead of Valerius. He was a man of no greater
excellence than Valerius, but the influential, citizens
were afraid of the kings, who were still putting
forth many efforts outside, and trying to appease
resentment inside the city, and they therefore desired
to have as their commander the most pronounced
enemy of the royal family, believing that he would
make no concessions to them.
11. Valerius, accordingly, vexed that his desire to
do his utmost for his country should be doubted,
merely because he had received no private injury at
the hands of the tyrants, withdrew from the senate,
gave up his practice as an advocate, and abandoned
entirely his public activities. This caused anxious
remark among the multitude. They feared lest, in
his wrath, he should attach himself to the royal
exiles, and subvert the established order of the city, .
which was in a dangerous pass. But when Brutus,
1 Cf. Livy, i. 58f.; ii. 2,11. 3 Cf. Livy, i. 60, 4.
505
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἑτέρους τινὰς ὑποψίαν ἔχων ὁ Βροῦτος ἐβούλετο
διὰ σφαγίων ὁρκῶσαι τὴν βουλὴν καὶ προεῖπεν
ἡμέραν, καταβὰς μάλα φαιδρὸς εἰς ἀγορὰν ὁ
Οὐαλλέριος, καὶ πρῶτος ὀμόσας μηδὲν ἐνδώσειν
μηδ᾽ ὑφήσεσθαι 'αρκυνίοις, ἀλλὰ πολεμήσειν
κατὰ κράτος ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας, ἡδονήν τε τῇ
βουλῇ καὶ θάρσος ἅμα τοῖς ἄρχουσι παρέσχεν.
εὐθὺς δὲ καὶ τὰ ἔργα τὸν ὅρκον ἐβεβαίου.
πρέσβεις γὰρ ἧκον ἀπὸ Ταρκυνίου γράμματα
κομίζοντες ἐπαγωγὰ τοῦ δήμου καὶ λόγους ἐπι-
ELKELS, οἷς μάλιστα τοὺς πολλοὺς ῴοντο δια-
φθείρειν, λεγομένοις παρὰ βασιλέως ἀφεικέναι
τὸ φρόνημα καὶ μετρίων δεῖσθαι δοκοῦντος.
τούτους εἰς τὸ πλῆθος οἰομένων δεῖν τῶν ὑπάτων
προαγαγεῖν οὐκ εἴασεν ὁ Οὐαλλέριος, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνέστη
καὶ διεκώλυσεν ἀνθρώποις πένησι καὶ βαρυνο-
μένοις μᾶλλον τῆς τυραννίδος τὸν πόλεμον ἀρχὰς
καὶ προφάσεις νεωτερισμῶν ἐγγενέσθαι.
III. Μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα πρέσβεις ἧκον ἕτεροι τῆς
τε βασιλείας ἀφίστασθαι καὶ πολεμοῦντα παύ-
σασθαι τὸν Ταρκύνιον λέγοντες, ἀπαιτεῖν δὲ τὰ
χρήματα καὶ τὰς οὐσίας αὑτῷ καὶ φίλοις καὶ
οἰκείοις, ἀφ᾽ ὧν διαβιώσονται φεύγοντες. ἐπικλω-
μένων δὲ πολλῶν καὶ μάλιστα τοῦ Κολλατίνου
συναγορεύοντος, ἄτρεπτος ὧν ἀνὴρ καὶ τραχὺς
ὀργὴν ὁ Βροῦτος ἐξέδραμεν εἰς ἀγοράν, προδότην
ἀποκαλῶν τὸν συνάρχοντα, πολέμου καὶ τυραν-
νίδος ἀφορμὰς χαριζόμενον οἷς δεινὸν ἦν ὄντως
ἐφόδια φυγῆς ψηφίσασθαι. συνελθόντων δὲ τῶν
πολιτῶν πρῶτος ἰδιώτης ἀνὴρ εἶπεν ἐν δήμῳ τότε
506
PUBLICOLA, π΄. 2-111. 2
who had his suspicions of certain others also, desired
the senators to take a sacrificial oath, and set a day
for the ceremony, Valerius went down with a glad
countenance into the forum, and was the first to take
oath that he would make no submission or concession
to the Tarquins, but would fight with all his might
in defence of freedom. This pleased the senate and
inspired the consuls with courage. And his actions
speedily confirmed his oath. For envoys came from
Tarquin bringing letters calculated to seduce the
people, and specious words by which they thought
the multitude were most likely to be corrupted,
coming as they did from a king who seemed to have
humbled himself, and to ask only moderate terms.
These envoys the consuls thought should be brought
before the assembled people, but Valerius would not
suffer it. He was unalterably opposed to giving
poor men, who considered war a greater burden than
tyranny, occasions and excuses for revolution.
III. After this, other envoys came announcing
that Tarquin abdicated his throne and ceased to
wage war upon the city, but demanded for himself,
his friends, and his kinsmen, their moneys. and
effects,! wherewith to maintain themselves in exile.
Many were inclined to grant this favour, and
Collatinus in particular joined in advocating it, but
Brutus, a man of harsh and unyielding temper ran
forth into the forum and denounced his colleague as
a traitor, because he would bestow the means for
waging war and maintaining tyranny on men to
whom it were a terrible mistake to vote even a bare
subsistence in exile. And when an assembly of the
citizens was held, the first to speak among them
ECL Livy, ii. 9, δ:
507
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Γάϊο“ ς Μινούκιος, τῷA τε Βρού7τ ῳ διακελευόμενος
καὶ τοῖaς Ῥωμαίοις παραινῶlνal ὁCc ρᾶoaν ὅe πως τὰ
χρήματα μετ᾽ αὐτῶν ὄντα πολεμοίη πρὸς τοὺς
τυράννους. μᾶλλον ἢ μετ᾽ ἐκείνων πρὸς αὐτούς.
ov μὴν ἀλλ᾽ ἔδοξε τοῖaς Ῥωμαίο,ι ς τὴν ἐλευθερίαν
ἔχουσιν, ὑπὲρ ἧς ἐπολέμουν, μὴ\ προέσθαι τὴν
εἰ2 ρήΥν͂ ην ἕoeν εκα χρημάτ4 ων, ἀ’ λλὰ \ συνεκβαλεῖν“ Kai \
ταῦτα τοῖς τυράννοις.
s Ην δὲΝ ἄ»,ρ α Ῥαρκυνίiῳf λό,γ ος μὲ\ν ἐλάAχ ιστος
TOAV χρημάτων, ἡe δ᾽ ἀπαίτησις ἅ¢ μα πεῖa ρα τοῦA
δήμου καὶ κατασκευὴ προδοσίας. καὶ ταῦτ᾽
ἔπραττον οἱ πρέσβεις ὑπομέν, οντες ἐπὶ THaA τῶaν
χρημάτ/ ων προφάσ/ε ι, TAο ὗ μὲ\ν ἀ3 ποδδίίδὃο σθαθι , τὰ\ δὲ\
φυλάττειν, τὰ δ᾽' ἀποπέμπειν φάσκοντες, ἄχρι
οὗΜ Ὲ διέJ,φ θειραν οἴ7 κους δύ/ο τῶaν καλῶfνa) κἀbdγ αθῶaν
νομιζομέν/ ων, τὸ\ν 3 ᾿Ακυλλί,ω ν τρεῖnς ἔ” χοντα β΄ ου-
λευτὰς καὶ δύο τὸν Οὐϊτελλίων. οὗτοι πάντες
ἦσαν ἀπὸ μητέρων ἀδελφιδοῖ Κολλατίνου τοῦ
ὑ« πατεύο, ντος, ἰIQδ/ί ᾳ δὲ\ Οὐϊ3.τ.. ελλίο/ι ς ἑe τέlAρ α πρὸςN
Βροῦaτ ον οἰκειότης ὑπῆρan χεν. ἀδελφὴ\ν γὰρ αὐτῶ“ν
ὁ Βροῦτος εἶχε καὶ παῖδας ἐξ αὐτῆς πλείονας" ὧν
δύο τοὺς ἐν ἡλικίᾳ συγγειεῖς ὄντας ἅμα καὶ
συνήθεις οἱ Οὐϊτέλλιοι προσηγάγοντο καὶ συνέ-
πεισαν ἐν τῇ προδοσίᾳ γενέσθαι καὶ καταμί-
ξαντας ἑἑ αυτοὺς εἰς γένος μέγα τὸ τῶν Ταρκυνίων
καὶ βασιλικὰς ἐλπίδας ἀπαλλαγῆναι τῆς τοῦ
πατρὸς ἀβελτερίας καὶ χαλεπότητος: χαλεπό-
TNTA μὲν τὸ ἀπαραίτητον αὐτοῦ πρὸς τοὺς
πονηροὺς\ λέ/γ οντες, THa δ᾽? ἀ» βελτερίᾳ/ προσποιή /
508
PUBLICOLA, m1. 2-4
was Caius Minucius, a private man, who exhorted
Brutus and advised the Romans to see to it that the
treasures fought with them against the tyrants,
rather than with the tyrants against them. However,
the Romans decided that, since they had the liberty
for which they were at war, they would not sacrifice
peace for the sake of wealth, but cast this also out
along with the tyrants.
Now the wealth, of course, was of very slight
consequence to Tarquin, but the demand for it was
at once a test of the people’s disposition and a means
of instigating treachery among them. And it was
with this that the envoys busied themselves, making
the property merely a pretext for remaining in the
city, and saying that they were selling part of it,
and reserving part, and sending part of it away. At
last they succeeded in corrupting two of the noble
families of Rome, that of the Aquillii, which had
three senators, and that of the Vitellii, which
had two. All these, by the mother’s side, were
nephews of Collatinus the consul, and besides, the
Vitellii were related in another manner to Brutus.
For Brutus had married a sister of theirs, and she had
borne him several sons. Two of these, who had come
to manhood, and were their near kindred and close
companions, the Vitellii won over and persuaded to
join the plot for betraying the city, to ally them-
selves with the great family and the royal ex-
pectations of the Tarquins, and rid themselves of
the stupidity and cruelty of their father. For they
gave the name of cruelty to that father’s inexorable
treatment of criminals, and as for his stupidity, he
had for a long time, as it appears, feigned and
1 Cf. Livy, ii. 4, 3.
500
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ματι καὶ παρακαλύμ4 ματι πολὺν χρόνον, WS ἔοικε,
χρησάμενος ἀσφαλεία‘4ς ἕνεκα πρὸςΝ τοὺς τυράν-
vous, οὐδ᾽ ὕε στερον ἔφυγεν αὐτῆaς τὴ\ν ἐπωνυμίαν.
IV. « Ὡς δ᾽ οὖ>ν συνεπείσθη τὰ μειράκια καὶ
τοῖὉς ᾿Ακυλλίοdιe ς els λόγους ἦ5 λθεν, ὅρκον ὀμόσαι
μέΑγ͂ αν ἔBA δοξε πᾶaσ ι καὶ Ν δεινόν4 , ἀ? νθρώ,π ου σφα-
γέντος ἐπισπεί/σ αντας αἷμα καὶ τῶnν σπλάγχνων
θιγό,ν τας. ἐ5 πὶ \ τούτ7 οις εἰγς τὴ\ν 2 ᾿Ακυλλί/ω ν οἰΣκΝί αν
συνῆaλ θον. ἣ9 ν δ᾽) ὁς οἶ- κος, ἐ2ν ᾧka ταῦ“τ α δράσγι ειν
ἔ» μελλον, οἷ(το ν εἰΤακ όςD, , ὑς πέ,ρ ημος καὶ \ σκοτώδ“ ης.
BἔYλ αθεν οὖ5ν αὐ3τ οὺς\ οἰpry κέΔτ ης ὄBg νομα Οὐι> νδίκ, ιος
ἔ” νδον κατακρύ/ψ ας ἑe αυτόν/, οὐ> κατ᾽ 3 ἐ5 πιβουλὴν\ oe
ἢ προαίσθησίν τινα τοῦa μέlλA λοντος, ἀλλ᾽ ἔνδον
ὧ3 ν ἔτυχε Kal προσιοῦaσ ιν αὐτοῖςa μετὰ\ σπουδῆςa
ὀ5 φθῆaνn αι φοβηθεὶς\ ὑς πέσ/ τη, λά/ρ νακα κειμέAν ην πρὸ\
αὑτοῦ“ ποιησάμενος, ὥefσ τε Kal τῶanν πραττομένων
θεατὴς γενέσθαι καὶ τῶν βουλευμάτων ἐπήκοος.
ἔδοξε δ᾽ αὐτοῖς τοὺς ὑπάτους ἀναιρεῖν, καὶ ταῦτα
δηλού,σ ας γρά/ψ αντες ἐ3 πιστολὰς\ πρὸς\ τὸ\ν Ταρκύ-΄
νιον ἔδωκαν τοῖaς πρέσ, βεσι" Kal yap @KovY αὐτό-
61, τῶlaνl > ᾿Ακυλλίω/ ν ξέ,ν οι γεγονότ/ ες, KalN i τό,τ ε THaA
συνωμοσίᾳ, παρῆnσ αν. ᾿ ; .
Ὡς δὲ ταῦτα πράξαντες ἀπηλλάγησαν, ὑπεξ-
ελθὼν ὁu d Οὐινδίκ, ιος λάθρα, χρήσασθαι τοῖaς
προσπεσοῦσιν οὐκ εἶχεν, ANN ἠπορεῖτο, δεινὸν
μὲν ἡγούμενος, ὥ/σ περ ἣ3ν , πρὸςΝ πατέρα Βροῦlτal ον
υἱῶν ἐξάγιστα κατηγορεῖν ἢ πρὸς θεῖον ἀδελφιδῶν
τὸν Κολλατῖνον, ἰδιώτην δὲ Ρωμαίων οὐδένα νο-
510
PUBLICOLA, 111. 4-Iv. 3
assumed this, to insure his safety from the cruel
designs of the tyrants, and afterwards the surname
of Brutus, which had been given him for it, clung to
him.
IV. When, accordingly, the youths had been per-
suaded and held conference with the Aquillii, it was
decided that all the conspirators should swear a great
and dreadful oath, pouring in libation the blood of a
slain man, and touching his entrails. For this purpose
they met at the house of the Aquillii1 Now the
room in which the ceremony was to be held was, as
was natural, dark and somewhat desolate. Without
their knowing it, therefore, a slave named Vindicius
had concealed himself therein, not with design, or
with any inkling of what was to happen there; he
merely chanced to be there, and when they came in
with anxious haste, he was afraid to be seen by them,
and hid himself behind a chest that lay there, so
that he saw what they did, and heard what they
resolved upon. ‘Their decision was to kill the con-
suls, and when they had written letters to Tarquin
to this effect, they gave them to his envoys, who were
living there as guests of the Aquillii, and were then
present at the conspiracy.
Their business transacted, the conspirators de-
parted, and then Vindicius stole secretly away from
the house. He knew not what use to make of what
had befallen him, but was at a loss, considering it a
dreadful thing, as it really was, to arraign the sons
of Brutus before their father, or the nephews of
Collatinus before their uncle, on the most abominable
charges, and yet believing that no Roman in a
private station could be entrusted with such im-
1 At the house of the Vitellii, according to Livy, ii. 4, 5.
511
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
4 pilav ἐχέγγυον ἀπορρήτων τηλικούτων. πᾶν δ᾽
av μᾶλλον ἢ δυνατὸς ὧν ἡσυχίαν ἄγειν, ἐλαυνό-
μενος δὲ τῷ συνειδότι τοῦ πράγματος, ὥρμησέ
πως πρὸς τὸν ΠΤ ΚΡ ΡΟΝ, μάλιστα τοῖς κουνοῖς
καὶ φιλανθρώποις ' ,ἐπαχθεὶς τοῦ ἀνδρός, ὅτι
πᾶσιν εὐπρόσοδος ἣν τοῖς δεομένοις, καὶ τὴν
οἰκίαν ἀεὶ παρεῖχεν ἀνεῳγμένην, καὶ λόγον οὐ-
δενὸς οὐδὲ χρείαν ἀπερρίπτει τῶν ταπεινῶν.
V. Ὥς οὖν ἀνέβη πρὸς αὐτὸν ὁ Οὐινδίκιος
καὶ κατεῖπε πάντα, Μάρκου τε τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ παρ-
όντος αὐτῷ μόνου καὶ τῆς γυναικός, ἐκπλαγεὶς
καὶ δείσας ὁ Οὐαλλέριος οὐκέτι προήκατο τὸν
ἄνθρωπον, ἀλλὰ κατακλείσας εἰς τὸ οἴκημα καὶ
φύλακα τὴν ἑαυτοῦ γυναῖκα ταῖς θύραις ἐπιστή-
σας, τὸν μὲν ἀδελφὸν ἐκέλευσε τὴν βασιλικὴν
ἔπαυλιν περισχόντα τὰ γράμματα λαβεῖν, ἂν
δυνατὸν ἢ, καὶ τοὺς οἰκέτας παραφυλάττειν'
αὐτὸς δὲ πελατῶν τε πολλῶν καὶ φίλων ἀεὶ περὶ
αὐτὸν ὄντων καὶ θεραπείας συχνῆς, ἐβάδιζε πρὸς
τὴν οἰκίαν τῶν ᾿Ακυλλίων οὐκ ἔνδον ὄντων
2 διὸ μηδενὸς ἂν προσδοκήσαντος ὠσάμενος διὰ
θυρῶν ἐἐ πιτυγχάνει τοῖς γράμμασι κειμένοις ὅπου
κατέλυον. οἱ πρέσβεις. ταῦτα δ᾽ αὐτοῦ πράτ-
TOVTOS οἱ ᾿Ακύλλιοι δρόμῳ προσεφέροντο, καὶ
περὶ τὰς θύρας συμμίξαντες ἐζήτουν ἀφελέσθαι
τὰς ἐπιστολάς. οἱ δ᾽ ἠμύνοντο, καὶ τὰ ἱμάτια
περιβαλόντες αὐτῶν τοῖς τραχήλοις ὑπὸ βίας καὶ
μόλις ὠθούμενοι καὶ ὠθοῦντες διὰ τῶν στενωπῶν
εἰς τὴν ἀγορὰν ἐνέβαλον. τὰ δ᾽ αὐτὰ καὶ περὶ τὴν
ἔπαυλιν ἅμα τὴν βασιλικὴν ἐγίνετο, τοῦ Μάρκου
γραμμάτων ἑτέρων ἐν τοῖς σκεύεσι κομιζομένων
1 φιλανθρώποις Bekker supplies τρόποις, after Porson.
512
PUBLICOLA, tv. 3-v. 2
portant secrets. The last thing that he could do,
however, was to hold his peace, and driven on by his
knowledge of the affair, he made his way somehow
to Valerius, attracted especially by the affable and
kindly ways of the man.! For he was easily ac-
cessible to all the needy, always kept open house,
and never refused to hear or help one of the
lowly.
V. Accordingly, when Vindicius came to him and
told him the whole story, in the presence of his
brother Marcus only, and of his wife, Valerius was
struck with consternation and fear, and would not
now let the man go, but shut him up in a room and
set his own wife to guard the door. Then he
ordered his brother to surround the royal residence,
seize the letters, if possible, and take the servants
into custody. He _ himself, with the numerous
clients and friends who were always about him,
and with a large company of retainers, went to the
house of the Aquillii, who were not at home.
Therefore, to the surprise of everybody, he forced
the door, and came upon the letters lying in the
quarters where the envoys were lodging. Meantime
the Aquillii came up in hot haste, joined battle at
the door, and sought to take away the letters. But
Valerius and his party resisted the attack, threw
their togas about their opponents’ necks, and after
much struggling on both sides, at last succeeded in
pushing them through the streets into the forum.
The same success was had at the royal residence,
where Marcus laid hands on other letters which were
to be conveyed away in the baggage, seized as many
1 Vindicius laid the matter before the consuls, according
to Livy, ii. 4, 6.
5¥3
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἐπιλαμβανομένου, καὶ τῶν βασιλικῶν ὅσους δυ-
νατὸς ἣν ἕλκοντος εἰς τὴν ἀγοράν.
VI. ᾿Επεὶ δὲ τὸν θόρυβον κατέπαυσαν οἱ ὕπα-
τοι καὶ τοῦ Οὐαλλερίου κελεύσαντος ἐκ τῆς οἰκίας
ὁ Οὐινδίκιος “προήχθη, καὶ γενομένης κατηγορίας
ἀνεγνώσθη τὰ γράμματα καὶ πρὸς οὐδὲν ἐτόλμη-
σαν ἀντειπεῖν οἱ ἄνδρες, ἣν μὲν κατήφεια καὶ
σιωπὴ τῶν ἄλλων, ὀλίγοι δὲ βουλόμενοι τῷ
Βρούτῳ χαρίξεσθαι φυγῆς ἐμέμνηντο. καί τι
καὶ ΚΚολλατῖνος αὐτοῖς ἐλπίδος ἐπιεικοῦς ἐνεδίδου
δεδακρυμένος καὶ Οὐαλλέριος σιωπῶν. ὁ δὲ
Βροῦτος ὀνομαστὶ τῶν υἱῶν ἑκάτερον προσειπών,
A. γε, ὦᾧ TiTtitee,”, εἶεἶ πεν, a “ἄγε, ὦὉ Τιβέριpεl,e, τί οὐκ
ἀπολογεῖσθε πρὸς τὴν κατηγορίαν; ᾿ ws δ᾽ οὐδὲν
ἀπεκρίναντο τρὶς ἐρωτηθέντες, οὕτως πρὸς τοὺς
ὑπηρέτας ἀποστρέψας τὸ πρόσωπον, “ Ὑμέτερον
On, εἶπε, “70 λοιπὸν ἔργον." οἱ δὲ εὐθὺς
συλλαβόντες τοὺς νεανίσκους περιερρήγνυον τὰ
ἱμάτια, τὰς χεῖρας ἀπῆγον ὀπίσω, paps ous
ἔξαινον τὰ σώματα, τῶν μὲν ἄλλων οὐ δυνα-
μένων προσορᾶν οὐδὲ καρτερούντων, ἐκεῖνον δὲ
λέγεται μήτε τὰς ὄψεις ἀπαγαγεῖν ἀλλαχόσε
μήτ᾽ οἴκτῳ τι τρέψαι τῆς περὶ τὸ πρόσωπον
ὀργῆς καὶ βαρύτητος, ἀλλὰ δεινὸν ἐνορᾶν κολα-
ζομένοις τοῖς παισὶν ἄχρι οὗ κατατείναντες αὐ-
τοὺς ἐπὶ τοὔδαφος πελέκει τὰς κεφαλὰς ἀπέ-
κοψαν. οὕτω δὲ τοὺς ἄλλους ἐπὶ τῷ συνάρχοντι 100
ποιησάμενος @xeT ἐξαναστάς, ἔργον εἰργασμένος
οὔτ᾽ ἐπαινεῖν βουλομένοις ἀξίως οὔτε ψέγειν
ἐφικτόν. ἢ yap ἀρετῆς ὕψος εἰς ἀπάθειαν
ἐξέστησε τὴν ψυχήν, ἢ πάθους μέγεθος εἰς ἀναλ-
514
PUBLICOLA, v. 2-v1. 4
of the king’s people as he could, and haled them to
the forum.
VI. When the consuls had quieted the tumult,
Valerius ordered Vindicius to be brought from his
house, the denunciation was made, the letters were
read aloud, and the accused had no courage to reply.
Most of the people held their peace for very sorrow,
but a few spoke of exile as a penalty, wishing to do
Brutus a kindness. ‘They were also somewhat
encouraged to hope by the tears of Collatinus and
the silence of Valerius. But Brutus, calling each of
his sons by name, said: ‘Come, Titus, come
Tiberius, why do ye not defend yourselves against
this denunciation?’ But when they made _ no
answer, though he put his question to them thrice,
he turned to the lictors and said: “It is yours
now to do the rest.”” These straightway seized the
young men, tore off their togas, bound their hands
behind their backs, and scourged their bodies with
theirrods. The rest could not endure to look upon the
sight, but it is said that the father neither turned his
gaze away, nor allowed any pity to soften the stern
wrath that sat upon his countenance, but watched.
the dreadful punishment of his sons until the lictors
threw them on the ground and cut off their heads
with the axe. Then he rose and went away, after
committing the other culprits to the judgement of
his colleague.1 He had done a deed which it is
difficult for one either to praise or blame sufficiently.
For either the loftiness of his virtue made his spirit
incapable of suffering, or else the magnitude of his
1 With this account, compare Livy, ii. 5, 5-9. Brutus
looked on ‘‘eminente animo patrio inter publicae poenae
ministerium.”
515
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γησία, ν. οὐ» δέ0τ ερον δὲδὲ μικρὸ\ν οὐδ᾽δ ᾽ ἀ᾽ νθθρ ώπ, ινον,
arr ἢ θεῖa ον ἢ θηριῶaδ ες. δίi,κ αιον δὲ\ τῇa δό, ξῃ
τοῦa ἀ’ νδρὸςN τὴἉν κρί/σ ιν ἕ“ πεσθαι μᾶcaλl λον ἢA τὴ\ν
ἀρετὴν ἀσθενείᾳ τοῦa κρίνοντος ἀπιστεῖσA θαι. « Ῥω-
μαῖοι γὰρ οὐ τοσοῦτον ἔργον οἴονται Ῥωμύλου
γενέ7σ θαι τῆAς πό/λ εως TH\Y γἵ΄ δρυσιν, ὅefσ ον Βρούτid ου
τὴν κτίσιν τῆAς πολιτεία/ ς Kal κατάσ4 τασιν.
VII. Ὡς δ᾽ οὖν ἀπῆλθεν ἐξ ἀγορᾶς τότε, πολὺν
μὲἊνΝ χρόν, ον ἔδ κπληξις εἶs χε Kal \ φρί/κ η καὶ A σιωπὴ \
πάντας ἐπὶ τοῖoς διαπεπραγμένο/ ις" πρὸςNy δὲ τὴν
Κολλατίνου μαλακίαν καὶ μέλλησιν ἀνεθάρρησαν
οἱ ᾿Ακύλλιοι, καὶ χρόνον ἠξίτο υν λαβόντες ἀπο-
λογήσασθαι, καὶ tov Οὐινδίκ’ ιον αὐτοῖςa ἀποδο-
θῆA ναι δοῦvaλl ον ὄντα, Kal \ μὴ\ Tapa τοῖAς κατηγόροις
εἶναι. βουλομένου δὲ ταῦτα συγχωρεῖν καὶ
διαλύοντος ἐπὶ τούτοις τὴν ἐκκλησία/ ν, ὁ. Οὐαλλέ-
plos οὔ»τ ε τὸ\ν ἄ"νΔθ ρωπον οἷτό,ς τ᾽ > ἣ4 ν ἀ> φεῖpνA αι τῷa
περὶ αὐτὸν ὄχλῳ καταμεμιγμένον, οὔτε τὸν δῆμον
εἴΜ α προέμ, ενον τοὺς\ προδδόότ ας ἀ» πελθεῖν-. τέ/λ ος δὲ\
τοῖeς σώμασιν ἐπιβαλὼν\ τὰ\ς χεῖAρ ας ἐπεκαλεῖτa ο
τὸν Βροῦτον, καὶ τὸν ἱζΚολλατῖνον ἐβόα δεινὰ
ποιεῖνa , εἰ> THA συνάρ/ χοντι παιδοφονία/ ς ἀνάγκην
προστριψάμ/ε νος αὐ>τ ὸς\ οἴεται δεῖa ν καταχαρίξεσθαι
ταῖnςa γυναιξὶ τοὺς' προδότ, ας καὶ πολεμίο/ υς τῆaς
πατρίδος. ἀγανακτοῦντος δὲ τοῦ ὑπάτου καὶ
«κελεύ4 οντος ἀ» πάγi4 εσθαι τὸΝν Οὐι> νδίκ’ὔι ον, οἱ ς μὲΝν
ὑπηρέται διω. σάμενοι τὸΝν ὄχλον ἥπτοντο τοῦf a
ἀνθρώπου Kai τοὺ\ς ἀφαιρουμέν/ ους ἔτυπτον, οἱ
516
PUBLICOLA, vi. 4-vul. 3
suffering made it insensible to pain. in neither
ease was his act a trivial one, or natural to a man,
but either god-like or brutish. However, it is right
that our verdict should accord with the reputation of
the man, rather than that his virtue should be dis-
credited through weakness in the judge. For the
Romans think that the work of Romulus in building
the city was not so great as that of Brutus in founding
and establishing its form of government.
VII. After Brutus had left the forum at this time,
for a long while consternation, horror, and silence
prevailed among all who remained, as they thought
of what had been done. But soon the weakness and
hesitation of Collatinus gave the Aquillii fresh
courage ; they demanded time in which to make
their defence, and the surrender of Vindicius to
them, since he was their slave, and ought not to be
in the hands of their accusers. Collatinus was
willing to grant this request, and was about to
dissolve the assembly with this understanding ; but
Valerius was neither able to surrender the slave,
who had mingled with the throng about him, nor
would he suffer the people to release the traitors and
withdraw. So at Jast he seized the persons of the
Aquillii and summoned Brutus to the scene, crying
aloud that Collatinus was acting shamefully in laying
upon his colleague the necessity of killing his own
sons, and then thinking it necessary for himself to
bestow upon their wives the lives of his country’s
betrayers and foes. The consul was indignant at
this, and ordered that Vindicius should be taken
away, whereupon the lictors pushed their way
through the crowd, seized the man, and beat those
who tried to rescue him. Then Valerius and _ his
517
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δὲ φίλοι τοῦA Οὐαλλερίο’ υ προέ/σ τησαν ἀμυνόμενοι"
καὶ ὁ δῆA μος ἐβόα κελεύ4ω ν παρεῖνa αι τὸ\ν ΒροῦτA ον.
ἧκεν οὖν αὖθις ὑποστρέψ/ ας" Kal γενομένης αὐτῷa
σιωπῆςr εἶπεν Oδ TL τοῖ΄ς“ μὲ\ν υἱcοaῖnς AUTOS ἀποχρῶLνal
ἣἰὴν δικαστής/, περὶ \ beδὲ τῶaν ἄ» λλων τοῖ-ς πολίτ7, αις
ἐλευθέροις οὖσι ψῆaφ ον δί»,δ ωσι: λεγέτω δὲ ὁe
βουλόμενος καὶ πειθέτω τὸXNν δῆrnμ ον. οὐκέτι μέντοι
λόγων ἐδέησεν, ἀλλὰ Ν τῆaς ψήφου δοθείσης πάσαις
ἁλόντες ἐπελεκίσθησαν.
ὋὉ δὲ Κολλατῖνος ἦν μέν, ὡς ἔοικεν, ἐν ὑποψία
τινὶ καὶ διὰ συγγένειαν τῶν βασιλέων, ἤχθοντο
δ᾽ αὐτοῦ καὶ τῷ δευτέρῳ τῶν ὀνομάτων, ἀφοσιού-
μενοι τὸν Ταρκύνιον. ὧς δὲ καὶ ταῦτα συνέβη,
παντάπασι προσκρούσ/ ας ἀφῆaκ ε τὴν ἀρχὴν ἑκὼν
καὶ τὴς πό,λ εως ὑπεξῆλA θεν. οὕτω δὴ πάλιν
ἀρχαιρεσιῶAν γενομέ/ν ων ὕ¢ πατος ἀπεδείχθη λαμ-
πρῶaς ὁ« ς Οὐα» λλέρι7 ος, ἀ5 ξί7α ν ἀ> πολαβὼν\ τῆAς προ-
θυμίας χάριν: ἧς οἰ» όμενός/ τι δεῖa ν ἀπολαῦσ“ αι
τὸ\ν Οὐι᾽ νδίκ΄ ιον ἐ5 ψηφίσ7 ατο πρῶlτal ον ἀ» πελεύθLe ερον
ἐΕῚκ εῖa νον ἐΡῚν ς Ῥώ,μ ῃ γενέ/σ θαι πολίτ/ ην καὶ \ φέ,ρὔ ειν
ψῆrφn ον ἧ-ὗ βούλ/ οιτο φρατρίᾳ, προσνεμηθέν7τ α. τοῖaς
δ᾽ ἄλλοις ἀπελευθέροις ὀψὲ καὶ μετὰ πολὺν
χρόνον ἐξουσί/α ν ψήφου δημαγωγῶνA ἔδωκεν “Arr-
mTLos* ἡ δὲ παντελὴς\ ἀπελευθέρωσις ἄχρι νῦaν
οὐ> ινδί, κτα λέ/γ εται oe > ἐ2 κεῖcνa ον, ὥ“ς φασι, τὸ\ν
Οὐινδίκιον.
VIII. Ἔκ τούτου τὰ\ μὲν χρήματα τῶaν βασι-
λέων διαρπάσαι τοῖTςad «ς Ῥωμαίο/ι ς ἔ> δωκαν, τὴ\ν δὲ
518
PUBLICOLA, vu. 3-vin. 1
friends stood forth in the man’s defence, while the
people shouted for Brutus to come. He turned
back, therefore, and came, and when silence had
been made for him, said that for his sons, he himself
sufficed as judge, but he would leave the fate of the
other traitors to the votes of the citizens, who were
free, and any one who wished might speak and try to
persuade the people. However, by this time there
was no need of oratory, but a vote was taken
which unanimously condemned the men, and they
were beheaded.
Collatinus, as it would seem, was already under
some suspicion on account of his relationship to the
royal family, and the second of his names also was
hateful to the people, who loathed the sound of Tar-
quin. But after these recent events, he saw that he
was altogether obnoxious, and therefore resigned his
ofice and withdrew secretly from the city. A new
election was consequently held, and Valerius was
triumphantly declared consul, thus receiving a
worthy reward for his zeal. In this reward he
thought that Vindicius ought to share, and therefore
had a decree passed which made him, first of all
freedmen, a citizen of Rome, and entitled him to
vote with any curia in which he chose to be enrolled.
Other freedmen received the right of suffrage in
much later times from Appius,? who thus courted
popularity. And from this Vindicius, as they say, a
perfect manumission is to this day called “ vindicta.” ὃ
VIII. After this, the property of the royal family
was given to the Romans to plunder, and their house
1 Cf. Livy, ii. 2, 3-10.
3 Appius Claudius Caecus, censor in 312 8.0.
5. (Υ Livy; i 5; 10.
519
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
οἰ391κ ί47α, ν κατέ/ σκαψαν καὶ \ τὴ\ν ἔΜ παυλιν: τοῦa δΟ Ὶ
>] Α ρείοZ υ πεδίοs υ τὸ\ ἥefδ ιστον ἐ> κέ/κ τητο Ταρκύν4ι ος,
καὶ τοῦτο τῷ θεῷ καθιέρωσαν. ἔτυχε δὲ τεθε-
ρισμένον ἄρτι, καὶ κειμένων ἔτι τῶν δραγμάτων
οὐ᾽κ @vo vto δεῖa ν ἀ> λοᾶ-ν οὐἡδδὲὲ χρῆaσ θαι διὰN τὴ\ν
καθιέ/ρ ωσιν, ἀ> λλὰ \ συνδραμόν/ τες ἐ> φό/ρ ουν τὰ\ς
ἀ> μάλ/ λας εἰ>ς τὸΝν ποταμόν/. wes δ᾽> αὕ«τ ως καὶ Ν τὰ\
δέ/ νδρα κό/π τοντες ἐ> νέ/ βαλλον, ἀ> ργὸἣνν παντάπ/ ασι
τὸ χωρίον ἀνιέντες τῷ θεῷ καὶ ἄκαρπον. ὠθου-
μένων δὲ πολλῶνa ἐπ᾿ 3 ἀλλήλοις καὶ ἀθρόων
ὑς πήγ7 αγεν ὁ€ ῥ« οῦaς ov> πολὺν\ τό΄π ον, ἀ᾽λ λ᾽ ᾽ ὅee που
τὰ πρῶaτ α συνενεχθέν/ τα Kal περιπεσόν/ τα τοῖAς
στερεοῖς ὑπέστη, τῶν ἐπιφερομένων διέξοδον οὐκ
ἐχόντων, ἀλλ᾽ ἐνισχομέ/ν ων καὶ περιπλεκομένων,
ἐ5 λά/μ βανεν ἡ€ σύ/μ πηξις ἰ» σχὺν\ καὶ \ ῥpaίt d ζωσιν αὐ᾿ξ] ανο- 101]
μένην ὑπὸ τοῦf al ῥe εύ1μ2 ατος. ἰλύ/ν TE γὰ\ρ ἐπήγαγε
πολλήν, ἣ προσισταμέν’ η τροφὴ\ν παρεῖAχ εν ἅμα
καὶ \ κό/ λλησιν, αἱ“ τε πληγαὶ \ σά/λ ον οὐ>κ ἐ?ἔ ποι’ο υν,
ἀ> λλὰ \ μαλακῶςA πιέ/ζ ουσαι συνή/λ αυνον εἰ>ς ταὐτSr ὸ N
πάντα καὶ συνέ/π λαττον. ὑπὸ δὲ μεγέθους καὶ
στάσεως ἕτερον αὐτὸ μέγεθος ἐκτᾶτο καὶ χώραν
ἀναδεχομένην τὰ\ πλεῖστα τῶν ὑπὸ\ τοῦ ποταμοῦ
καταφερομένων. τοῦτο νῦν νῆσός ἐστιν ἱερὰ
κατὰ τὴν πόλιν, ἔχει δὲ ναοὺς θεῶν καὶ περι-
πάτους, καλεῖται δὲ φωνῇ τῇ Λατίνων Μέση
δυοῖν γεφυρῶν.
“Eviot δὲ τοῦτο συμπεσεῖν ἱστοροῦσιν οὐχ ὅτε
Ταρκυνίου καθιερώθη τὸ πεδίον, ἀλλὰ χρόνοις
ὕστερον ἄλλο χωρίον ὁμοροῦν ἐκείνῳ Ταρκυνίας
520
PUBLICOLA, vu. 1-4
and palace were razed to the ground. But the
pleasantest part of the field of Mars, which had
belonged to Tarquin, was dedicated to that god.
Now it chanced that it had just been reaped,
and the grain still lay upon the ground; but
since the field had been consecrated, they thought
it not right to thresh it or use it in any way.
They therefore with one accord carried the sheaves
to the river and cast them in. In like manner
also they cast in the trees which had been cut,
and left the place wholly untilled and barren for
the god of war. The quantities of stuff thus heaped
together were not borne along by the current
very far, but the advanced portions stopped and
accumulated at the shallows which they encountered.
The portions that followed these could not get
through them, but impinged upon them and blended
inextricably with them, and the aggregation was
made increasingly firm and fast by the action of the
stream. For this brought along great quantities of
mud, the addition of which increased the size and
cohesion of the mass. And besides, the impacts of
the current were not rude, but with a gentle pres-
sure pushed and moulded everything together.
Owing to its size and position the mass acquired
fresh size, and an extent sufficient to receive most of
what was brought down by the river. It is now a
sacred island over against the city, containing temples
of the gods and covered walks,} and is called in the
Latin tongue “ Inter duos pontes.”
Some, however, say that this did not happen when
the field of Tarquin was consecrated, but in later
times, when Tarquinia devoted another field adjacent
1 Cf. Livy, ii. 5, 1-4,
521
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀ> νεί’σ ης. ἡς δὲ\ Ταρκυνία, παρθέν/ ος ἦ5 ν ἱδ,έἢ ρ εια,
pi/a τῶaν ‘“Kotiabwy, ἔσχε δὲ τιμὰς ἀντὶ τούτου
μεγάλας, ἐν αἷς ἣν καὶ τὸ μαρτυρίαν αὐτῆς
δέχεσθαι μόνης γυναικῶνa . τὸ\ δ᾽ ἐξεῖa ναι γαμεῖaσ θαι
ψηφισαμένων ov προσεδέξ/ ατο. καὶ ταῦalτ α μὲν
οὕτω γενέσθαι μυθολογοῦσι.
IX. Ταρκύνιον δὲ τὴν ἐκ προδοσίας ἀπογνόντα
τῆ“ς ἀ᾽ ρχῆς“ ἀ’ νά/λ ηψιν ἐ5 δέ/ ξαντο rΤ υρρηνοὶ A προθύ4μ ως
καὶ μεγάλῃ δυνάμει κατῆγον. ἀντεξῆγον δὲ τοὺς
«ςΡ ωμαίο/ υς ot ὕπατοι, Kal παρέ/τ αξαν ἐν F χωρίο/ι ς
ἱe εροῖςa , ὧκὺν TOΧ μὲ\ν Μ “Apotov) 5 ἄλσος, TO\ δὲ\ ΑἰoσJ ούε/ ιον
λειμῶνα προσαγορεύουσιν. ἀρχομένων δὲ αὐτῶν
συνάγειν εἰς χεῖρας “Appwv ὁ Ταρκυνίου παῖς
καὶ Βροῦτος ὁ Ῥωμαίων ὕπατος οὐ κατὰ τύχην
ἀλλήλοις περιπεσόντες, GAN ὑπ᾽ ἔχθους καὶ
ὀργῆς, ὁ μὲν ὡς ἐπὶ τύραννον καὶ πολέμιον τῆς
πατρίδ/ ος, ὁ δὲ τῆaς φυγῆaςn ἀμυνόμU ενος, ὥρμησαν
ὁὉ μό’σ ε τοῖAς “ἵ4 πποις. θυμῷa n δὲ\ μᾶanλ λον ἢxX λογισμῷa n
προσμίξαντες ἠφεί/δ ησαν αὑτῶnν καὶ συναπέθανον
ἀ> λλήλ/ο ις. οὕὉ τω δὲΝ δεινοῦa γενομέν/ ου τοῦa προά-΄
yovos οὐκ ἔσχεν ὁ< ἀγὼν τέλος ἐπιεικέστερον,
ἀ3 λλὰ \ καὶ \ δρά/σ αντες i7 ca καὶ \ παθόν/ τες οἱ e στρατοὶ \
διεκρίθησαν ὑπὸ χειμῶνος.
Ἢν οὖν ἐν ἀπόρ, οις ὁe Οὐαλλέρι“4 ος, οὐκ εἰδὼς
TO τῆnaς μάχης πέρας, ἀλλὰἈ Ν τοὺς\ στρατιώτας ὁρῶanν
τοῖς μὲν αὑτῶν νεκροῖς ἀθυμοῦντας, ἐπαιρομένους
δὲ τοῖς τῶν πολεμίων: οὕτως ἄκριτος ἣν καὶ
1 “Apoiov Amyot, Coraés, Bekker, after Livy’s silva Arsia
(il. 7, 2) : Οὖρσον.
522
PUBLICOLA, viii. 4-1x. 3
to this. Now Tarquinia was a holy virgin, one of
the Vestals, and received great honours for this act,
among which was this, that of all women her testi-
mony alone should be received. The people also
voted her permission to marry, but she did not avail
herself of it. This is how the thing happened, as
the tale runs.
IX. But Tarquin, despairing of attempts to regain
his throne by treachery, was eagerly welcomed by
the Tuscans,! who set out to restore him with a
great force. The consuls led the Romans out to
meet them, and arrayed their forces in certain sacred
precincts, one of which was called the Arsian grove,
the other the Aesuvian meadow. When the engage-
ment began, Aruns the son of Tarquin and Brutus
the Roman consul encountered each other. It was
not by chance, but both were driven on by hatred
and wrath, the one to attack a tyrant and foe of his
country, the other to avenge himself on the author
of his exile. They urged their horses to the combat,
but since they engaged with fury rather than calcu-
lation, they were reckless of themselves, and fell by
one another's hands. The battle which had such a
dreadful beginning, ended no less disastrously ; the
armies, after inflicting and suffering equal losses,
were separated by a tempest.”
Valerius was therefore in perplexity, not knowing
what the issue of the battle was, but seeing his
soldiers as much disheartened by their own losses as
they were encouraged by those of their enemies. So
undistinguishable and equal was the slaughter on
reer ae people of Veii and Tarquinii, according to Livy,
il. 6, 4f.
2 According to Livy (ii. 7, 1), the Tuscans departed in
terror after the battle.
523
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
παράλληλος ὑπὸ πλήθους ὁ φόνος. οὐ μὴν ἀλλ᾽
ἑκατέροις ἐγγύθεν ὁρώμενα τὰ οἰκεῖα μᾶλλον
ἐβεβαίον τὴν ἧτταν ἢ τὴν νίκην εἰκαζό-
μενα τὰ τῶν πολεμίων. ἐπελθούσης δὲ νυκτὸς
οἵαν εἰκὸὲξ οὕτω μεμαχημένοις, καὶ γενομένων
ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ τῶν στρατοπέδων, λέγουσι σεισθῆναι
τὸ ἄλσος, ἐκ δ᾽ αὐτοῦ φωνὴν ἐκπεσεῖν μεγάλην
φράζουσαν ὡς ἑνὶ πλείους ἐν τῇ μάχῃ τεθνήκασι
Τυρρηνῶν ἢ Ῥωμαίων. jv δ᾽ ἄρα θεῖόν τι τὸ
φθεγξάμενον: εὐθύς τε γὰρ ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοῖς μὲν
ἀλαλάξαι παρέστη μέγα καὶ θαρραλέον, οἱ δὲ
Τυρρηνοὶ περίφοβοι γενόμενοι. καὶ συνταρα-
χθέντες ἐξέπεσον ἐκ τοῦ στρατοπέδου καὶ διε-
σπάρησαν οἱ πλεῖστοι; τοὺς δὲ καταλειφθέντας
ὀλίγῳ πεντακισχιλίων ἐλάσσους ἐπελθόντες εἷ-
λον οἱ Ῥωμαῖοι, καὶ τἄλλα διήρπασαν. οἱ δὲ
νεκροὶ διαριθμηθέντες εὑρέθησαν τριακόσιοι μὲν
ἐπὶ χιλίοις καὶ μυρίοις οἱ τῶν πολεμίων, οἱ δὲ
Ῥωμαίων παρ᾽ ἕνα τοσοῦτοι.
Ταύτην τὴν μάχην λέγουσι γενέσθαι πρὸ μιᾶς
καλανδῶν Μαρτίων. ἐθριάμβευσε δ᾽ ἀπ᾿ αὐτῆς
Οὐαλλέριος εἰσελάσας τεθρίππῳ πρῶτος ὑπάτων.
καὶ τὸ πρᾶγμα σεμνὴν καὶ μεγαλοπρεπῆ παρέ-
σχεν ὄψιν, οὐκ ἐπίφθονον οὐδ᾽ ἀνιάσασαν, ὡς
ἔνιοι λέγουσι, τοὺς ὁρῶντας" οὐ γὰρ ἂν ἔσχε
ζῆλον τοσοῦτον οὐδὲ φιλοτιμίαν εἰς ἔτη πάμ-
πολλα διαμένουσαν. ἀπεδέξαντο δὲ τοῦ Οὐαλ-
λερίου καὶ τὰς εἰς τὸν συνάρχοντα τιμάς, αἷς
ἐκκομιζόμενον καὶ θαπτόμενον ἐκόσμησε: καὶ
λόγον ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ διεξῆλθεν ἐπιτάφιον, ὃς οὕτως 102
ὑπὸ Ρωμαίων ἠγαπήθη καὶ τοσαύτην ἔσχε χάριν
524
PUBLICOLA, 1x. 3-7
both sides. Each army, however, was more convinced
of defeat by the near sight of its own dead, than it
could be of victory by conjecturing those of the
enemy. But when such a night came on as must
needs follow such a battle, and both camps were
quiet, they say that the grove was shaken, and a
loud voice issued from it declaring that the Tuscans
had lost one man more in the battle than the
Romans. The utterance was manifestly from some
god,! for at once the Romans were inspired by it to
loud shouts of courage, while the Tuscans were
panic-stricken, abandoned their camp in confusion,
and were for the most part dispersed. As for those
that remained, a little less than five thousand in
number, the Romans fell upon them, took them
prisoners, and plundered the camp. And when the
dead on both sides were numbered, those of the
enemy were found to be eleven thousand and three
hundred, and those of the Romans as many less
one.
It is said that this battle was fought on the last
day of February. Valerius celebrated a triumph for
it, being the first consul to drive into the city on a
four-horse chariot. And the proceeding afforded a
spectacle which was imposing and magnificent, not
odious and offensive to the spectators, as some say;
otherwise it would not have been continued with
such ardour and emulation for countless years. The
people were also pleased with the honours which
Valerius bestowed upon his colleague at the funeral
ceremonies. He even delivered a funeral oration in
his honour, which was so admired by the Romans
and won such favour that from that time on, when
1 Silvanus, as Livy tells the tale (ii. 7, 2).
VOL, 1.1 ς 5 2 5
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὥστε πᾶσι τοῖς ἀγαθοῖς Kal μεγάλοις ὑπάρχειν
ἐξ ἐκείνου τελευτήσασιν ὑπὸ τῶν ἀρίστων ἐγκω-
μιάζεσθαι. λέγεται δὲ καὶ τῶν “Ἑλληνικῶν ἐπι-
ταφίων ἐκεῖνος γενέσθαι πρεσβύτερος, εἴγε μὴ
καὶ τοῦτο Σόλωνός ἐστιν, ὡς ᾿Αναξιμένης ὁ ῥήτωρ
ἱστόρηκεν.
Χ. ᾿Αλλὰ δι᾽ ἐκεῖνα μᾶλλον ἤχθοντο τῷ Οὐαλ-
λερίῳ καὶ προσέκρουον, ὅτι Βροῦτος μέν, ὃν
πατέρα τῆς ἐλευθερίας ἐνόμιζεν ὁ δῆμος, οὐκ
ἠξίωσε μόνος ἄρχειν, ἀλλὰ καὶ πρῶτον αὑτῷ
συνάρχοντα προσείλετο καὶ δεύτερον" “Οὑτοσὶ
δ᾽, ἔφασαν, “eis αὑτὸν ἅπαντα συνενεγκάμενος
οὐκ ἔστι τῆς Βρούτου κληρονόμος ὑπατείας μηδὲν
αὐτῷ προσηκούσης, ἀλλὰ τῆς Ταρκυνίου τυραν-
νίδος. καίτοι τί δεῖ λόγῳ μὲν Βροῦτον ἐἐγ κωμιά-
ξειν, ἔἐ ργῳ δὲ μιμεῖσθαι Ταρκύνιον, ὑπὸ ῥάβδοις
ὁμοῦ πάσαις καὶ πελέκεσι κατιόντα μόνον ἐξ
οἰκίας τοσαύτης τὸ μέγεθος ὅσην οὐ καθεῖλε τὴν
τοῦ βασιλέως; ᾿ καὶ “γὰρ ὄντως ὁ Οὐαλλέριος
ᾧκει τραγικώτερον ὑπὲρ τὴν καλουμένην Οὐελίαν
οἰκίαν ἐπικρεμαμένην τῇ ἀγορᾷ καὶ καθορῶσαν
ἐξ ὕψους ἅπαντα, “δυσπρόσοδον δὲ πελάσαι καὶ
χαλεπὴν ἔξωθεν, ὥστε καταβαίνοντος αὐτοῦ τὸ
σχῆμα μετέωρον εἶναι καὶ βασιλικὸν τῆς προ-
πομπῆς τὸν ὄγκον. ὅσον οὖν ἐν ἀρχῇ καὶ πράγ-
μασι μεγάλοις ἀγαθὸν ἣν ἔχειν ὦτα παρρησίαν
ἀντὶ κολακείας προσιέμενα καὶ λόγους ἀληθεῖς,
ἔδειξεν. ἀκούσας γὰρ ὅτι τοῖς πολλοῖς ἁμαρτά-
νειν ἐδόκει τῶν φίλων διεξιόντων, οὐκ ἐφιλονεί-
κησεν, οὐδ᾽ ἠγανάκτησεν, ἀλλὰ ταχὺ πολλοὺς
526
PUBLICOLA, 1x. 7-x. 3
their great and good men died, encomiums were
pronounced upon them by the most distinguished
citizens. And this funeral oration of his is said to
have been earlier than any among the Greeks, unless
Anaximenes the orator is right in saying that the
custom originated with Solon.
X. But that which the rather displeased and
offended the people in Valerius was this. Brutus,
whom they regarded as the father of their liberties,
would not consent to rule alone, but once and again
chose a colleague to rule with him. “ But this
Valerius,” they said, “in concentrating all power
upon himself, is not a successor to the consulate of
Brutus, to which he has no right, but to the tyranny
of Tarquin. Yet why should he extol Brutus in
words, while in deeds he imitates Tarquin, descending
to the forum alone, escorted by all the rods and
axes together, from a house no less stately than the
royal house which he demolished?” For, as a
matter of fact, Valerius was living in a very splendid
house on the so-called Velia.1 It hung high over
the forum, commanded a view of all that passed
there, and was surrounded by steeps and hard to
get at, so that when he came down from it the
spectacle was a lofty one, and the pomp of his
procession worthy of aking. Accordingly, Valerius
showed what a good thing it is for men in power and
high station to have ears which are open to frankness
and truth instead of flattery. For when he heard
from his friends, who spared him no detail, that he
was thought by the multitude to be transgressing,
he was not obstinate nor exasperated, but quickly
got together a large force of workmen, and while it
1 An eminence of the Palatine hill,
527
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
συναγαγὼν\ τεχνί/τ ας ἔovτ ι νυκτὸMςS οὔ7 σης κατέἢβ αλε
τὴ\ν οἰ> κί,α ν Kal \ κατέ/σ καψεν εἰ>ς’ ἔ"᾿ δαφος πᾶaσn αν.
ὥ“ στε μεθ᾽ 9 ἡγι,μ έWρd αν τοὺςNU eas Ῥωμαίο, υς ὁCρhiῶr ντας καὶ\
συνισταμένους τοῦf a) μὲν ἀνδρὸ\ς ἀγαπᾶνa Kal θαυ-
pave τὴν μεγαλοφροσύνiηg ν, ἄχθεσθαι δὲ THAs
οἰbaκ ί4α ς καὶ \ ποθεῖ-ν τὸ\ μέ/γ εθος καὶ \ τὸ\ κάtλh λος,
ὥσπερ ἀνθρώπου, διὰ φθόνον οὐ δικαίως κατα-
λελυμέν/η ς, TOD“ δὲ\ ἄ” ρχοντος, ὥ“ σπερ ἀ’ νεστίο, υ,
παρ᾽ ᾽ ἑς τέ/ρ οις οἰ> κοῦ»ν“ τος. ἐ29δ07έ χοντο γὰ\ρ οἱ « φίΧλά οι
τὸν Οὐαλλέριον ἄχρι οὗ τόπον ἔδωκεν ὁ δῆμος
αὐτῷ καὶ κατεσκεύασεν οἰκίαν ἐκείνης μετριω-
τέραν, ὅδ που νῦaν ἱς ερό’ν ἐστιν Ovix/ as πότας ὀνομα-
ζόμενον.
Βουλόμενος δὲ μὴ μόῇν ον ἑαυτόν, ἀλλὰ\ Kal τὴν
ἀρχὴν avtt φοβερᾶς χειροήθη καὶ προσφιλῆ
ποιεῖtνal τοῖAς πολλοῖςa, τούς/ τε πελέκ/ εις ἀ3 πέλυσε
τῶὉ“ν ῥάβδων, αὐτάς τε τὰΝς ῥάβδους εἰς ἐκκλησίαν
παριὼν ὑφῆκε τῷ δήμῳ καὶ κατέκλινε, μέγα
ποιῶν τὸ πρόσχημα τῆς δημοκρατίας. καὶ τοῦτο
μέVχA ρι νῦaν διαφυλάτ7 τουσιν οἱ CRASἄS ρχοντες. ἐ> λά/ν θανε
δὲ τοὺς πολλοὺς οὐχ ἑαυτόν, ὡς ῴοντο, ποιῶν
ταπεινόν,, ἀ᾽ λλὰ x τὸΝν φθόν΄ ον τῇan μετριότ/ ητι ταύ΄τὔ ῃ
καθαιρῶν καὶ κολούων, αὑτῷ δὲ προστιθεὶς το-
σοῦaτ ον μέ/γ εθος δυνά΄μ εως ὅ“ σον ἀb]φ αιρεῖνal ἐ50.δ ό7κ ει
τῆς ἐξουσίας, ὑποδυομένου μεθ᾽ ἡδονῆς αὐτῷ τοῦ
528 :
PUBLICOLA, x. 3-6
was still night tore the house down, and razed it all
to the ground. In the morning, therefore, the
Romans saw what had happened, and came flocking
together. ‘they were moved to love and admiration
by the man’s magnanimity, but were distressed for
the house, and mourned for its stately beauty, as if
it had been human, now that envy had unjustly
compassed its destruction. They were also distressed
for their ruler, who, like a homeless man, was now
sharing the homes of others. For Valerius was
received into the houses of his friends until the
people gave him a site and built him a house, of
more modest dimensions than the one he had lived
in before, where now stands the temple of Vica Pota,}
so-called.
Wishing now to make not only himself but also
the government, instead of formidable, submissive
and agreeable to the multitude, he removed the
axes from the lictors’ rods, and when he came into
the assembly, inclined and lowered the rods them-
selves to the people, emphasizing the majesty of the
democracy. This custom the consuls observe to this
day. And before the multitude were aware of it, he
had succeeded, not by humbling himself, as they
thought, but by checking and removing their envious
feelings through such moderation on his part, in add-
ing to his real influence over them Just as much as he
had seemed to take away from his authority, and the
people submitted to him with pleasure and bore his
1 Victress Possessor, a name of the goddess of victory,
whose temple was at the foot of the Velia (Livy, ii. 7, 12).
According to Livy, Valerius was building the house on the
Velia, but in order to allay the people’s jealousy, brought
the materials to the foot of the hill, and built the house
there.
529
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
δήμου καὶ φέροντος ἑκουσίως. ὥστε καὶ ἸΠοπλι-
κόλαν ἀνηγόρευσεν αὐτόν: σημαίνει δὲ τοὔνομα
δημοκηδῆ: καὶ τοῦτο μᾶλλον ἴσχυσε τῶν ἀρ-
χαίων ὀνομάτων, ᾧ καὶ ἡμεῖς χρησόμεθα τὸν
λοιπὸν βίον τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἱστοροῦντες.
ΧΙ. Ὑπατείαν μὲν γὰρ ἔδωκε μετιέναι καὶ
παραγγέλλειν τοῖς βουλομένοις" πρὸ δὲ τῆς
καταστάσεως τοῦ συνάρχοντος οὐκ εἰδὼς τὸν
γενησόμενον, ἀλλὰ δεδιὼς ἀντίπραξιν ὑπὸ φθόνου
τινὸς ἢ ἀγνοίας, ἐχρήσατο τῇ μοναρχίᾳ πρὸς
τὰ κάλλιστα καὶ μέγιστα τῶν πολιτευμάτων.
πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἀνεπλήρωσε τὴν “βουλὴν ὀλι-
γανδροῦσαν' ἐτεθνήκεσαν γὰρ οἱ μὲν ὑπὸ Ταρ-
κυνίου πρότερον, οἱ δὲ ἔἐ ναγχος ἐν τῇ μάχῃ. τοὺς
δ᾽ ἐγγραφέντας ὑπ᾽ αὐτοῦ λέγουσιν ἑκατὸν καὶ
ἑξήκοντα τέσσαρας γενέσθαι. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα
νόμους ἔγραψεν, ὧν μάλιστα μὲν ἰσχυροὺς ἐποίησε
τοὺς πολλοὺς ὁ τὸν δῆμον ἀπὸ τῶν ὑπάτων τῷ
φεύγοντι, δίκην ἐπικαλεῖσθαι διδούς" δεύτερος ὁ 103
τοὺς ἀρχὴν ἀναλαβόντας, ἣν ὁ δῆμος οὐκ ἔδωκεν,
ἀποθνήσκειν κελεύων' τρίτος δὲ μετὰ τούτους,
ὃς ἐβοήθησε τοῖς πένησιν, ᾧ τὰ τέλη τῶν πολιτῶν
ἀφεῖλε καὶ προθυμότερον ἅπτεσθαι τῶν ἐργασιῶν
ἐποίησεν ἅπαντας. ὁ δὲ “γραφεὶς κατὰ τῶν
ἀπειθούντων τοῖς ὑπάτοις οὐχ ἧττον ἔδοξε δημο-
τικὸς εἶναι, καὶ πρὸς τῶν πολλῶν μᾶλλον ἢ
δυνατῶν γεγράφθαι. ζημίαν γὰρ ἀπειθείας ἔταξε
βοῶν πέντε καὶ δυεῖν προβάτων ἀξίαν. ἣν δὲ
τιμὴ προβάτου μὲν ὀβολοὶ δέκα, βοὸς δὲ ἑκατόν,
οὔπω νομίσματι χρωμένων πολλῷ τότε Ῥωμαίων,
539
PUBLICOLA, x. 6—x1. 4
yoke willingly. They therefore called him Publicola,!
a name which signifies people-cherisher. This name
prevailed over the older names which he had borne,
and it is the name which I shall use for him in the
remainder of this Life.
XI. For he permitted any who wished to enter
the lists and sue for the consulship. But before the
installation of his colleague, not knowing who he
would be, but fearing an opposition due to some
jealousy or ignorance, he used his sole authority for
the enactment of his best and most important
measures. In the first place, he filled up the senate,
which was much reduced in numbers; for some had
long before been put to death by Tarquin, and
others had recently fallen in the battle with the
Tuscans. Those who were enrolled in this body by
him amounted, they say, to a hundred and sixty-four.
After this he enacted several laws, one of which
especially strengthened the position of the commons
by allowing a defendant to appeal to the people from
the judgement of the consuls. A second made it a
capital offence to assume a magistracy which the
people had not bestowed. A third, following these,
came to the relief of the poor; it lifted the taxes
from the citizens, so that all engaged more zealously
in manufactures and commerce. And the one which
was enacted against disobedience to the consuls was
thought to be no less popular in its character, and to
be in the interest of the many rather than of the
powerful. For the fine which it imposed on
disobedience was only the worth of five oxen and
two sheep. Now the value of a sheep was ten obols,
and that of an ox, a hundred, for the Romans at
2 Cf. Livy, ii, 8, 1.
531
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἀλλὰ\ προβατεία/ ις Kal κτηνοτροφία, ις εὐθηνούντων.
διὸ καὶ τὰς οὐσίας ἄχρι νῦν ἀπὸ τῶν προβάτων
πεκούλια καλοῦσι, καὶ τῶν νομισμάτων τοῖς
παλαιοτάτοις βοῦν ἐπεχάραττον ἢ πρόβατον ἢ
σῦaν . ἐτ τί(θ0ε ντο δὲδὲ καὶ \ παισὶν\ αὑa τῶν bΣυrΐ λλους
καὶ \ Βουβούλ/ κους καὶ \ Kampapio, vs ὀede νόetd ματα καὶ \
Πορκίους: κάπρας μὲν τὰ\ς αἶ>γ ας, πόρκους δὲ
τοὺς χοίρους ὀνομάζοντες.
XII. Οὕτω δὲ περὶ ταῦaτ α δημοτικὸς\ γενό,μ ενος
νομοθέτης Kal μέτριος, ἐν TOA μὴ\ μετρί, ῳ TH\Y τιμω-
ρίαν ὑπερέτεινεν. ἔγραψε γὰΝρ νό’ μον ἄ7ν ευ κρί’σ εως
κτεῖ-ν αι διδόντα τὸν βουλόμενον τυραννεῖνA " κτεί-/
vavta δὲ φόνου καθαρὸν ἐποί/η σεν, εἰ᾽ παράσ/ χοιτο
τοῦr n ἀδικήματος τοὺς ἐλέ4γ χους. ἐπεὶ ya\p οὐ
δυνατὸν ἐπιχειροῦaν τα τηλικούτ/ οις λαθεῖνa ἅπαντας,
οὐ>κ ἀ’ δύ΄ν ατον δὲΝ TO\ μὴ\ λαθόν4 τα τοῦ“ κριθῆaν αι
φθάσαι κρείττονα γενόμενον, ἣAS ν ἀναιρεῖA TOo s ἀδί-
κημα κρίσιν, προλαβεῖνA ἔδωκε τῷan δυναμέ,ν ῳ κατὰ
τοῦ ἀδικοῦντος.
᾿᾿πηνέθη δὲ καὶ διὰ τὸ\ν ταμιευτικὸνN νόμον.
ἐπεὶ yap ἔδει χρήματα πρὸς\ TO\V πό/λ εμον εἰσε-
νεγκεῖaν ἀπὸ τῶaν οὐσιῶlνa τοὺς πολίτ, ας, οὔτ᾽ ᾿Ὶ αὐτὸς
ἅὉ“ ψασθαι τῆ“ς οἰ3 κονομίαyi ς οὔBAτ ε τοὺς\ φίfλ ους ἐpiᾶal σαι
βουλόμ/ ενος οὔwθp᾽ ὅὦ λως εἰ>ς οSἶsκ ον ἰ> διώ΄ του παρελθεῖν-
δημόσια χρήματα, ταμιεῖaο ν μὲ\ν ἀπέδ/ ειξε τὸ\ν τοῦa
Κρόν/ ου ναόν/ , ᾧ- μέ/χ ρι νῦlaν χρώμ» ενοι διατελοῦσa ι,
ταμίας δὲ τῷ δήμῳ δύο τῶν νέων. ἔδωκεν ἀπο-
δεῖa ξαι" καὶ \ ἀ> πεδεί, χθησαν οἱ Ὁ πρῶrτn οι Πούπ7 λιος
1 ἐν τῷ μὴ μετρίῳ with Coraés: ἐν τῷ μετρίφ.
532
PUBLICOLA, x1. 4—x1. 3
that time did not use much coined money, but their
wealth consisted in flocks and herds. Therefore to
this day they call their substance “ peculium,” from
“necus,” cattle; and their oldest coins are stamped
with the figure of an ox, a sheep, or a hog. And
they actually gave their own sons such surnames as
Suillius, Bubulcus, Caprarius, and Porcius; the last
two from “capra” and “porcus,” their words for goat
and pig.t
XII. But although in these particulars he showed
himself a popular and moderate lawgiver, in the
case of an immoderate offence he made the penalty
severe. For he enacted a law by which any one
who sought to make himself tyrant might be slain
without trial, and the slayer should be free from
blood-guiltiness if he produced proofs of the crime.
For although it is impossible for one who attempts so
great a task to escape all notice, it is not impossible
for him to do so long enough to make himself too
powerful to be brought to trial, which trial his very
crime precludes. He therefore gave any one who
was able to do so the privilege of anticipating the
culprit’s trial.
He also received praise for his law concerning the
public treasury. When it was necessary for the
citizens to contribute from their substance means for
carrying on the war, he was unwilling to assume the
administration of it himself, or to allow his friends to
do so, or, indeed, to have the public moneys brought
into any private house. He therefore made the
temple of Saturn a treasury, as it is to this day, and
gave the people the privilege of appointing two
young men as quaestors, or treasurers. ‘The first to
1 The first two from forms of ‘‘ sus,” swine, and ‘ bos,” ox.
533
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Οὐετούριος καὶ Μινούκιος Μάρκος καὶ χρήματα
συνήχθη πολλά. τρισκαίδεκα γὰρ ,“ἀπεγράψαντο
μυριάδες, ὀρφανοῖς παισὶ καὶ χήραις γυναιξὶν
ἀνεθείσης τῆς εἰσφορᾶς.
Ταῦτα δὲ διοικήσας ἀπέδειξεν ἑαυτῷ συνάρ-
χοντα τὸν Λουκρητίας πατέρα Λουκρήτιον, ¢ᾧ τῆς
ἡγεμονικωτέρας ἐξιστάμενος ὄντι πρεσβυτέρῳ
τάξεως παρέδωκε τοὺς καλουμένους φάσκης" καὶ
τοῦτο διέμεινεν εἰς ἡμᾶς τὸ πρεσβεῖον ἀπ᾽ ἐκείνου
τοῖς γεραιτέροις φυλαττόμενον. ἐπεὶ δ᾽ ὀλίγαις
ἡμέραις ὕστερον ἐτελεύτησεν ὁ Λουκρήτιος, πάλιν
ἀρχαιρεσιῶν γενομένων npeOn Μάρκος Ὡράτιος,
καὶ συνῆρχε τῷ Ποπλικόλᾳ τὸν ὑπολειπόμενον
χρόνον τοῦ ἐνιαυτοῦ.
XIII. Ταρκυνίου. δὲ “Ῥωμαίοις δεύτερον πόλεμον
ἐν Τυρρηνίᾳ κινοῦντος μέγα σημεῖον λέγεται
γενέσθαι: βασιλεύων γὰρ ἔτι καὶ τὸν νεὼν τοῦ
Καπιτωλίου Διὸς ἔχων ὁ Ταρκύνιος ὅσον οὔπω
συντετελεσμένον, εἴτε μαντείας γενομένης εἴτ᾽ av-
τῷ δόξαν ἄλλως, ἅρμα κατὰ κορυφὴν ἐπιστῆσαι
κεραμεοῦν ἐξέδωκε Τυρρηνοῖς τισιν ἐξ Οὐηΐων
ἡημιουργοῖς, εἶτ᾽ ὀλίγον ὕστερον ἐξέπεσε τῆς
ἀρχῆς. τῶν δὲ Τυρρηνῶν διαπεπλασμένον τὸ
τέθριππον ἐμβαλόντων εἰς κάμινον, οὐκ ἔπαθεν
ἃ προσήκει πάσχειν πηλὸν ἐν πυρί, πυκνοῦσθαι
καὶ συνιξάνειν, ἐκτηκομένης τῆς “ὑγρότητος, ἀλλ᾽
ἐξέστη καὶ ὠδησε καὶ μέγεθος ἔσχεν ἅμα ῥώμῃ
καὶ σκληρότητι τοσοῦτον ὥστε μόλις ἐξαιρεθῆναι
τὴν ὀροφὴν ἀποσκευασαμένων τῆς καμίνου καὶ
τῶν τοίχων περιαιρεθέντων. ὡς οὖν ἐδόκει τοῖς
μάντεσι θεῖον εἶναι σημεῖον εὐτυχίας καὶ δυνά-
μεως παρ᾽ οἷς ἔσοιτο τὸ τέθριππον, ἔγνωσαν οἱ
534
PUBLICOLA, xu. 3-xm1. 3
be thus appointed were Publius Veturius and Marcus
Minucius, and large sums of money were collected.
For one hundred and thirty thousand names were on
the assessment lists, orphans and widows being
excused from the contribution.!
This matter regulated, he caused Lucretius, the
father of Lucretia, to be appointed his colleague in
the consulship.2. To him he yielded the precedence,
as the elder man, and committed to him the so-
called “fasces,’’ a privilege of seniority which has
continued from that day to this. But Lucretius died
a few days afterwards, and in a new election Marcus
Horatius was chosen consul, and shared the office
with Publicola for the remainder of the year.
XIII. While Tarquin was stirring up in Tuscany
another war against the Romans, a thing of great
portent is said to have happened. When Tarquin
was still king, and had all but completed the temple
of Jupiter Capitolinus, either in consequence of an
oracle, or else of his own good pleasure, he com-
missioned certain Tuscan craftsmen of Veii to place
upon its roof a chariot of terra cotta. Soon after
this he was driven from his throne. The Tuscans,
however, modelled the chariot and put it in a furnace
for firing, but the clay did not contract and shrink in
the fire, as it usually does, when its moisture
evaporates. Instead of this, it expanded and
swelled and took on such size, strength, and hardness,
that it could with difficulty be removed, even after
the roof of the furnace had been taken off and its
sides torn away. To the seers, accordingly, this
seemed a divine portent of prosperity and power
for those who should possess the chariot, and the
1 Cf. Camillus, ii. 2. 3 Cf. Livy, ii. 8, 1-4. 535
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
Οὐήϊοι μὴ προέσθαι τοῖaς «ςῬ ωμαίο/ι ς ἀ᾽ παιτοῦσι,
καὶ ἀπεκρίναντο τοῦnτr ο Tapxuvio’ l, ov totas Tap-
xuvio’ὔ us ἐ» κβαλοῦσn ι προσήκ/ε ιν. ὀ> λί/γ αις δ᾽PE ὕee στερον 104
ἡμέραις ἦσαν ἵππων ἀγῶνες αὐτοῖς. καὶ τὰ μὲν
ἄλλα θέαν καὶ σπουδὴν εἰωθυῖaα ν παρεῖχa ε, TO\ δὲ
νικῆa σαν τέθριππον ὁξ μὲΝν ἡνί/ο χος ἐξή/λ αυνε τοῦn
ἱπποδρόμifο υ σχέδην ἐστεφανωμένiοd ς, οἱ δὲS ealeἵd πποι
πτοηθέντες ἀπ᾽ οὐδεμιᾶς ἐμφανοῦς προφάσεως,
ἀλλὰ κατά τι δαιμόνιον ἢ τύχην “ἵ εντο παντὶ
τάχει πρὸς τὴ\ν Ῥωμαίωbe ν πόλ/ ιν, ἔχοντες τὸ\ν
ἡνίοχον, ὡς οὐδὲν ἣν ἔργον αὐτοῦ κατατείνοντος
οὐ2δOὲ\ παρηγοροῦνaτ ος, G3 AN » ἥὉ ρπαστο, δόντα THa
ῥύμῃ καὶ φερόμUf ενον, ἄlχi ρι οὗἀ τ τῷA Καπιτωλίῳ
προσμίξ/ αντες ἐ5.ξ..έ" βαλον αὐ2τ2ὸ2 ν ἐ>’ν ταῦa θα παρὰ N τὴ\ ν
πύλην ἣν νῦnaν ς Ρατουμέν/ αν καλοῦσἴω ι. γενομένου
δὲN τούντ ου θαυμάσ/ αντες οἱ e Οὐήd ϊSοu ι καὶ \ φοβηθέν/ τες
ἐπέ, τρεψαν ἀποδοῦνa αι TO\ ἅρμα τοῖaςl τεχνίταις.
XIV. Τὸν δὲ νεὼν τοῦ Καπιτωλίου Διὸς εὖὔ-
Eato μὲν ἀναθήσ/ ειν Ταρκύν/ ιος ὁ« Δημαράτου
πολεμῶlνal —Σ αβίν4ο ις, w>K’ od5o0u noe δὲδὲ αρκύνι/ ος ὃὉ
Σούπερβος υἱὸ\ ς ὧτιν ἢ υἱωνὸ\ς τοῦa εὐξαμένου"
καθιερῶLaσl αι δὲAy οὐ>κ ἔ7 φθασεν, ἀ5)λ λὰἊ ν μικρὸνΝ ἀτ πε-
λείπετο τοῦn τέ/λ ος ἔχειν ὅδ τε Ταρκύνιος ἐξέπιπτεν.
ὡς οὖ9ν ἀπείiρ γαστο τελέ/ω ς Kal τὸν προσήκοντα
κό, σμον ἀ’ πεῖχan εν, n* v τῷfa l Ποπλικόλ/ ᾳ φιλοτιμία,
πρὸς τὴ\ν καθιέ/ρ ωσιν. ἐφθόνουν δὲ πολλοὶ τῶaν
δυνατῶν, καὶ ἤχθοντο ταῖς μὲν ἄλλαις τιμαῖς
ἧττον, ἃς νομοθετῶν καὶ στρατηγῶν ἐκ προση-
κόντων ἔσχε' ταύτην δ᾽ οὖσαν ἀλλοτρίαν οὐκ
@ovtTo δεῖ“ ν αὐτῷ“ προσγενέσ, θαι, καὶ τὸ\ν ‘Opatiov
536
PUBLICOLA, xu. 3—x1v. 2
people of Veii determined not to give it up. When
the Romans asked for it, they were told that it
belonged to the Tarquins, not to those who had
expelled the Targuins. But a few days afterwards
there were chariot races at Veii. Here the usual
exciting spectacles were witnessed, but when the
charioteer, with his garland on his head, was quietly
driving his victorious chariot out of the race-course,
his horses took a sudden fright, upon no apparent
occasion, but either by some divine ordering or by
merest chance, and dashed off at the top of their
speed towards Rome, charioteer and all. It was of
no use for him to rein them in or try to calm them
with his voice; he was whirled helplessly along
until they reached the Capitol and threw him out
there, at the gate now called Ratumena. The
Veientines were amazed and terrified at this occur-
rence, and permitted the workmen to deliver their
chariot.
XIV. The temple of Jupiter Capitolinus had been
vowed by Tarquin, the son of Demaratus, when he
was at war with the Sabines, but it was actually
built by Tarquinius Superbus, the son, or grandson,
of him who vowed it. He did not, however, get so
far as to consecrate it, but was driven out before it
was quite completed. Accordingly, now that it was
completely finished and had received all the orna-
ments that belonged to it, Publicola was ambitious
to consecrate it. But this excited the jealousy ot
many of the nobility. They could better brook his
other honours, to which, as legislator and military
commander, he had a rightful claim. But this one
they thought he ought not to have, since it was
more appropriate for others, and therefore they
537
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
προετρέποντο Kal παρώξυνον ἀντιποιεῖσθαι τῆς
καθιερώσεως. γενομένης οὖν τῷ Ποπλικόλᾳ
στρατείας ἀναγκαίας, ψηφισάμενοι τὸ\ν “Opatiov
καθιεροῦἴνω ἀνῆfoγl ον εἰς τὸΝ Καπιτώλιον, ὡς οὐκ
ἂν ἐκεί“ν ου περιγενόμενοι παρόνUa τος. ἔνιοι δέ
φασι κλήρῳ τῶν ὑπάτων λαχεῖν ἐκεῖνον ἐπὶ
τὴν στρατεία/ ν ἄκοντα, τοῦnτ ον δὲ ἐπὶ τὴν καθιέ-
pwow. ἔξεστι δὲ περὶ τού4τ ων ὡς ἔσχεν εἰκά-
ζειν τοῖaς πραχθεῖσla ι περὶ τὴ\ν καθιέ,ρ ωσιν. εἰδοῖaς
οὖν Σεπτεμβρία,ι ς, ἃὃ συντυγχάνει περὶ τὴ\ν παν-
σέληνον μάλιστα τοῦ Μεταγειτνιῶνος, συνηθροι-
σμένων ἁπάντων εἰς τὸ\ Καπιτώλιον, ὁ¢ μὲν
«ςὩ ράτ/ ιος σιωπῆςa γενομέν/ ης τά iy τ΄ 3 ἄ” λλα δρά/σ ας
καὶ τῶν θυρῶν ἁψάμενος, ὥσπερ ἔθος ἐστίν,
ἐπεφθέγγετο τὰς νενομισμένI ας ἐπὶ THa καθιερώσει
φωνάς" ὁ δ᾽ ἀδελφὸς τοῦ ἸΠοπλικόλα Μάρκος ἐκ
πολλοῦ a Tapa \ τὰ\ς θύ,ρ ας ὑς φεστὼς\ Kal \ παραφυ-
λά΄τ των τὸ\ν καιρόν, , ε“ς. Ὦ bὉ“ ate,” >} εἶ,; πεν, rot“ ὁ υἱΟόἿς
σου τέ΄ θνηκεν ἐν TOrn στρατοπέδῳ νοσήσας." ? τοῦnτ ο
πάντας ἠνί-α σε τοὺς ἀκούσαντας" ὁ« ς δ᾽ ‘Opatios
οὐδὲν διαταραχθείς, ἀλλ᾽ ᾽ ἢ τοσοῦ“τ ον μόνον
εἰ> πών΄ὔ, c“e’ Ῥί,ύὔ ψατε τοί/ν υν ὅ4 ποι βού΄λ εσθε τὸΝν
νεκρόν/ , ἐγὼ ya\p ov προσίεΨ μαι TO\ πέν/ θος," ” ἐπέ-
pave τὴ\ν λοιπὴ\ν καθιέρ, ωσιν. ἦ5 ν δὲ\ TO\ προσηγ-
γελμέν4 ον οὐ3κ ἀ2 ληθέςi, G2 AX > ὁe Μάρ΄ κος ὡ€ς ἀ᾽ πο-
στήσων τὸν «ς Opatiov ἐψεύσατο. θαυμαστὸς οὖν
ὁ ἀνὴρ τῆς εὐσταθείας, εἴτε τὴν ἀπάτην ἐν καιρῷ
βραχεῖ a συνεῖaδ εν εἴτε πιστευθεὶς ὁς λό/γ ος οὐκ
ἐκίνησεν αὐτόν/ .
X5V . Ἔ, οικε δὲ καὶ περὶ τὸν δεύ/τ ερον ναὸν
538
PUBLICOLA, xiv. 2—xv, 1
encouraged and incited Horatius to claim the
privilege of consecrating the temple. At a time,
then, when Publicola was necessarily absent on
military service, they got a vote passed that Horatius
should perform the consecration, and conducted
him up to the Capitol, feeling that they could
not have gained their point had Publicola been
in the city. Some, however, say that Publicola
was designated by lot, against his inclination, for
the expedition, and Horatius for the consecration.!
And it is possible to infer how the matter stood
between them from what happened at the conse-
cration. It was the Ides of September, a day which
nearly coincides with the full moon of the Attic
month Metageitnion ; the people were all assembled
on the Capitol, silence had been proclaimed, and
Horatius, after performing the other ceremonies and
laying hold upon the door of the temple, as the
custom is, was pronouncing the usual words of con-
secration. But just then Marcus, the brother of
Publicola, who had long been standing by the door
and was watching his opportunity, said : “O Consul,
thy son lies dead of sickness in the camp.” This
distressed all who heard it; But Horatius, not at all
disturbed, merely said: “ Cast forth the dead then
whither ye please, for I take no mourning upon me,”
and finished his consecration. Now the announce-
ment was not true, but Marcus thought by his
falsehood to deter Horatius from his duty. _Wonder-
ful, therefore, was the firm poise of the man, whether
he at once saw through the deceit, or believed the
story without letting it overcome him.!
XV. A similar fortune seems to have attended the
1 CE. Livy, ii. 8, 6-8.
539
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὁμοία τύχη γενέσθαι τῆaς καθιερώσ/ εως. τὸ\ν μὲν
γὰρ πρῶτον, ὡς εἴρηται, Ταρκυνίου κατασκευά-
σαντος, ‘Qpatiov δὲ καθιερώσαντος, ἐν τοῖς
ἐμφυλίοις πολέμοις πῦρ ἀπώλεσε τὸν δὲ δεύ-
τερον ἀ> νέfdσ τησε μὲ\ν Σύλ7 λας, ἐ5 πεγράfφd η δὲ\ THA
καθιερώσει Κάτουλος Σύλλα προαποθανόντος.
τού΄τ ου δὲ\ πάλ/ ιν ἐ3ν ταῖnςa κατὰN N Οὐϊδεςτ έλΤὰ λιον στάσ/ εσι
διαφθαρέντος τὸν τρίτον τῇ πρὸς τἄλλα καὶ
τοῦa το χρησάμlAε νος εὐ>’π οτμίᾳ/ Οὐbεy σπεσιανὺς\ ἐ2 ξ
ἀρχῆς ἄχρι τέλους ἀναγαγών, ἐπεῖδε γενόμενον
καὶ \ φθειρό,μ ενον pet 5. ὀπλεί γον οὐ9κ ἐ5)π εῖaδ εν, ἀ5)λ λὰ \
τοσοῦτον εὐτυχίᾳ Σύλλαν παρῆλθεν ὅσον ἐκεῖνον
μὲν τῆς ἀφιερώσεως τοῦ ἔργου, τοῦτον δὲ τῆς
ἀναιρέσεως προαποθανεῖν. ἅμα γὰρ τῷ τελευ-
τῆleσl αι Οὐε> σπεσιανὸνΝ ἐ>’ν επρήτσω θη TO\ Καπιτώλ,ι ον.
idO δὲδὲ τέ/ ταρτος οὗ᾿τ ος ὑς πὸ Χ Δομετιανοῦf a) καὶ \ 105
συνετελέσθη καὶ καθιερώθη. λέγεται δὲ Ταρ-
κύνιον εἰς τοὺς θεμελίους ἀναλῶσαι "λίτρας ἀρ-
γυρίου τετρακισμυρίας" τούτου δὲ τοῦ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς
τὸν μέγιστον ἐν Ῥώμῃ τῶν ἰδιωτικῶν πλοῦτον
ἐκλογισθέντα τὸ τῆς χρυσώσεως μὴ τελέσαι ἂν
ἀνάλωμα, πλέον ἢ δισχιλίων καὶ μυρίων τα-
λάντων γενόμενον. οἱ δὲ κίονες ἐκ τοῦ Tevre-
λῆσιν eT pH Ono av λίθου, κάλλιστα τῷ πάχει
πρὸς τὸ μῆκος ἔχοντες" εἴδομεν γὰρ αὐτοὺς ᾿Αθή-
νησιν. ἐν δὲ Ῥώμῃ πληγέντες αὖθις καὶ ἀναξυ-
σθέντες οὐ τοσοῦτον ἔσχον γλαφυρίας ὅσον
ἀπώλεσαν συμμετρίας Kat! τοῦ καλοῦ, διάκενοι
1 καὶ supplied by Bekker, after G. Hermann: συμμετρίας
τοῦ καλοῦ (the symmetry of their beauty).
540
PUBLICOLA, xv. 1-4
dedication ot the second temple. The first, as I
have said, was built by Tarquin, but consecrated by
Horatius; this was destroyed by fire during the civil
wars.! The second temple was built by Sulla, but
Catulus was commissioned to consecrate it,? after the
death of Sulla. This temple, too was destroyed,
during the troublous times of Vitellius,? and Vespas-
ian began and completely finished the third, with the
good fortune that attended him in all his under-
takings. He lived to see it completed, and did not
live to see it destroyed, as it was soon after; and in
dying before his work was destroyed he was just so
much more fortunate than Sulla, who died before his
was consecrated. For upon the death of Vespasian
the Capitol was burned.*
The fourth temple, which is now standing on the
same site as the others, was both completed and
consecrated by Domitian. It is said that Tarquin
expended upon its foundations forty thousand pounds
of silver. But the greatest wealth now attributed
to any private citizen of Rome would not pay the
cost of the gilding alone of the present temple,
which was more than twelve thousand talents.> Its
pillars are of Pentelic marble,° and their thickness
was once most happily proportioned to their length ;
for we saw them at Athens. But when they were
recut and scraped at Rome, they did not gain as
much in polish as they lost in symmetry and beauty,
1 83 B.C. 2. 698.6. ="69 4. ΤΣ 4 80 4.D.
5 For purposes of comparison a talent may be reckoned as
worth £250, or $1200.
6 Pentelé was an Attic deme on the N.E. edge of the
Athenian plain, near which excellent marble was quarried
from the mountain. This was called Brilessus in earlier
times, then Pentelicus.
541
PLUTARCR’S LIVES
5 καὶ λαγαροὶ φανέντες. ὁe μέντοι θαυμάσας τοῦa
Καπιτωλίου τὴν πολυτέλ,ε ιαν, εἰ μίαν εἶδεν ἐν
οἰ> κίfᾳ Δομετιανοῦ a στοὰν\ ἢxX βασιλικὴν\ ἢA βαλα-
vela ov Aἢ παλλακίδ, ων δί» αιταν, οἷeόr ν ἐ> στι TO\ λεγό-,
μενον ᾿Επιχάρμου πρὸς τὸΝν ἄ,σ ωτον,
Οὐ φιλάνθρωπος τύ y ἐσσ᾽" ἔχεις νόσον'
χαίρεις διδούς,
τοιοῦτον ἄν τι πρὸς Δομετιανὸν εἰπεῖν προήχθη"
“«“Οὐκὑ κ εὐεσὐσεεββὴὴςς οὐδὲ φιλότιμμο ς τύ Y γ᾽ ἐσσί: ἔχ xε ις
vooov' χαίρεις κατοικοδομῶν, ὥσπερ ὁ Midas
ἐκεῖνος, ἅπαντά σοι χρυσᾶ καὶ λίθινα βουλό-
μενος γίνεσθαι." ταῦτα μὲν οὖν περὶ τούτων.
XVI. ‘O "δὲ “Ῥαρκύνιος μετὰ τὴν μεγάλην
μάχην ἐν ἣ καὶ τὸν υἱὸν ἀπώλεσε μονομαχή-
σαντα Βρούτῳ, καταφυγὼν εἰς τὸ Κλούσιον
ἱκέτευσε Λάραν Πορσίναν, ἄνδρα καὶ δύναμιν
μεγίστην ἔχοντα τῶν ᾿ταλικῶν βασιλέων καὶ
οκοῦντα χρηστὸν εἶναι καὶὶ φιλότιμον" 08 ὑπέ-
σχετο βοηθήσειν. καὶ πρῶτον μὲν ἔπεμψεν εἰς
Ῥώμην κελεύων δέχεσθαι τὸν Ταρκύνιον' ὡς δ᾽
οὐ ὑπήκουσαν. οἱ “Ῥωμαῖοι, καταγγείλας αὐτοῖς
πόλεμον καὶ χρόνον ἐν ᾧ καὶ τόπον εἰς ὃν ἔμελλεν
2 ἐμβαλεῖν, ἀφίκετο μετὰ πολλῆς δυνάμεως. IIo-
πλικόλας δ᾽ ἠρέθη μὲν ἀπὼν ὕπατος τὸ δεύτερον,
καὶ σὺν αὐτῷ Τίτος Λουκρήτιος" ἐπανελθὼν δὲ
εἰς Ρώμην καὶ βουλόμενος τῷ φρονήματι, πρῶτον
ὑπερβαλέσθαι τὸν Πορσίναν, ἔκτιζε, πόλιν Σι-
γλιουρίαν ἤδη πλησίον ὄντος αὐτοῦ. καὶ τει-
χίσας μεγάλοις ἀναλώμασιν ἑπτακοσίους ἐποι-
542
PUBLICOLA, xv. 5—xv1. 2
and they now look too slender and thin. However,
if anyone who is amazed at the costliness of the
Capitol had seen a single colonnade in the palace
of Domitian, or a basilica, or a bath, or the apart-
ments for his concubines, then, as Epicharmus says
to the spendthrift,
*°Tis not beneficent thou art; thou art diseased;
thy mania is to give,”
so he would have been moved to say to Domitian:
“Tis not pious, nor nobly ambitious that thou art ;
thou art diseased; thy mania is to build; like the
famous Midas, thou desirest that every thing become
gold and stone at thy touch.” So much, then, on
this head.
XVI. But to return to Tarquin, after the great
battle in which he lost his son in a duel with Brutus,
he fled for refuge to Clusium, and became a suppliant
of Lars Porsena, the most powerful king in Italy,
who was thought also to be aman of worth and noble
ambitions. He promised Tarquin his aid and assist-
ance. So in the first place he sent to Rome and
ordered them to receive Tarquin as their king. Then
when the Romans refused, he declared war upon
them, proclaimed the time and place of his attack,
and marched thither with a great force.!_ Publicola
was chosen consul for the second time, in his absence,
and Titus Lucretius as his colleague. Returning,
therefore, to Rome, and wishing, in the first place, to
surpass Porsena in the loftiness of his spirit, he built
the city of Sigliuria, although his adversary was al-
ready near at hand. After he had fortified it at great
expense, he sent to it a colony of seven hundred
1 Cf. Livy, ii. 9.
543
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κοὺς ἀπέστειλεν, ὡς ῥᾳδίως φέρων καὶ ἀδεῶς τὸν
πόλεμον. οὐ μὴν ἀλλὰ προσβολῆς ὀξείας τῷ
τείχει γενομένης ἐξεώσθησαν οἱ φύλακες ὑπὸ
τοῦ ΠΠορσίνα, καὶ φεύγοντες ὀλίγου συνεπεσπά-
σαντο τοὺς πολεμίους εἰς τὴν πόλιν. ἔφθη δὲ
πρὸ τῶν πυλῶν ἐκβοηθήσας ὁ Ποπλικόλας, καὶ
μάχην συνάψας παρὰ τὸν ποταμὸν ἀντεῖχε πλή-
θει βιαζομένοις τοῖς πολεμίοις, ἄχρι οὗ τραύμασι
νεανικοῖς περιπεσὼν ἀπεκομίσθη φοράδην ἐκ τῆς
μάχης. τὸ δ᾽ αὐτὸ καὶ Λουκρητίου τοῦ συνάρ-
χοντος αὐτῷ παθόντος ἀθυμία τοῖς Ῥωμαίοις
ἐνέπεσε, καὶ φυγῇ πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ἔσωζον ἑἑ αυ-
τούς. ὠθουμένων δὲ τῶν πολεμίων διὰ τῆς ξυλί-
νῆς γεφύρας ἐκινδύνευσεν ἡ Ῥώμη κατὰ κράτος
ἁλῶναι. πρῶτος δὲ Κόκλιος ‘Opatios καὶ σὺν
αὐτῷ δύο TOV ἐπιφανεστάτων ἀνδρῶν, “Eppivtos
Kal 'Λάρκιος, ἀντέστησαν περὶ τὴν ξυλίνην γέφυ-
ραν. ὁ δ᾽ ODp arvos τὸν Κόκλιον ἐἐ πωνύμιον ἔσχεν
ἐν πολέμῳ τῶν ὀμμάτων θάτερον ἐκκοπ είς" ὡς
δ᾽ ἔνιοι “λέγουσι, διὰ σιμότητα τῆς ῥινὸς ἐνδεδυ-
κυίας ὥστε μηδὲν εἶναι τὸ διορίζον τὰ ὄμματα
καὶ τὰς ὀφρῦς συγκεχύσθαι, Κύκλωπα βουλό-
μενοι καλεῖν αὐτὸν οἱ πολλοὶ τῆς γλώττης OAL-
σθαινούσης ἐκράτησεν ὑπὸ πλήθους Κόκλιον κα-
λεῖσθαι. οὗτος ἑστὼς πρὸ τῆς γεφύρας ἠμύνετο
τοὺς πολεμίους, ἄχρι οὗ διέκοψαν οἱ σὺν αὐτῷ
κατόπιν τὴν γέφυραν. οὕτω δὲ μετὰ τῶν ὅπλων
ἀφεὶς ἑαυτὸν εἰς τὸν ποταμὸν ἀπενήξατο, καὶ
προσέμιξε τῇ πέραν ὄχθῃ δόρατι Ῥυρρηνικῷ
βεβλημένος τὸν γλουτόν. ὁ δὲ Ποπλικόλας τὴν
ἀρετὴν θαυμάσας αὐτίκα μὲν εἰσηγήσατο 'Ῥω- 106
544
PUBLICOLA, xvi. 2-7
men, indicating that he had no concern or fear
about the war. However, a sharp assault was made
upon its wall by Porsena, and its garrison was driven
out. They fled to Rome, where the pursuing enemy
almost followed them into the city. But Publicola
promptly sallied out to their aid in front of the gate,
joined battle by the river side with the enemy, who
pressed on in great numbers, and held out against
them until he was desperately wounded and carried
bodily out of the battle. The same fate overtook
Lucretius, his colleague, also, so that dismay fell upon
the Romans, and they fled for safety towards the
city. But as the enemy were forcing their way onto
the wooden bridge, Rome was in danger of being
taken by storm. MHoratius Cocles,! however, first,
and with him two of the most illustrious men of the
city, Herminius and Lartius, defended the wooden
bridge against them. Horatius had been given his
surname of Cocles because he had lost one of his
eyes in the wars. Some, however, say that his nose
was flat and sunken, so that there was nothing to
separate his eyes, and his eye-brows ran together, and
that for this reason the multitude wished to call him
Cyclops, but by a slip of the tongue the name of
Cocles became generally prevalent instead. This
Cocles, standing at the head of the bridge, kept the
enemy back until his companions had cut the bridge
in two behind him. Then, all accoutred as he was,
he plunged into the river and swam across to the
other side, in spite of a wound in the buttocks from
a Tuscan spear. Publicola, out of admiration for his
valour, proposed that every Roman should at once
1 The exploit of Horatius is much more dramatically
narrated by Livy (ii. 10).
545
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μαίους ἅπαντας, ὅσην ἕκαστος ἐν ἡμέρᾳ τροφὴν
ἀνήλισκε, δοῦναι συνεισενεγκόντας, ἔπειτα τῆς
χώρας ἣν αὐτὸς περιαρόσειεν ἐν ἡμέρᾳ. πρὸς
δὲ τούτοις εἰκόνα χαλκῆν ἔστησαν αὐτῷ! ἐν τῷ
ἱερῷ τοῦ Ἡφαίστου, τὴν γενομένην ἐκ τοῦ τραύ-
ματος τῷ ἀνδρὶ χωλότητα μετὰ τιμῆς παρηγο-
ροῦντες.
XVII. ᾿Επικειμένου δὲ Πορσίνα τῇ πόλει καὶ
λιμὸς ἥπτετο τῶν “Ῥωμαίων, καὶ Τυρρηνῶν ἕἕτ ερος
στρατὸς αὐτὸς καθ᾽ αὑτὸν εἰς τὴν χώραν ἐνέβαλε.
Ποπλικόλας δὲ τὸ τρίτον ὑπατεύων Πορσίνᾳ
μὲν κἀτρεμῶν καὶ φυλάττων τὴν πόλιν @ETO δεῖν
ἀντέχειν, τοῖς δὲ Tuppnvois ἐπεξῆλθε καὶ συμβα-
λὼν ἐτρέψατο καὶ πεντακισχιλίους αὐτῶν ἀνεῖλε.
Τὸ δὲ περὶ Μούκιον εἴρηται μὲν ὑπὸ πολλῶν
καὶ διαφόρως, λεκτέον δὲ 7 μάλιστα πιστεύεται
καὶ ἡμῖν. ἦν ἀνὴρ εἰς πᾶσαν ἀρετὴν ἀγαθός, ἐν
δὲ τοῖς πολεμικοῖς ἄριστος" ἐπιβουλεύων δὲ τὸν
Πορσίναν ἀνελεῖν παρεισῆλθεν εἰς τὸ στρατό-
πεδον Τυρρηνίδα φορῶν ἐσθῆτα kab φωνῇ χρώ-
μενος ὁμοία. περιελθὼν δὲ τὸ βῆμα τοῦ βασι-
λέως καθεζομένου, καὶ σαφῶς μὲν αὐτὸν οὐκ
εἰδώς, ἐρέσθαι δὲ περὶ αὐτοῦ δεδιώς, ὃν ὠήθη
μάλιστα τῶν συγκαθεζομένων ἐκεῖνον εἶναι σπα-
σάμενος τὸ ξίφος ἀπέκτεινεν. ἐπὶ τούτῳ δὲ
συλληφθεὶς ἀνεκρίνετο"' καί τινος ἐσχαρίδος πῦρ
ἐχούσης μέλλοντι τῷ Πορσίνᾳ θύειν κεκομισμέ-
νης, ὑπερσχὼν τὴν δεξιὰν χεῖρα καιομένης τῆς
σαρκὸς εἱστήκει πρὸς τὸν Πορσίναν ἀποβλέπων
ἰταμῷ καὶ ἀτρέπτῳ τῷ προσώπῳ, μέχρι οὗ θαυ-
-----.ἕ
1 αὐτῷ bracketed in Sintenis? because of the hiatus
following.
546
PUBLICOLA, xvi. 7-xvil. 3
contribute for him as much provision as each con-
sumed in a day, and that afterwards he should be
given as much land as he could plough round in a
day. Besides this, they set up a bronze statue of
him in the temple of Vulcan, to console him with
honour for the lameness consequent upon his wound.
XVII. While Porsena was closely investing the
city, a famine afflicted the Romans,! and another
Tuscan army on its own account invaded their terri-
tory. Publicola, who was now consul for the third
time, thought that Porsena must be met by a quiet
and watchful resistance within the city; but he
sallied out upon the other Tuscan army, engaged it,
routed it, and slew five thousand of them.
The story of Mucius has been often and variously
told, but I must give it as it seems most credible to
me.2 He was a man endowed with every virtue, but
most excellent in war. Designing to kill Porsena,
he stole into his camp, wearing a Tuscan habit, and
using a speech to correspond. After walking around
the tribunal where the king was sitting with others,
not knowing him certainly, and fearing to inquire
about him, he drew his sword and slew that one of
the group whom he thought most likely to be the
king. Upon this he was seized, and was being
questioned, when a sort of pan containing live coals
was brought to Porsena, who was about to offer
sacrifice. Mucius held his right hand over the
flames and, while the flesh was burning, stood
looking at Porsena with a bold and _ steadfast
countenance, until the king was overcome with
ACP. Livy, i 121.
2 Plutarch’s version is far less coherent and dramatic
than Livy’s (1i. 12).
547
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μάσας ἀφῆaκ εν αὐτὸ\ν καὶ τὸ ξί, φος ἀποδιδοὺςἉ
ὥ”ρ εξεν ἀ’ πὸ \ τοῦa βήμ/ ατος" ὁe δὲδὲ τὴ\ν εὐWmώ: νυμον
προτείν/ ας ἐ7δ έξατο. καὶ Ν διὰΝ τοῦlaτ) ό , φασιν αὐb)τ ῷa
γενέσθαι τὸΝν Σκαιό/λ αν ἐ» πί,κ λησιν, ὅ“ περ ἐ> στὶ \
Λαιόν. ἔφη δὲ τὸν φό᾿β ον τοῦa Ilopci,v a νενι-
κηκὼς ἡττᾶaσn θαι τῆaς ἀρετῆςa , Kal \ χάριτι μηνύειν
ἃὰ πρὸςNeh ἀνάArγey κην οὐCoκat Aaἂ ν ἐlp) ξηγόρ, ευσε. “ἐς Τριακόσ, ιοι
γὰΝρ « Ῥωμαίων, ," 33.9 ἔΝΟ φη, ce “τ\ὴ ν αὐBτEὴN ν ἐ> μοὶ \ γνώΓμΑ ην
ἔχοντες ἐν τῷ στρατοπέδ/ ῳ σου πλανῶνa ται καιρὸν
ἐ5 πιτηροῦνa τες: ἐIγNὼ δὲ\ κλή,ρ ῳ λαχὼ\ν Kal \ Tpo-
επιχειρήἍσ ας οὐ>κ ἄYχd θομαι τῇa τύ/χ ῃ, διαμαρτὼν
ἀνδρὸς ἀγαθοῦl al καὶ φί/λ ου μᾶa λλον ἢ πολεμίου
«ςΡ ωμαίοις εἶ4 ναι πρέπ/ οντος. 9 ταῦθay᾽y ὁς ορσίν,α ς
ἀ3 κού΄σ ας ἐSπELίF στευσε Kal \ πρὸςN τὰ\ς διαλύσ΄ εις ἥeeδ ιον
ἔσχεν, οὐ τοσοῦτa ό,U d μοι δοκεῖ,- φό/ βῳ THaY τριακο-
σί7ω] ν, ὅ«“ σον ἀ᾽ γασθεὶς\ καὶ \ θαυμάσiL ας τὸ\ φρό/ν ημα
Kal τὴNν ἀρετὴ\ν τῶAν ¢ Ῥωμαίω, ν.
Τοῦaτ ον toΝv ἄνδρα ΜούκVAι ον ὁ= μοῦA τι πάντων
καὶ Σκαιόλαν καλούν/ των ᾿Αθηνόδωρος ὁ Savdwvos
ἐ>ν τῷn πρὸς\ 3 ᾿Οκταουΐoαf. ν τὴ\ν Καίσ/ αρος ἀ> δελφὴ\ν
καὶ eed ᾿Οψίύ, γονον ὠνομάσθαι φησίν/ .
XVIII. ς “O μέντοι Ποπλικόλας αὐτός, οὐχ οὕτω
πολέμ/ ιον ὄv ντα τὸἋνς Ilopci/v ay βαρὺν\ ἡ6 γούμ7 ενος
ὡς ἄYξd ιον πολλοῦa n τῇA πόλ, ει φίλον γενέσθαι καὶ
σύ7μ μαχον, οὐκ ἔΨ φευγεν ἐ>π a᾽t i αὐτοῦl al δίκῃ κριθῆnνa αι
πρὸς\ ΤαρκύνΥι ον, ἀ>λ λ᾽ > ἐb]θ άρ/ ρει καὶ \ προὐκ᾽ αλεῖτn ο
548
PUBLICOLA, xvit. 3—xviu. 1
admiration and released him, and handed him back his
sword, reaching it down to him from the tribunal.
Mucius stretched out his left hand and took it (on
which account, they say, he received the surname of
Scaevola, which means Left-handed). Then he said
that although he had conquered the fear which
Porsena inspired, he was vanquished by the nobility
which he displayed, and would reveal out of gratitude
what he would not have disclosed under compulsion.
“ Three hundred Romans, then,” said he, “ with the
same resolution as mine, are now prowling about in
thy camp and watching their opportunity. I was
chosen by lot to make the first attempt upon thee,
and I am not distressed at what has happened, so
noble is the man whom I failed to kill, and so worthy
to be a friend rather than an enemy of the Romans.”
On hearing this, Porsena believed it to be true, and
felt more inclined to come to terms, not so much,
I suppose, through fear of the three hundred, as out
of wondering admiration for the lofty spirit and
bravery of the Romans.}
All other writers agree in giving this Mucius the
surname of Scaevola, but Athenodorus, the son of
Sandon, in his book addressed to Octavia, the sister
of Augustus Caesar, says that his surname was Pos-
tumus.
XVIII. Publicola himself, moreover, thinking that
Porsena would be more valuable as a friend and ally
of the city than he was dangerous as its enemy, did
not shrink from making the king an arbitrator in his
dispute with Tarquin,! but often boldly challenged
1 According to Livy (ii. 13, 1-5), Porsena was so terrified
by the disclosures of Mucius, that he made propositions of
peace to the Romans.
549
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
πολλάκ»»ι ς ὡς ἐξελέ, γξων κάκιστον ἀνδρῶAν καὶ
δικαίως ἀφαιρεθέντα τὴν ἀρχήν. ἀποκριναμένου
δὲ tova Ταρκυνίο, υ τραχύτερον, οὐδέ,ν α ποιεῖa σθαι
δικαστήν, ἥκιστα δὲ Llopcivav, εἰ σύμμαχος
ὼἋ ν μεταβάλfeλ εται, δυσχεράν/ ας καὶ \ KATAYVOUS\ O«
Πορσίνας, ἅμα δὲ τοῦa παιδὸς\ ” “Appovtos δεομένου
καὶ Ν σπουδάζ/ οντος ὑe πὲἊρΝ τῶLaνl] € “Ρωμαίω, ν, κατελύ-lA
σατο τὸΝν πόiλf εμον ἐξισταμένΨ οις ἧς ἀ᾿ πετέμοντο
τῆaς Tuppnvidos χώρ, ας καὶ τοὺς\ αἰχμαλώτους
ἀποπέμπουσι, κομιζομένοις δὲ τοὺς αὐτομόλους.
ἐπὶ τούτοις ὁμήρους ἔδωκαν ἐξ εὐπατριδῶν περι-
πορφύρους δέκα καὶ παρθένἐςο υς τοσαύτUAα ς, ὧν
ἣν καὶ Ποπλικόλα θυγάτηρ Οὐαλλερίαl4.
XIX. ἸΙραττομέ,ν ων δὲ τούτων τοῦa τε ἸΤορσί,ν α
πᾶaσ αν ἤδη τὴν πολεμικὴν\ AVELKOTOS παρασκευὴν
διὰ πίστιν, αἱ παρθένοι τῶ“ν ς Ῥωμαίων κατῆaλ θον
ἐ> πὶ \ λουτρὸνΝ ἔ4 νθα δὴ\ μηνοειδής/ τις ὄ5 χθη περι-
βάλλουσα τὸν ποταμὸν\ ἡσυχία᾽ὔ ν μάλιστα καὶ
γαλήνην τοῦf al κύματος παρεῖχὉ εν. ὡς δ᾽> οὔτε
τινὰ\ φυλακὴν\ E(aede wpwv οὔ”τ ε παριόν, τας ἄ” λλως ἢἋ
διαπλέοντας, ὁ« ρμὴν ἔσχον ἀπονήξασθαι πρὸς\
ῥεῦμα πολὺ καὶ δίνας βαθείας. ἔνιοι δέ φασι
μίαν αὐτῶνn , ὄνομα Κλοιλίαifν , ἵππῳ διεξελάσαι
τὸν πόρον, ἐγκελευομένην ταῖς ἄλλαις νεούσαις
καὶ παραθαρρύνουσαν. ἐπεὶ δὲ σωθεῖaσ αι πρὸς\
τὸΝν ΠοπλικόλΥ͂ αν ἧ= κον, οὐ᾽κ ἐΨ θαύ,μὔ ασεν οὐδ20᾽. ἠ> γά-’,
πησεν, abyd r ’ ἡ?ἠ νιά/ θη, ὅὉ τι ἸΙορσί,ν α κακίlωd ν ἐ>ν
πίστει φανεῖτa αι, καὶ τὸ\ τόλμημα τῶ“-ν παρθένων
55°
PUBLICOLA, xvi. 1-x1x. 2
Tarquin to do so, confident of proving that he was
the basest of men and justly deprived of his king-
dom. And when Tarquin gave him a rough answer,
saying that he would make no man his judge, least
of all Porsena, seeing that he was swerving from
his alliance with him, Porsena was displeased and per-
ceived the weakness of his cause. His son Aruns
also pleaded earnestly with him in behalf of the
Romans. Consequently, he put an end to his war
against them, on condition that they gave up the
territory of Tuscany which they had taken, sent
back their prisoners of war, and received back their
deserters. In confirmation of these conditions, the
Romans gave as hostages ten young men from their
noblest families, and as many maidens, of whom
Valeria, a daughter of Publicola, was one.
XIX. After these stipulations had been carried
out, and when Porsena had already remitted all his
warlike preparations through his confidence in the
treaty, these Roman maidens went down to the river
to bathe, at a place where the curving bank formed
a bay and kept the water especially still and free
from waves. As they saw no guard near, nor any
one else passing by or crossing the stream, they
were seized with a desire to swim away, notwith-
standing the depth and whirl of the strong current.
And some say that one of them, named Cloelia,
crossed the stream on horseback, exhorting and
encouraging the rest as they swam. But when they
were come in safety to Publicola, he bestowed no
admiration or affection upon them, but was distressed
because he would be thought less true to his word
than Porsena, and because the daring exploit of the
maidens would be called a base fraud on the part of
Joe
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
αἰSτyίl αν ἕὉ ξει κακού’ρ γημα « Ῥωμαίω’ ν γεγονέν(2α ι.
διὸ\ συλλαβὼν\ αὐ᾽τ ὰςx πάλ/ ιν ἀ᾽ πέσ, τειλε πρὸς\ TOxV
Πορσίναν. ταῦaτ α δ᾽ οἱ περὶ \ τὸ\ν Γαρκύν/ ιον προ-
αἰσθόμενοι, καὶ καθί/σ αντες ἐνέ/ δραν τοῖaς ἄγουσι
τὰς παῖδa ας, ἐν τῷA περᾶlνal ἐπέ/θ εντο πλείο» νες ὄντες.
ἐbdκ εί΄ νων δὲ\ ὅ4 μως ἀ5 μυνομέν/ ων, ἡ€ ἸΠοπλικό/λ α
θυγά/τ ηρ Οὐα᾽ λλερία, διὰ\ μέ4σ ων ὁe ρμή/σ ασα τῶalν
μαχομένων ἀπέφυγε, καὶ τρεῖrςf τινες οἰκέ/τ αι
συνδιεκπεσόν/ τες ἔ” σωζον αὐ>τ ήν/. τῶaν δ᾽᾽ ἄ» λλων
οὐκ ἀκινδύνως ἀναμεμιγμέν/ ων τοῖaς μαχομένοi ις,
αἰ’ θό/μ ενος ” “Appwy ὁe Ilopot/v a υἱeὸv ς ὀ’ ξέ/ω ς mpoce-
βοήθησε, καὶ φυγῆaςn γενομένης τῶaνl πολεμίω/ ν
περιεποίη/ σε τοὺς\ € Ρωμαίο/υ ς.
‘Os δὲ Ta\s παρθένους κομισθεί/σ ας ὁς ἸΤορσίν, ας
εἶδε, τὴ\ν καταρξαμέν/ ην τῆnς πράξεως καὶ Tapa-
κελευσαμέν7 ην ταῖaς ἄBAλ λαις ἐ5 ζήτ΄ ει. ἀ> κού7σ ας δὲ\
τὸ ὄνομα τῆaς Κλοιλίας προσέβλεψεν αὐτὴν ἵΛ λεῳ
καὶ φαιδρῷ τῷ προσώπῳ, καὶ κελεύσας ἵππον
ἀχθῆναι τῶν βασιλικῶν κεκοσμημένον εὐπρεπῶς
ἐδωρήσατο. τοῦτο ποιοῦνται μαρτύριον οἱ μόνην
τὴν Κλοιλίαν λέγοντες ἵππῳ διεξελάσαι τὸν
ποταμόν/. οἱ e 6 > ov” φασιν, ἀ’ λλὰ \ τιμῆanσ αι TO\
ἀ> νδρῶaδn ες αὐ3τ ῆςA τὸ\ν Τυρρηνόν΄. ἀ’ νάκ, ειται δὲ\ τὴ\ν
ἱ€ ερὰ\ν ὁCδQ\ὸ ν πορευομέν/ο ις εἰ>ς Παλάτ/ι ον ἀ2 νδριὰ\ς
αὐτῆnς ἔφιππος, ὅν τινες οὐ τῆaς Κλοιλία[ς , ἀλλὰ
τῆς Οὐαλλερίας εἶναι λέγουσιν.
«ςΟ δὲ Πορσίν/ ας διαλλαγεὶς τοῖaς € “Ρωμαίοtd ις
592
PUBLICOLA, xix. 2-5
the Romans. He seized them, therefore, and sent
them back again to Porsena. But Tarquin and his
men got timely intelligence of this, set an ambush
for the convoy of the maidens, and attacked them in
superior numbers as they passed along. The party
attacked defended themselves, nevertheless, and
Valeria, the daughter of Publicola, darted through
the combatants and fled, and with the help of three
attendants who broke through the crowd with her,
made good her escape. The rest of the maidens
were mingled with the combatants and in peril of
their lives. But Aruns, the son of Porsena, learning
of the affair, came with all speed to their assistance,
put their enemies to flight, and rescued the
Romans.
When Porsena saw the maidens thus brought
back, he asked for the one who had begun the
enterprise and encouraged the rest in it. And when
he heard Cloelia named as the one, he looked upon
her with a gracious and beaming countenance, and
ordering one of the royal horses to be brought, all
fittingly caparisoned, he made her a present of it.
Those who say that Cloelia, and Cloelia alone, crossed
the river on horseback, produce this fact in evidence.
Others dispute the inference, and say that the
Tuscan merely honoured in this way the maiden’s
courage. But an equestrian statue of her stands by
the Via Sacra, as you go to the Palatine, though
some say it represents not Cloelia, but Valeria.!
Porsena, thus reconciled with the Romans, gave
1 According to Livy, who gives a very different version
of the Cloelia episode (ii. 13, 6-11), the maidens were
incited by the example of Mucius to their display of courage,
in memory of which the Romans erected at the top of the
Via Sacra an equestrian statue, ‘‘ virgo insidens equo.”
553
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἄλλην τε ἑαυτοῦ πολλὴν μεγαλοφροσύνην ἐπε-
δείξατο τῇ πόλει, καὶ τὰ ὅπλα τοὺς Τυρρηνοὺς
ἀναλαβεῖν κελεύσας, ἄλλο δὲ μηδέν, ἀλλ᾽ ἐκλεί-
πειν τὸν χάρακα σίτου τε πολλοῦ καὶ χρημάτων
γέμοντα παντοδαπῶν, παρέδωκε τοῖς “Ῥωμαίοις.
διὸ καὶ καθ᾽ ἡμᾶς ἔτι πωλοῦντες τὰ δημόσια
πρῶτα κηρύττουσι τὰ Πορσίνα χρήματα, ie
TO ἀνδρὶ τῆς χάριτος ἀΐδιον ἐν τῇ μνήμῃ
φυλάττοντες. εἱστήκει δὲ καὶ χαλκοῦς ἀνδριὰς
αὐτοῦ παρὰ τὸ βουλευτήριον, ἁπλοῦς καὶ ἀρ-
χαϊκὸς τῇ ἐργασίᾳ.
XX. Mera δὲ ταῦτα Σαβίνων ἐμβαλόντων
εἰς τὴν χώραν ὕπατος μὲν ἀπεδείχθη Μάρκος
Οὐαλλέριος, ἀδελφὸς ἸΠοπλικόλα, καὶ Ποστού-
pos Τούβερτος. ἹΠραττομένων δὲ τῶν μεγίστων
γνώμῃ καὶ παρουσίᾳ Ποπλικόλα δυσὶ μάχαις
μεγάλαις ὁ Μάρκος ἐνίκησεν, ὧν ἐν TH δευτέρᾳ
μηδένα Ῥωμαίων ἀποβαλὼν τρισχιλίους ἐπὶ
μυρίοις τῶν πολεμίων ἀνεῖλε. καὶ γέρας ἔσχεν
ἐπὶ τοῖς θριάμβοις οἰκίαν αὐτῷ γενέσθαι δημοσίοις
ἀναλώμασιν ἐν Παλατίῳ. τῶν Ἢ ἄλλων τότε
θυρῶν εἴσω τῆς οἰκίας εἰς τὸ κλεισίον ἀνοιγο-
μένων, ἐκείνης μόνης τῆς οἰκίας ἐποίησαν ἐκτὸς
ἀπάγεσθαι τὴν αὔλειον, ὡς δὴ κατὰ τὸ συγχώ-
ρημα τῆς τιμῆς ἀεὶ τοῦ δημοσίου προσεπι-
λαμβάνοι.
Τὰς δ᾽ “Ελληνικὰς πρότερον οὕτως ἔχειν ἁπάσας
λέγουσιν, ἀπὸ τῶν κωμῳδιῶν λαμβάνοντες, ὅτι
κόπτουσι καὶ ψοφοῦσι τὰς αὑτῶν θύρας ἔνδοθεν
οἱ προϊέναι μέλλοντες, ὅπως αἴσθησις ἔξω γένοιτο
τοῖς παρερχομένοις ἢ προεστῶσι καὶ μὴ κατα-
554
PUBLICOLA, xix. 5-xx. 3
the city many proofs of his magnanimity. In
particular, he ordered his Tuscan soldiers, when they
evacuated their camp, to take with them their arms
only, and nothing else, leaving it full of abundant
provisions and all sorts of valuables, which he turned
over to the Romans. ‘Therefore it is that down to
this very day, when there is a sale of public property,
Porsena’s goods are cried first, and thus the man’s
kindness is honoured with perpetual remembrance.
Moreover, a bronze statue of him used to stand near
the senate-house, of simple and archaic work-
manship.?
XX. After this, when the Sabines invaded the
Roman territory, Marcus Valerius, a brother of
Publicola, was made consul, and with him Postumius
Tubertus. Inasmuch as the most important steps
were taken with the advice and assistance of
Publicola, Marcus was victorious in two great battles,
and in the second of them, without losing a single
Roman, slew thirteen thousand of the enemy.?
Besides his triumphs, he also obtained the honour of
a house built for him at the public charge on the
Palatine. And whereas the doors of other houses at
that time opened inwards into the vestibule, they
made the outer door of his house, and of his alone,
to open outwards, in order that by this concession
he might be constantly partaking of public honour.
They say that all Greek doors used to open
outwards in this way, and the conclusion is drawn
from their comedies, where those who are about to
go out of a house beat noisily on the inside of their
own doors, in order that persons passing by or
standing in front of them may hear, and not be
2 Ci. Livy, ii. 14, 1-4. 2. CE bivy, 16,167, 1.
555
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
λαμβάν,ο ιντο προϊἀορύ, σαις ταῖaς κλεισιάσιν εἰς τὸν
στενωπόν.
XXI. ΤῷA δ᾽᾽ ἑξῆa ς ἔτει πάλιν ὑπάτευε ἸΤ]οπλι-
κό/λ ας TO\ τέUAτ αρτον: ἣτὰν δὲ\ προσδοκία/ πολέμ/ ου
Σαβίν/ ων καὶ Λατίνων συνισταμένων. καί τις
ἅμα δεισιδαιμονία, τῆaς πόλεως ἥψατο' πᾶAσ αι yap
αἱ κυοῦσαι τότε γυναῖκες ἐξέβαλλον ἀνάπηρα,
καὶ \ τέ/λ ος οὐ5δ0 εμία, γέΑν εσις ἔ” σχεν. ὅ“ θεν ἐ2κ τῶlaν) 108
Σιβυλλείω/ ν ὁ Ποπλικόλ£ ας ἱλασάμενος τῷa “7 Aton
καί τινας ἀγῶνας πυθοχρήστους ἀναλαβὼν καὶ
ταῖaς ἐλπίσ7 ι πρὸς TO\ θεῖa ον ἡδί/ο να καταστήσας
τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν, ἤδη τοῖaς ἀπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων φοβεροῖςa
προσεῖχA ε. μεγάλη ya\p ἐφαίFνi ετο κατασκευὴ \ τῶnν
πολεμίων καὶ σύστασις.
3Ἦ: ν οὖiν ’ Λππιος Κrλ αῦσan ος ἐν Σαβίνοις, ἀνὴἉ ρ
χρήμασί fe τε δυνατὸς\ Kal σώματος ῥώ,μ ῃ πρὸς\
ἀλκὴν ἐπιφανής, ἀρετῆaς δὲ δό, ξῃ μάλιστα καὶ
λόiγy ου δεινό/ τητι πρωτεύω/ ν. ἃὃ δὲ\ πᾶAσ ι συμβαίν4ε ι
τοῖaς μεγάλοις ov διέφυγε παθεῖν“-,“ ἀλλ᾽ ? ἐφθονεῖτan ο"
καὶ τοῖς φθονοῦσιν αἰτίων παρέσχε καταπαύων
τὸΝν πό/λ εμον αὔ7ξ ειν τὰ\ ς Ῥωμαίω/ ν, ἐ2 πὶ \ τυραννίδ/ ι
καὶ \ δουλώσ7, ει τῆnς πατρίδ/ ος. αἰ2 σθόμ/ ενος δὲ\ τοὺς\
λό΄γ ους τού4τ ους βουλομένif. ῳ THla l πλήθ/ ει λεγομέν/ ους,
καὶ προσκρούο΄ ντα τοῖaς πολεμοποιοῖςA καὶ \ oT pa-
τιωτικοῖςa ἑαυτόν, ἐφοβεῖaτ ο τὴ\ν κρίσιν. ἑταιρείαν
δὲ\ καὶ \ δύ,ν αμιν φί, λων καὶ x οἰ2 κεί/ω ν ἔ» χων ἀ> μύ-id
556
ςὁἘa. (ΣᾧΚΞ ΚΞ.ΒΡ-΄ο..... ...
PUBLICOLA, xx. 2-χχι. 3
taken by surprise when the doors open out into the
street.
XXI. In the following year Publicola was consul]
again, for the fourth time, when there was expec-
tation of a war with the Sabines and Latins com-
bined.! At the same time also a sort of superstitious
terror seized upon the city because all the women
who were pregnant were delivered of imperfect
offspring, and ali births were premature. Wherefore,
by direction of the Sibylline books, Publicola made
propitiatory sacrifices to Pluto, and renewed certain
games that had been recommended by Apollo, and
after he had thus made the city more cheerful in its
hopes and expectations from the gods, he turned
his attention to what it feared from men. For their
enemies were plainly making great preparations and
a powerful league against them.
Now there was among the Sabines one Appius
Clausus,? a man whose wealth made him powerful,
as his personal prowess made him illustrious, but
who was most eminent for his lofty character and
for his great eloquence. He could not, however,
escape the fate of all great men, but was an object
of jealous hate, and when he tried to stop the war,
those who hated him charged him with trying to
increase the power of Rome, with a view to making
himself tyrant and master of his own country.
Perceiving that the multitude gave a ready ear to
these stories, and that he himself was obnoxious to
the war party and the military, he feared the issue,
but with a large and powerful coterie of friends and
1 Livy gives a very brief account of this war (ii. 16, 2-6).
2 Attius Clausus among the Sabines, Appius Claudius
among the Romans, according to Livy, ii, 16, 4.
VOL. 1. τ vol
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
νουσαν περὶ αὑτὸν ἐστασίαζε. καὶ τοῦτ᾽ ἦν τοῦ
πολέμου διατριβὴ καὶ μέλλησις τοῖς Σαβίνοις.
Ταῦτ᾽ οὖν ὁ ἸΠοπλικύόλας οὐ μόνον εἰδέναι
ποιούμενος ἔργον, ἀλλὰ καὶ κινεῖν καὶ συνεξ-
ορμᾶν τὴν στάσιν, εἶχεν ἄνδρας ἐπιτηδείους οἱ
τῷ Κλαύσῳ διελέγοντο παρ᾽ αὐτοῦ τοιαῦτα, ὡς
ὁ Πυπλικόλας ἄνδρα σε χρηστὸν ὄντα καὶ δίκαιον
οὐδενὶ κακῷ δεῖν οἴεται τοὺς σεαυτοῦ πολίτας
ἀμύνεσθαι, καίπερ ἀδικούμενον: εἰ δὲ βούλοιο
σώζων ἑαυτὸν μεταστῆναι καὶ φυγεῖν τοὺς μι-
σοῦντας, ὑποδέξεταί σε δημοσίᾳ καὶ ἰδίᾳ τῆς τε
σῆς ἀρετῆς ἀξίως καὶ τῆς “Ῥωμαίων λαμπρότητος.
ταῦτα πολλάκις ἀνασκοποῦντι τῷ Κλαύσῳ βέλ-
τίστα τῶν ἀναγκαίων ἐφαίνετο, καὶ τοὺς φίλους
συμπαρακαλῶν, ἐκείνων τε πολλοὺς ὁμοίως
συναναπειθόντων, πεντακισχιλίους οἴκους ἀνα-
στήσας μετὰ παίδων καὶ γυναικῶν, ὅπερ ἣν ἐν
Σαβίνοις ἀθόρυβον μάλιστα καὶ βίου πράου καὶ
καθεστῶτος οἰκεῖον, εἰς “Ῥώμην ἦγε, προειδότος
τοῦ Ποπλικόλα καὶ δεχομένου φιλοφρόνως καὶ
προθύμως ἐπὶ πᾶσι δικαίοις. τοὺς μὲν yap
οἴκους εὐθὺς ἀνέμιξε τῷ πολιτεύματι, καὶ χώραν
ἀπένειμεν ἑκάστῳ δυεῖν πλέθρων περὶ τὸν ᾿Ανί-
wva ποταμόν, τῷ δὲ Κλαύσῳ πλέθρα πέντε καὶ
εἴκοσι γῆς ἔδωκεν, αὐτὸν δὲ τῇ βουλῇ προσέ-
γραψεν, ἀρχὴν πολιτείας λαμβάνοντα ταύτην,
ἡ χρώμενος ἐμφρόνως ἀνέδραμεν εἰς τὸ πρῶτον
ἀξίωμα καὶ δύναμιν ἔσχε μεγάλην, καὶ γένος
οὐδενὸς ἁἀμαυρότερον ἐν Ῥώμῃ τὸ Κλαυδίων ἀφ᾽
αὑτοῦ κατέλιπε.
XXII. Τὰ δὲ Σαβίνων οὕτω διακριθέντα τῷ
558
PUBLICOLA, xxi. 3-xx. 1
kinsmen to defend him, continued his opposition.
This made the Sabines put off and delay the war.
Publicola, accordingly, making it his business not
only to know about these matters, but also to foment
and promote the faction, kept some of his followers
employed in bringing to Clausus from him such
messages as this: ‘ Publicola thinks thee too worthy
and just a man to inflict any evil upon thy fellow
citizens in self-defence, even though thou art
wronged by them. But if thou wishest, for thine
own safety, to change thine allegiance and flee from
those who hate thee, he will receive thee with public
and private honours which are worthy of thine own
excellence and the splendour of Rome.”’ On repeated
consideration of the matter, this course seemed to
Clausus the best that was open to him ; he therefore
summoned his friends, who in like manner persuaded
many more, to join him, and taking five thousand
families from their homes, wives and children in-
cluded, the most peaceful folk among the Sabines, of
gentle and sedate lives, he led them to Rome.
Publicola knew beforehand of their coming, and
gave them an eager and a kindly welcome, admitting
them to all rights and privileges. For he at once
incorporated the families in the Roman state, and
gave each one two acres of land on the river Anio.
To Clausus, however, he gave twenty-five acres of
land, and enrolled him among the senators. This
was the beginning of a political power which he used
so wisely that he mounted to the highest dignity and
acquired great influence. The Claudian family, which
is descended from him, is no less illustrious than any
in Rome.
XXII. Though the schism among the Sabines was
VOL. I. T2 999
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μετοικισμῷ τῶν ἀνδρῶν, οὐκ εἴασαν οἱ δημαγω-
γοῦντες ἀτρεμῆσαν καὶ καταστῆναι, σχετλιά-
ζοντες εἰ Κλαῦσος ἃ παρὼν οὐκ ἔπεισε διαπρά-
ἕεται φυγὰς γενόμενος καὶ πολέμιος, μὴ δοῦναι
δίκην Ῥωμαίους ὧν ὑβρίζουσιν. ἄραντες οὖν
στρατῷ μεγάλῳ περὶ Φιδήνας κατηυλίσαντο, καί
τινα λόχον θέμενοι πρὸ τῆς Ῥώμης ἐν χωρίοις
συνηρεφέσι καὶ κοίλοις δισχιλίους ὁπλίτας, ἔμελ-
λον ἅμ᾽ ἡμέρᾳ φανερῶς ὀλίγοις ἱππεῦσι λείαν EXav-
νειν. εἴρητο δ᾽ αὐτοῖς, ὅταν τῇ πόλει “προσελά-
σωσιν, ὑποφεύγειν ἕὃ ως ἐμβάλωσιν εἰς τὴν ἐνέδραν
τοὺς πολεμίους" ταῦθ᾽ ὁ Ποπλικόλας αὐθημερὸν
πυθόμενος παρ᾽ αὐτομόλων ταχὺ διηρμόσατο πρὸς
πάντα καὶ διένειμε τὴν δύναμιν. Ποστούμιος
μὲν “γὰρ Βάλβος ὁ γαμβρὸς αὐτοῦ τρισχιλίοις
ὁπλίταις ἑσπέρας ETL προελ ov καὶ κατα-
λαβὼν τοὺς ἀκρολόφους, ὑφ᾽ οἷς ἐνήδρευον οἱ
Σαβῖνοι, παρεφύλαττεν" ὁ δὲ “συνάρχων Λου-
κρήτιος ἔχων τὸ κουφότατον ἐν τῇ πόλει καὶ
γενναιότατον ἐτάχθη τοῖς ἐλαύνουσι τὴν λείαν
ἱππεῦσιν ἐπιχειρεῖν, αὐτὸς δὲ τὴν ἄλλην ἀνα-
λαβὼν στρατιὰν κύκλῳ περιῆλθε τοὺς πολεμίους.
καὶ κατὰ τύχην ὁμίχλης βαθείας ἐπιπεσούσης,
περὶ ὄρθρον ἅμα Ποστούμιός. τε τοὺς ἐνεδρεύ- 109
οντας ἐμβοήσας ἔβαλεν ἀπὸ τῶν ἄκρων, καὶ τοῖς
προϊππασαμένοις ἐφῆκε τοὺς περὶ αὑτὸν ὁ Λου-
κρήτιος, καὶ Ποπλικόλας προσέβαλε τοῖς oT pato-
πέδοις τῶν πολεμίων. πάντη μὲν οὖν ἐκακοῦτο
τὰ Σαβίνων καὶ διεφθείρετο: τοὺς δ᾽ ἐνταῦθα μηδ᾽
ἀμυνομένους, ἀλλὰ φεύγοντας, εὐθὺς ἔκτεινον οἱ
“Ῥωμαῖοι, τῆς ἐλπίδος αὐτοῖς ὀλεθριωτάτης γενο-
560
PUBLICOLA, xxi. 1-4
thus removed by the emigration of these men, their
popular leaders would not suffer them to settle
down into quiet, but complained bitterly that
Clausus, by becoming an exile and an enemy, should
bring to pass what he could not effect by his per-
suasions at home, namely, that Rome pay no penalty
for her outrages. Setting out, therefore, with a large
army, they encamped near Fidenae, and placed two
thousand men-at-arms in ambush just outside of
Rome in wooded hollows. Their intention was that
a few of their horsemen, as soon as it was day,
should boldly ravage the country. But these had
been ordered, whenever they approached the city
and were attacked, to retire gradually until they had
drawn the enemy into the ambuscade. That very
day Publicola learned of this plan from deserters,
and took measures accordingly, dividing up his
forces. Postumius Balbus, his son-in-law, while it
was yet evening, went out with three thousand men-
at-arms, occupied the hills under which the Sabines
were lying in ambush, and kept the enemy under
observation; Lucretius, his colleague, retaining in
the city the lightest armed and most impetuous
troops, was ordered to attack the enemy’s horsemen
as they ravaged the country; he himself took the
rest of the army and encircled the enemy in their
camp. Favoured by a heavy fog, at break of day
Postumius, with loud shouts, fell upon the ambuscade
from the heights, while Lucretius hurled his troops
upon the horsemen when they rode towards the city,
and Publicola attacked the camp of the enemy. At all
points, then, the Sabines were worsted and undone.
Wherever they were, they madc no defence, but
fled, and the Romans straightway slew them. The
561
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
μέν4 ης. σώ,ζ εσθαι γὰ\ρ οἰ3ό.κ ᾿μ ενοι τοὺς\ ἑe τέ/ρ ους οἱ «
ἕτεροι τῷ μάχεσθαι καὶ μένειν οὐ προσεῖχον,
ἀλλ᾽ οἱ μὲν ἐκ τῶaν ἐρυμάτων πρὸς\ τοὺς\ ἐνεδρεύ-΄
οντας, οἱ δὲ πάλιν ὡς ἐκεί/ν ους εἰς τὸΝ στρατό-,
medov θέοντες ἐναντίοι φεύγουσιν ἐνέπιπτον πρὸςN
ods ἔφευγον καὶ βοηθείας δεομένοις ods ἤλπιζον
αὐ>τ οῖςa βοηθήσ/ε ιν. τὸ\ δὲ\ μὴ\ πάν‘bsτ ας ἀ> πολέσ/ θαι
Tous\ >Σ αβίνtAο υς, ἀ> λλὰ \ Kal \ περιγενέ/σ θθα ι τινὰ\ς ἡe
Φιδηνατῶaν πόλ/ ις ἐγγὺς οὖσα παρέσχε, Kal
μάλιστα τοῖAς ἐκ τῶaνn στρατοπέδ7 ων, ὅθ᾽ ἡλίtσe κετο,
διεκπίπτουσιν. ὅσοι δὲ Φιδηνῶν διήμαρτον διε-
φθάρησαν ἢ ζῶἴων τες ἀπήχθησαν ὑπὸ τῶrνn λαβόν/ των.
XXIII. Τοῦτο τὸ κατόρθωμα Ῥωμαῖοι, καίπερ
εἰ3 ωθότ/ ες ἅ[7 πασι τοῖnςan μεγάλΖ οις ἐ3 πιφημίζ/ε ιν TO\ δαι-
μόνye ιον, ἑνὸ\ς ἔργον ἡγοῦaν το τοῦl al στρατηγοῦ “ γεγο-
νέναι. καὶ τῶν μεμαχημένων πρῶτον ἣν ἀκούειν
ὅτε χωλοὺς καὶ τυφλοὺς αὐτοῖς καὶ μόνον οὐ
καθείρξας τοὺς πολεμίους Ἰ]Ποπλικόλας παρέδωκε
χρῆσθαι τοῖς ξίφεσιν. ἐρρώσθη δὲ καὶ χρήμασιν
ὁ δῆμος ἐκ τῶν λαφύρων καὶ τῶν αἰχμαλώτων.
€ O δὲ Ποπλικόλας to,v te θρίαμβον ἀγαγὼν
καὶ τοῖς μετ᾽ αὐτὸν ἀποδειχθεῖσιν ὑπάτοις παρα-
δοὺ\ς τὴ\ν πόλ/ ιν εὐ᾽ θὺ\ς ἐ2 τελεύ/τ ησεν, ὡςς ἐ2 φικτόν/
ἐστιν ἀνθρώποις μάλιστα τοῖς νενομισμένοις κα-
hotns καὶ \ ἀγαθοῖςa , τὸΝν ἑαυτοῦa βίον ἐκτελειώσας.
ὁ€ δὲΝ δῆa μος ὥΦ σπερ οὐ>δ ὲ\ν εἰ,ς ζῶanν τα τῶ-“ν ἀ9 ξί,ω ν
πεποιηκώς, ἀλλὰ \ πᾶlaσl αν ὀφείλων χάριν, ἐψηφί-
gato δημοσίᾳ ταφῆνn αι τὸ\ σῶlμa α, καὶ τεταρτη-
μόριον ἕκαστον ἐπὶ τιμῇ συνεισενεγκεῖν. αἱ δὲ
562
PUBLICOLA, xxi. 4—xxm. 3
very hopes they placed in one another proved most
fatal to them. For each party, supposing that the
other was safe, had no thought of holding their
ground and fighting, but those in the camp ran
towards those in the ambuscade, while these, on
their part, ran to those in the camp, so that fugitives
encountered fugitives, and found those needing
succour from whom they expected succour them-
selves. And all the Sabines would have perished,
had not the neighbouring city of Fidenae afforded a
refuge to some, especially to those who fled from the
camp when it was captured. All who did not gain
this city were either slain or brought back to Rome
as prisoners.
XXIII. This success the Romans, although they
were wont to attribute all such great events to the
influence of the gods, considered to be the work of
their general alone. And the first thing his soldiers
were heard to say was that Publicola had delivered
their enemies into their hands lame, blind, and all
but imprisoned, to be dispatched by their swords.
Great wealth also accrued to the people from the
spoils and prisoners.
But Publicola, immediately after celebrating his
triumph and handing the city over to the consuls
appointed to succeed him, died. So far as it can
possibly be achieved by men who are regarded as
honourable and good, he had brought his life to
perfection. The people, as if they had done nothing
to show their esteem for him while he was alive, but
owed him every homage, decreed that his body
should be buried at the public charge, and that
every man should contribute a quadrans towards the
honour, The women also, by private agreement
563
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γυναῖκες, ἰδίᾳ “πρὸς αὑτὰς συμφρονήσασαι, διεπέν-
θησαν ἐἐ νιαυτὸν ὅλον ἐπὶ τῷ ἀνδρὶ πένθος ἔντιμον
καὶ ζηλωτόν. ἐτάφη δὲ καὶ οὕτως τῶν πολιτῶν
ψηφισαμένων ἐντὸς ἄστεος παρὰ τὴν καλου-
μένην Οὐελίαν, ὥστε καὶ γένει παντὶ τῆς ταφῆς
μετεῖναι. νῦν δὲ θάπτεται μὲν οὐδεὶς τῶν ἀπὸ
γένους, κομίσαντες δὲ τὸν νεκρὸν ἐκεῖ κατατί-
θενται καὶ δᾷδά τις ἡμμένην λαβὼν ὅσον ὑπή-
νεγκεν, εἶτα ἀναιρεῖται, μαρτυρόμενος ἔργῳ τὸ
ἐξεῖναι, φείδεσθαι δὲ τῆς τιμῆς, καὶ τὸν νεκρὸν
οὕτως ἀποκομίζουσιν.
SOAQNOS ΚΑΙ ΠΟΠΛΙΚΟΛΑ SYTKPISIS
I. *Ap’ οὖν ἴδιόν τι περὶ ταύτην τὴν σύγκρισιν
ὑπάρχει καὶ μὴ πάνυ συμβεβηκὸς ἑτέρᾳ τῶν
ἀναγεγραμμένων, τὸν ἕτερον “γεγονέναι μιμητὴν
τοῦ ἑτέρου, τὸν ἕτερον δὲ μάρτυν; ὅρα γὰρ ἣν
ὁ Σόλων ἐξήνεγκε περὶ εὐδαιμονίας ἀπόφασιν
πρὸς Κροῖσον, ὡς Ποπλικόλᾳ μᾶλλον ἢ Τέλλῳ
προσήκει" Τέλλου μὲν γάρ, ὃν εἶπε «γεγονέναι
μακαριώτατον δι᾿ εὐποτμίαν καὶ ἀρετὴν καὶ εὐ-
τεκνίαν, οὔτ᾽ αὐτὸς ἐν τοῖς ποιήμασιν ὡς ἀνδρὸς
ἀγαθοῦ λόγον ἔσχεν οὔτε παῖδες οὔτ᾽ ἀρχή τις
εἰς δόξαν ἦλθεν' “Ποπλικόλας δὲ καὶ ζῶν ἐπρώ-
τευσε δυνάμει καὶ δόξῃ δι’ ἀρετὴν Ῥωμαίων, καὶ
1 “In the following year, Agrippa Menemus and Ῥ.
Postumius being consuls, P. Valerius, by universal consent
the foremost Roman in the arts of war and peace, died, in
the height of his glory, but so poor that means to defray his
564
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA, 1. 1-2
amongst themselves, mourned a whole year for him,
with a mourning which was honourable and enviable.}
He was buried, too, by express vote of the citizens,
within the city, near the so-called Velia,? and all his
family were to have privilege of burial there. Now,
however, none of the family is actually buried there,
but the body is carried thither and set down, and
some one takes a burning torch and holds it under
the bier for an instant, and then takes it away,
attesting by this act that the deceased has the right
of burial there, but relinquishes the honour. After
this the body is borne away.
COMPARISON OF SOLON AND PUBLICOLA
I. Tuere is, then, something peculiar in this
comparison, and something that has not been true
of any other thus far, namely, that the second
imitated the first, and the first bore witness for the
second. For it must be plain that the verdict concern-
ing happiness which Solon pronounced to Croesus, is
more applicable to Publicola than to Tellus. Tellus,
whom Solon pronounced the most blessed man he
knew, because of his fortunate lot, his virtue, and his
goodly offspring, was not celebrated in Solon’s poems
as a good man, nor did his children or any magistracy
of his achieve a reputation ; whereas Publicola, while
he lived, was foremost among the Romans in in-
funeral expenses were lacking. He was therefore buried at
the public charge, and the matrons mourned for him as they
had done for Brutus” (Livy, ii. 16, 7).
3 See chapter x. 2.
565
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
τεθνηκότ/ ος ἐν τοῖAς ἐπιφανεστάτοις γένεσι καὶ
στέμμασιν ἔτι καθ᾽ ἡμᾶaς Ἰ]Ποπλικό/λ αι καὶ Meo-
σάλαι καὶ Οὐαλλέριοι δι’? ἐτῶ“ ν ἑξακοσίων τῆAς
εὐbfγ ενεία» ς τὴ\ν δό, ξαν ἀb ναφέρ“ ουσι. καὶ \ Τέ,λ λος μὲ\ν
ὑπὸ τῶaν πολεμίων ws ἀνὴ\ ρ ἀγαθὸς ἐν τάξει
μέLνarωs ν καὶ \ μαχόμ/ ενος κατέ,σ τρεψε: Ἰ]οπλικό,λ ας
δὲ τοὺς μὲν πολεμίους κτείνας, ὃ τοῦ πεσεῖν
εὐτυχέστερόνUl ἐστι, τὴν δὲ πατρίδα νικῶlalσ αν
ἐπιδὼν δι᾽ αὑτὸν ἄ7ρ χοντα καὶ στρατηγοῦνfal τα,
τιμηθεὶς δὲ καὶ θριαμβεύσας ἔτυχε τῆς ζηλου-
μένης ὑπὸ Σόλωνος καὶ μακαριξομένης τελευτῆς.
ἔτι τοίνυν οἷς πρὸς Μίμνερμον ἀντειπὼν περὶ
χρόνου ζωῆς ἐπιπεφώνηκε,
Μηδέ μοι ἄκλαυστος θάνατος μόλοι, ἀλλὰ
φίλοισι
ποιή/σ αιμι θανὼ\ν ἄA λγεα Kal \ στοναχάς/,
εὐδαίμονα τὸΝν ΠοπλικόλA αν ἄνδρα ποιεῖ,A τελευ- 110
τή/σ ας ya\p ov> φί,λ οις οὐδbw᾽) οἰ2 κείο/ ις μόνid ον, ἀ» λλὰ ἊΝ THA
πόλει πάσῃ, μυριάσι πολλαῖς, δάκρυα καὶ πόθον
καὶ κατήφειαν ἐφ᾽ αὑτῷ παρέσχεν' αἱ γὰρ Ῥω-
μαίων γυναῖκες ἐπένθησαν αὐτὸν ὥσπερ υἱὸν ἢ
ἀδελφὸν ἢἢ πατέρα κοινὸν ἀποβαλοῦσαι. “Χρή-
ματα δ᾽ ἱμείρω μὲν ἔχειν, ᾿φησὶν ὁ Σόλων, "“ ἀδί,ὔκ ως
δὲ πεπᾶσθαι οὐκ ἐθέλω, ὡς δίκης ἐπιούσης"
Ποπλικόλ/ ᾳ δ᾽7 ὑπῆAρ χεν ov μόνον μὴ κακῶς
πλουτεῖν, ἀλλὰ καὶ καλῶς ἀναλίσκειν εὖ ποιοῦντι
τοὺς δεομένους. ὥστ᾽ εἰ σοφώτατος ἁπάντων ὁ
Σόλων, εὐ> δαιμονέ,σ τατος eὁ Ποπλικόλ/ ας. ἃἃ ya\p
εὔ5 ξατο τῶaν ἀγαθῶνa ἐκεῖa νος ὡς μέ7γ ιστα καὶ
566
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA, τ. 2-5
fluence and repute for virtue, and since his death the
most illustrious family lines of our own day, like the
Publicolae, the Messalae, and the Valerii, have for
six hundred years ascribed the glory of their noble
birth to him. Tellus, moreover, though he kept his
post and fought like a brave man, died at the hands
of his enemies ; whereas Publicola slew his enemies,
which is a better fortune than to be slain by them,
saw his country victorious through his efforts as
consul and general, and enjoyed honours and triumphs
before he came to the end which Solon pronounced
so enviable and blest. Still further, what Solon says
to Mimnermus,! in arguing with him on the proper
duration of human life,
“ May not an unlamented death be mine, but unto
friends
Let me be cause, when dead, for sorrow and for
sighing,”
argues Publicola a happy man. For when he died,
his loss filled not only friends and kindred, but
the entire city, numbering many tens of thousands,
with weeping and yearning and sorrow. For the
women of Rome mourned for him as though they
had lost a son, or a brother, or a common father.
“‘ Wealth I desire to have,” says Solon, “ but wrong-
fully to get it, I do not wish,” ? believing that
punishment would follow. And Publicola’s wealth
was not only not ill got, but also nobly spent in
benefactions to the needy. So that if Solon was
the wisest, Publicola was the most happy of men,
since what Solon prayed for as the greatest and
1 Fragment 21 (Bergk). 2 See Solon, ii. 3.
567
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
κάλλιστα, ταῦτα Kal κτήσασθαι ἸΤοπλικόλᾳ Kal
φυλάξ, αι χρωμέν/ ῳ μέ/χ ρι τέ,λ ους ὑς πῆρfol ξεν.
II. Οὕ¢τ ω μὲν ὁ Σόλων κεκό4 σμηκε τὸν Ποπλι-
κό’λ αν, ToAv Σό/λ ωνα δ᾽> αὖ> πάλ7]ι ν ἐ9 κεῖ-ν ος ἐ9ν THA
πολιτείᾳ/ παραδειγμάτ/ ων κά4λ λιστον ἀ’ νδρὶ\ κο-
σμοῦντι δημοκρατίαν θέμενος" τῆς μὲν γὰρ ἀρχῆς
τὸν ὄγκον ἀφελὼν εὐμενῆ πᾶσι καὶ ἄλυπον κατ-
ἔ, στησε, νόμοις δὲ πολλοῖςa ἐχρήσατο τῶaν ἐκείνου.
καὶ γὰρ ἀρχόντων καταστάσεως κυρίους ἐποίησε
TOUS\ πολλούς΄, Kal Ν τοῖ“ς φεύAγ ουσι δί/ κην ἐ>’π ικαλεῖ-a
σθαι τὸΝν δῆrnμ ον, ὥefσ περ ὁ« Σό‘λ ων τοὺ\ς δικαστάςif,
ἔΜ δωκε. καὶ Ἁ βουλὴ\ν μὲ\ν ἑe τέ/ρ αν οὐ>κ ἐ> ποί4η σεν,
ὥefσ περ ὁe Σό,λ ων, τὴἉν δ᾽᾽ οὖ@ σαν ηὔ” ξησεν ἀ> ριθμῷA
μικροῦ διπλασιάσας. ἥ τε τῶν ταμιῶν ἐπὶ τοῖς
χρήμασι κατάστασις ἐκεῖθεν ἦλθεν, ὅπως ὁ
ἄρχων μήτ᾽ εἰ χρηστός, ἐστιν ἀσχολία4 ν ἔχῃ πρὸς
τὰο ὗ μεί’ξ ω, μήτἊ᾽ν εἰ᾽ φαῦaλ ος ἀ» φορμὰς\ τοῦa ἀ>δ ικεῖ-ν“
μᾶλλον, καὶ τῶν πράξεων καὶ τῶν χρημάτων
κύριος γενόἢμ ενος. τὸ\ δὲ\ μισοτύραννον ἐν τῷa
Ποπλικόλ, ᾳ σφοδρότ[ε| ρον. εἰ? γά/ρ τις ἐ2 πιχειροίη’
τυραννεῖνA , eὁ μὲ\ν ἁe λόν, τι τὴἉν δίκην ἐ5 πιτί/θ ησιν, ὁ€
δὲ καὶ πρὸ τῆς κρίσεως ἀνελεῖν δίδωσι. σεμνυ-
νομέῇν ου δδὲὲ TOVa sΣ ό/λ ωνος ὀ2 ρθθῶ ςa Kal \ ὃ δικαίΑ ως ὅ“ τι Kal \
τῶν πραγμάτων αὐτῷ διδόντων τυραννεῖν καὶ τῶν
πολιτῶν οὐκ ἀκουσίως δεχομένων ἀπεῖπεν, οὐχ
ἧττον ὑπάρχει καλὸν τῷA Ποπλικόλᾳ τὸ λαβόν, τα
τυραννικὴν ἀρχὴν ποιῆaσ αι δημοτικωτέρ/ αν καὶ
μηδ᾽ οἷς ἐξῆa ν ἔχοντα χρήσ/ ασθαι. καὶ \ τοῦaτ ο ὃ >
568
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA, 1. 5-n. 3
fairest of blessings, these Publicola was privileged to
win and continue to enjoy until the end.
II. Thus did Solon enhance the fame of Publicola.
And Publicola, too, in his political activities, enhanced
the fame of Solon, by making him the fairest of
examples for one who was arranging a democracy.
For he took away the arrogant powers of the consul-
ship and made it gracious and acceptable to all, and
he adopted many of Solon’s laws. For instance, he
put the appointment of their rulers in the power of
the people, and gave defendants the right of ap-
pealing to the people, as Solon to the jurors. He
did not, indeed, create a new senate, as Solon did,
but he increased the one already existing to almost
double its numbers. And his appointment of
quaestors over the public moneys had a like origin.
Its purpose was that the consul, if a worthy officer,
might not be without leisure for his more important
duties, and, if unworthy, might not have greater
opportunities for injustice by having both the ad-
ministration and the treasury in his hands. Hatred
of tyranny was more intense in Publicola than in
Solon. For in case any one attempted to usurp the
power, by Solon’s law he could be punished only
after conviction, whereas Publicola made it lawful to
kill him before any trial. Moreover, though Solon
rightly and justly plumes himself on rejecting
absolute power even when circumstances offered
it to him and his fellow-citizens were willing that he
should take it, it redounds no less to the honour of
Publicola that, when he had received a tyrannical
power, he made it more democratic, and did not use
even the prerogatives which were his by right of
possession. And of the wisdom of such a course
569
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ἔοικε συνιδεῖν πρότερος ὁ Σόλων, ὅτι δῆμος
ὧΦδΟ᾽ ἂἃ ν ἄ4 ριστα σὺ\ν ἡς γεμόν, εσσιν ἕ“ ποιτο,
μήτε λί/η ν ἀΣ νεθεὶς\ μήτ/ ε πιεζόμ, ενος.
III. Ἴδιον δὲ τοῦ Σόλωνος ἡ τῶν χρεῶν ἄνεσις, ἡ
μάλιστα τὴν ἐλευθερίαν ἐβεβαίωσε τοῖς πολίταις.
οὐδὲν yap ὄby φελος νό/ μων ἰσότητα παρεχόντων,
ἣA ν ἀ> φαιρεῖaτ αι τὰ\ χρεα, TOU\S πέν/ ητας" ἀ? λλ 2 ὅekὃ ποι'
μάλιστα χρῆσθαι τῇ ἐλευθερίᾳ δοκοῦσι, δου-
λεύουσι μάλιστα τοῖς πλουσίοις, ἐν τῷ δικάζειν
καὶ ἄρχειν καὶ λέγειν ἐπιταττόμενοι καὶ ὑπηρε-
τοῦντες. τούτου δὲ μεῖζον, ὅτε πάσῃ χρεῶν ἀπο-
κοπῇ στάσεως ἑπομένης, ἐκείνῃ μόνη, καθάπερ
φαρμάκ, ῳ παραβόλ/ ῳ μέν, ἰσχυρῷA δὲ χρησάμενος
εὐκαίρως, καὶ τὴν οὖσαν στάσιν ἔλυσε, τῇ περὶ
αὐ3τ ὸνΝ ἀ᾽ ρετῇa καὶ \ δό/ ξῃ τῆ»“ς τοῦi a) πράγ, ματος ἀ᾽ δοξίfα ς
καὶ διαβολῆaςA περιγενόμ“ ενος.
Τῆaς δ᾽ ὅe λης πολιτείας THa μὲxν ἀρχῇA λαμπρό-,
TEPOS ὁe Σό/λ ων' ἡ6 γή/σ ατο γὰ\ρ Kal \ οὐ᾽κ ἠ’ κολούθAη)σ ε,
καὶ \ καθ᾽ > αὑeτ όν, , ov᾽ pel’ δύ ἑὁ τέ/ρ ων, ἔ»Μ πραξε τὰ\ πλεῖaσ τα
καὶ μέγιστα τῶν κοινῶν: τῷ τέλει δὲ ἅτερος
εὐτυχὴς καὶ ζηλωτός. τὴν μὲν γὰΝρ Σό,λ ωνος
πολιτείαν αὐτὸς ἐπεῖδε Σόλων καταλυθεῖσαν, ἡ
δὲ Ποπλικόλα μέχρι τῶν ἐμφυλίων πολέμων
διεφύ/λ αξεν ἐ9ν κό/ σμῳ τὴ\ν πολUdι ν; ὁι ν μὲ\ν γὰ\ρ ἅ“ μα
τῷa θέ,σ θαι τοὺς\ νόῇ μους ἀ> πολιπὼν\ ἐ3ν ξύ΄λ οις Kal \
579
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA, πὶ. 3-111. 3
Solon seems to have been conscious even before
Publicola, when he says? that a people
“then will yield the best obedience to its
cuides
When it is neither humoured nor oppressed too
much.”
III. Peculiar to Solon was his remission of debts,
and by this means especially he confirmed the
liberties of the citizens. For equality under the
laws is of no avail if the poor are robbed of it by
their debts. Nay, in the very places where they are
supposed to exercise their liberties most, there they
are most in subjection to the rich, since in the courts
of justice, the offices of state, and in public debates,
they are under their orders and do them service.
And what is of greater moment here, though
sedition always follows an abolition of debts, in
this case alone, by employing opportunely, as it
were, a dangerous but powerful medicine, Solon
actually put an end to the sedition that was already
rife, for his own virtue and high repute prevailed
over the ill-repute and odium of the measure.
As regards their political careers in general,
Solon’s was more brilliant in the beginning. For
he led the way and followed no man, and it was
alone and without colleagues that he effected the
most and greatest of his public measures. But in
the ending, the other was more fortunate and
enviable. For Solon lived to see with his own eyes
the dissolution of his polity, while that of Publicola
preserved order in the city down to the civil wars.
Solon, as soon as he had made his laws, left them
1 Fragment 6 (Bergk) ; cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xii. 2.
571
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
γράμμασιν ἐρήμους τοῦ βοηθοῦντος Byer’ ἀπιὼν
ἐκ τῶν ᾿Αθηνῶν, ὁ δὲ μένων καὶ ἄρχων καὶ
πολιτευόμενος “ἵ δρυσε καὶ Ν κατέ/σ τησεν εἰDςB ἀ᾽ σφαλὲςΝ
τὴ\ν πολιτεία/ ν. ἔ» τι δ᾽? ἐ> κείiyν ῳ μὲ\ν οὐ>δ ὲ\ μέ,λ λοντα
κωλῦσαι προαισθομένῳ Πεισίστρατον ὑπῆρξεν,
G>’A N ae ἡie ττήiθ? η συνισταμέν/ ης τῆaςA τυραννίδ/ ος" οὗ2 τος 11]
δὲX βασιλεία/ ν ἰ’ σχύ΄οὔ υσαν ἐ>κ πολλῶnνa χρό,ν ων ἤδ) δη
καὶ κρατοῦσαν ἐξέβαλε καὶ κατέλυσεν, ἀρετὴν
μὲν ἴσην καὶ προαίρεσιν ὁμοίαν παρασχόμενος,
τύχῃ δὲ καὶ δυνάμει τελεσιουργῷa πρὸς\ τὴNNν
ἀρετὴν χρησάμενος.
IV. Τῶν μέντοι πολεμικῶν Σόλωνι μὲν οὐδὲ τὰ
πρὸς- Μεγαρεῖςa AaiΕpἾ} ayos ὁ€ Ἰ᾿Ϊλαταιεὺς\ μεμαρ-
τύρηκεν, ὥσπερ ἡμεῖς διεληλύθαμεν: ἸΤοπλικόλας
δὲ τοὺς μεγίστους ἀγῶνας αὐτὸς καὶ μαχόμενος
καὶ στρατηγῶν κατώρθωσε. καὶ μὴν ἔτι πρὸς
τὰς πολιτικὰς\ πράξεις ὁ μὲν ἐν παιδιᾶaς τινι
τρόπῳ καὶ προσποίημα μανίας ἀναλαβών, ὑπὲρ
Σαλαμῖνος ἐρῶν προῆλθεν' ὁ δ᾽ αὐτόθεν ἀναρ-
ρίψας τὸν περὶ τῶν μεγίστων κίνδυνον ἐπανέστη
τε Ταρκυνίοις καὶ τὴν προδοσίαν ἐφώρασε" καὶ
τοῦ κολασθῆναι καὶ μὴ διαφυγεῖν τοὺς πονηροὺς
αἰτιώτατος γενόμενος οὐ τὰ σώματα μόνον τῶν
τυράννων ἐξέβαλε τῆς πόλεως, ἀλλὰ καὶ τὰς
ἐλπίδ/ ας ἐb]ξ έ/ κοψεν. οὕὉ“τ ω δὲ\ τοῖlςa) δεχομέν7 οις
πράγμασιν ἀγῶνα καὶ θυμὸν καὶ ἀντίταξιν
ἐρρωμένως καὶ ἀτενῶς ἀπαντήσας, ἔτι βέλτιον
ἐχρήσατο τοῖaς ὁ€ μιλία, ς ἀπολέμου Kal πειθοῦrςn
572
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA, πὶ. 3-1v. 2
inscribed on wooden tables and destitute of a
defender, and departed from Athens; whereas
Publicola, by remaining in the city, serving as
consul, and busying himself with public affairs.
firmly and safely established his form of government.
And further, though Solon knew beforehand of the
designs of Peisistratus, he was not able to hinder
them, but yielded to his tyranny in its incipiency;
whereas Publicola subverted and drove out a kingly
power which was strong with the might which many
ages bring. ‘Thus, while exhibiting virtues equal to
Solon’s, and a purpose identical with his, he enjoyed
a good fortune and an efficacious power which
supplemented his virtues.
IV. When we consider their military careers,
moreover, Daimachus of Plataea does not allow Solon
even the conduct of the war against the Megarians,
as we have described it ;1 but Publicola, fighting and
commanding in person, brought the greatest struggles
to a successful issue. And still further, comparing
their political activities, Solon, in play, so to speak,
and counterfeiting madness, went forth to plead for
the recovery of Salamis ; but Publicola, without any
subterfuges, ran the greatest risks, set himself in
opposition to the party of the Tarquins, and detected
their treachery. Then, after being mainly instru-
mental in the capture and punishment of the
traitors, he not only drove the tyrants themselves
from the city, but extirpated their very hopes of
return. And if he thus sturdily and _ resolutely
confronted situations which called for active and
spirited opposition, still better did he deal with those
which required peaceable intercourse and gentle
* Solon, viii. ; cf. Aristotle, Const. of Athens, xiv. 1.
573
PLUTARCH’S LIVES
ὑπεικούσης δεομένοις, Πορσίναν ἄμαχον ἄνδρα
καὶ “φοβερὸν ἐμμελῶς προσαγαγόμενος καὶ μετα-
στήσας εἰς φιλίαν.
Καίτοι φήσει τις ἐνταῦθα τὸν μὲν Σόλωνα
προεμένοις ἀναλαβεῖν ᾿Αθηναίοις Σαλαμῖνα, τὸν
δὲ Ποπλικόλαν ἧς ἐκέκτηντο Ῥωμαῖοι χώρας
ἀποστῆναι. δεῖ δὲ πρὸς τοὺς ὑποκειμένους
καιροὺς τὰς πράξεις θεωρεῖν. ποικίλος γὰρ ὧν
ὃ πολιτικὸς ᾧ τρόπῳ τῶν ὄντων ἕκαστον εὔλη-
πτόν ἐστι μεταχειρίσεται,, καὶ μέρους ἀφέσει
πολλάκις ἔσωσε τὸ πᾶν καὶ μικρῶν ἀποστὰς
μειζόνων ἔτυχεν, “ὥσπερ ἐκεῖνος. ὸ ἀνὴρ τότε τῆς
μὲν ἀλλοτρίας χώρας ἀποστὰς ἔσωσε τὴν ἑαυτοῦ
βεβαίως ἅπασαν, οἷς δ᾽ ἦν μέγα τὴν πόλιν
διαφυλάξαι προσεκτήσατο τὸ τῶν πολιορκούντων
στρατόπεδον, ἐπιτρέψας δὲ τῷ πολεμίῳ δικαστῇ
γενέσθαι, καὶ περιγενόμενος τῇ δίκῃ, προσέλαβεν
ὅσα δόντας ἀγαπητὸν ἣν νικῆσαι" καὶ γὰρ τὸν
πόλεμον διέλυσε καὶ τὴν παρασκευὴν τοῦ πολέ-
μον κατέλιπεν αὐτοῖς διὰ πίστιν ἀρετῆς καὶ
καλοκαγαθίας, ἣν ὁ ἄρχων ὑπὲρ ἁπάντων
ἐνεποίησεν αὐτῷ.
1 μεταχειρίσεται With two Paris MSS., Coraés, and Bekker:
μεταχειρίσασθαι,
574
SOLON AND PUBLICOLA, wv. 2-4
persuasion, as when he tactfully won over Porsena,
an invincible and formidable foe, and made him a
friend of Rome.
But here, perhaps, some one will say that Solon
won back Salamis for the Athenians when they had
given it up, whereas Publicola relinquished territory
which the Romans had acquired. But we must view
men’s actions in the light of the times which call
them forth. The subtle statesman will handle each
issue that arises in the most feasible manner, and
often saves the whole by relinquishing a part, and
by yielding small advantages secures greater ones.
And so Publicola, in that instance, by yielding the
territory which belonged to others, saved all that
was assuredly his own, and procured besides, for
those who were hard put to it to save their city, the
camp of their besiegers with all its stores. He made
his adversary judge in the controversy, won his case,
and received besides what his people would gladly
have given for the victory. For Porsena put a
stop to the war, and left the Romans all his
provisions for carrying it on, owing to the confidence
in their virtue and nobility with which their consul
had inspired him.
572
PGs, ἀν"
a 7 “Ἂν
pos ven2 AUDA UES YO1O2
“soomet neovecnow sli iiiadh ohare dias quocie ieiasg —
e idbbeo bas? 60) oldshiquiboost sldinawaiaas /
revere εἰὸ dy χὰ μι} iD ao figito basiit a
aglo® JedtigneHi.v ong,-qenpe, δανίsτroθ αtu e, Ὁ
bed yout coulyn anginal Arad apt vintalee, alosd. nour |
“ootiqas harleapciion slnitdud, amsosq u Jn ati
θῖν duce γε Jel 6 betty οὐ bad ensinosd oft sfoidw
“They bide δόμα}, to’ ᾿o il seit αἵ .gaoiios 5n om
κοι ἌΡΗΝ Tir taiwsi2 ὁ ἐμ: SAT dross
+ ha ἀρ δού ofa? adda SIF μι eSets Yad seat ἢ
"HA αὐξα! a eninge ed other ‘St Gover Gofto€« |
Taare tnSty” δ τυδθα θὲ αν θά Nene ΡΥ ὦ
μοι4 ἀπ [5 1 ya ssdment rank ἀν, sos gy ‘ee ΗΔ. a
τοῦ Nhe herds ator? Deenoisdvdoliiv ΠΟΘΙ.
aha psbiesd οἰχυιμοοπὸς bre jerwqucatd vitionwees enw
catty ktisetionldcotsmobtinet dog frechotsyp odserageds ©
vobanookk ovesiete pti Bin eis geieed. sod) te gyea,
ΘΠ, adsl MOR ay spvotidaoneds, niopbupypetaybe, gid
i xulbsly, δίμον, alqasq, aid οὐ ει γαz ohieed bovipgsy. bam y
κἄν dug, soseiod το, wiolotysd ) .19t novia evade
até Ala,c anamodl .o st. Dak. baste padded ote
soushinos si) of gaivro τὸ ti galeria 10h eaolziverq:
: fues05 “οί. Wold ye fiw tilidon baa’ sudtiv 15iF ob!
fade eth) ala αὐτὶ bosigaai bad
Waydiloera with hee Paris MAS. Comat, and ΒΡ ce
f > Kova b-i ns Ψ ἂ᾿ν
τ
Spire |
ς
- " ἵ a
Ry A teo n
᾿ ΠῚ
A PARTIAL DICTIONARY OF
PROPER NAMES
A Androtion, 443, active in the
political life of Athens from 376
Abantes, 11, a people of Euboea in to 346 B.c. In old age and exile
the Homeric period. he wrote an Aitthis, or History of
Adrastus, 67, king of Arges, and Attica, which was much read.
leader of the ‘‘Seven against Antias, Valerius, 131, 381, a Roman
Thebes.”’ historian who flourished in the
Acilius, Caius, 159, interpreter in earlier part of the first century
the Roman _ senate for the B.o. His history extended from
Athenian embassy of 155 B.o. the earliest times down to those
(Cato Major, xxii. 4), author of a of Sulla, and was much used by
history of Rome from the earliest both Livy and Plutarch.
to his own time. Antigonus, 141, probably the
Aeacus, 21, a mythical king of general of Alexander who was
Aegina, after death one of the afterwards king of Asia, surnamed
judges in Hades. the One-eyed.
Agnus, 27, an Attic township N.E. Antigonus, 143, author of a History
of Athens. of Itaiy, is Greek, probably in
Alba, 97, a very ancient town of the latter part of the third
Latium, on the Alban lake, some century B.C.
twelve miles S.E. of Rome. Antimachus, of Teos, 121, an early
Alcman, 291, a Lydian of Sardis, epic poet. Two poems of the
who came in his youth to Sparta, epic cycle, the Thebais, and the
and became the founder of Dorian Epigoni, went under his name.
lyric poetry. He flourished in Antisthenes the Socratic, 301, a
the latter half of the seventh pupil of Gorgias and friend of
century B.C. Socrates.
Alcmene, 17, wife of Amphitryon Aphidnae, 75, an ancient Attic
of Thebes, and mother of Heracles township, about fifteen wmoailes
by Zeus. N.W. of Athens.
Anacharsis, 415, a Scythian, who Apoilodorus, 205, a learned gram-
travelled extensively in pursuit marian of Athens in the latter
of knowiedge (Herod. iv. 76 f). part of the second century B.0O.
Anaximenes, the orator, 527, of A treatise of hison mythology, the
Lampsacus, a pupil of Diogenes Bibliotheca, has come down to us.
the Cynic, active at Athens as Apollothemis, 303, mentioned only
rhetorician and historian in the here.
latter half of the fourth century Archilochus, 11, 319, of Paros, one
B.C. of the earliest Ionian lyric poets,
Androgeos, 29, son of Minos the flourishing in 650 B.o.
king of Crete. Ardettus, 63, a hill in the S.E.
Andron of Halicarnassus, 57, a suburbs of Athens.
genealogical writer of the fourth Ariadne, 37, daughter of Minos and
century B.0. Pasiphaé, of Crete
577
DICTIONARY OF PROPER NAMES
Aristocrates, 217, 303, known only Chalcis, 63, the chief town of
as the author of an antiquarian Kuboea, on the straits of the
and historical work on Sparta, Euripus.
probably of the early Roman Chrysa, 63, apparently a district
imperial period. of Athens at the foot of the Pnyx
Aristomenes, 169, the Messenian hill; put there are no other
hero of the second war between allusions to it.
tis hig and Sparta (685-668 Cirrha, 429, a town on the Corin-
B.O.). thian gulf, serving as the sea-
Aristoxenus, 303, of Tarentum, a port of Delphi.
Greek writer on philosophy and Cleidemus, 39, 63, the oldest
music, a pupil of Aristotle annalist of Athens, circa 420-350
flourishing in 330 B.o. Parts of B.C.
his works on Harmony and Clodius, 307, a Roman chrono-
Rhythm have come down to us. grapher, otherwise unknown.
Athenodorus, son of Sandon, 549, Codrus, 405, the last king of Athens,
of Tarsus, a Stoic philosopher long who, according to _ tradition,
resident at Rome, and much sacrificed himself for his country.
esteemed by Augustus. Colchis, 67, a district on the eastern
shore of the Euxine sea.
Colias, Cape, 423, about three miles
B to the south-east of the ancient
harbour of Phalerum.
Bion, 59, of Proconnesus, 8 com- Creophylus, 215, one of the earliest
piler of mythical history, of epic poets of Greece, said to have
uncertain date, not earlier than been a native of Chios, and a
the fourth century Β.0. relative of Homer. The epic
Boédromion, the third month in the poem Oechalia was attributed to
Attic calendar, corresponding im.
nearly to our September. Crommyon, Crommyonia, 19, a
Brasidas, 283, the greatest Spartan village and district on the Isthmus
hero of the Peloponnesian war. of Corinth.
His death at Amphipolis is Cychreus, 21, a mythical king of
described by Thucydides in v. 10. Salamis, receiving hero worship.
Brauron, 429, an ancient city on Cycnus, 23, a mythical son of Ares,
the eastern coast of Attica. slain by Heracles in Thessaly.
Busiris, 23, a mythical Egyptian
king, who sacrificed all foreigners D
that entered his country.
Butas, 159, probably the freedman Daedalus, 39, the mythical “ cun-
of Cato the Younger (Plutarch, ning artificer’’ of Athens, who
Cato Minor, |xx.), known as a took refuge with king Minos of
writer only from this mention of Crete, for whom he built the
his work. Labyrinth. He was the father
of Icarus.
Cc Daimachus of Plataea, 573, a Greek
historian active in the latter part
Cameria, 167, an ancient city of of the fourth century Β.6., author
Latium, the site of which is of a work on India.
unknown. Deidameia, 69, wife of Peirithoiis,
Cephisus, 23, a river flowing through commonly called Hippodameia.
the plain west of Athens. Deinon, 37, 51, one of the annalists
Chaeroneia, 65, a town on the of Athens, contemporary with
northern confines of Boeotia. Philochorus (306-260 B.0O.).
578
DICTIONARY OF PROPER NAMES
Demades, 451, a prominent orator E
and statesman at Athens in the
times of Philip, Alexander, and Eleusis, 21, a city some twelve miles
Antipater; a member of the west of Athens, the seat of the
Macedonian party. celebrated mysteries.
Demetrius the Phalerean, 277, 467, Eleutherae, 69, a mountain fastness
regent at Athens for Cassander between Eleusis and Boeotia.
317-307 Β.6., a voluminous writer Epicharmus the comic poet, 335,
on history, politics, poetry, and 542, born on the island of Cos,
philosophy. about 540 B.O., but early taken
Dicaearchus, 45, a celebrated Peri- to Megara in Sicily, and from
patetic philosopher, a disciple of 484 to 450 B.O. one of the orna-
Aristotle and a friend of Theo- ments of the court of Hiero of
phrastus. Syracuse.
Didymus, 405, the celebrated Epidauria, 17, between Troezen,
Alexandrian grammarian, of the on the N.E. cost of Peloponnesus,
time of Augustus. and the Isthmus of Corinth.
Dieutychidas, 207, perhaps Dieu- Eratosthenes, 205, of Cyrene,
chidas is meant, a Megarian 276-196 B.C., alearned geographer
chropigler, of the fourth century and mathematician, for many
years librarian at Alexandria.
Dione of Peparethus, 97, 113, an Erechtheus, 39, a mythical king of
otherwise almost unknown Greek Athens.
writer, whom Plutarch regards Eurytus, 19, a mythical king of the
as a source for Fabius Pictor. Thessalian city of Oechalia.
Diodorus the Topographer (or Evander, 125, the reputed leader
Periegete), 85, was probably an of a colony from Arcadia into
Athenian, and flourished at and Italy, some sixty years before
after the time of Alexander the the Trojan war.
Great (330-300 B.c.). He wrote
a work on the townships of α
Attica, and one on its monu-
ments. Gabii, 103, one of the oldest cities
Diogenes, 301, probably Diogenes of Latium, about twelve miles
hth ee a d B ofa b ty hl e o Sn ti oa in c sci hs o olm e aa tn t A, t hent sh ,e eS a. rE l. i er of colR oo nm y e; f rom pro Ab la bb al y thaa nn
and one of the Athenian embassy Rome.
to Rome in 155 B.o. He wrote Gargettus, 27, an Attic township
Dioa n yt sr ie ua sti ,s e 45o 9n , tL ha ew s E. l der, tvrant of GymN n. oE s, opo hf i sA tth se ,n s. 217, the naked
Syracuse 405-367 Β.6. philosophers of India. See Plu-
Dionysius, 139, of Halicarnassus, tarch’s Alexander, lxiv.
went to Rome about 29 B.O.,
where he remained for twenty-
two years, collecting materials H
for his great work on the anti-
quities and history of Rome. Hecataeus the Sophist, 267, of
Dioscorides (or Dioscurides), 237, Abdera, a learned philosopher,
a pupil of Isocrates, writing in critic, and grammarian, contem-
the latter part of the fourth porary with the first Ptolemy
century B.O (324-283 B.C.).
Draco, 449, ‘one of the ‘‘ thes- Hecatombaeon, the first month of
mothetai,” or six legislative the Attic calendar, correspouding
archons at Athens, in 621 B.o. nearly to our July.
579
DICTIONARY OF PROPER NAMES
Hellanicus, 33, of Lesbos, the recounted his experiences with
greatest of the Greek chroniclers, famous men of the day.
480-395 (?) Β.σ. Ister, 79, of Cyrene, a Greek his-
Heracleides Ponticus, 405, 467, so torian flourishing between 250
called from his birth in Heracleia and 230 8.0.
of Pontus, a pupil of Plato and
Aristotle, and a learned and
voluminous writer on almost all J
possible subjects. Cicero thought
him superstitious and uncritical. Juba, 131, 331, 353, Juba ἘΠΕ king
Heracleitus, 183, of Ephesus, a of Mauritania. He lived from
philosopher of the ionian school, 50 B.c. to about 20 A.D., was
who flourished in the latter part educated at Rome, and became
of the sixth century B.C. a learned and voluminous writer.
Hereas the Megarian, 41, 77, 429, Among his works was a History
known only through Plutarch’s of Rome.
citations.
Hermippus, 279, 407, of Smyrna, a L
distinguished philosopher and
biographer, active in the second Lapithae, 67, a mountain tribe of
half of the third century B.C.
Herodorus, 59, of Heracleia in Thessaly.
Laurentum, 165, the ancient capital
ahP a no l dn f t u ws ao, sf ttf hhl eeo u ar ui s ts i hxh ote rhd ofi c n e a n nt t uh ere xy t el na B dt .t eCe . dr , Lavo sf i i x nL t iea uet mni , u m m, i 1l 6eo 3sn , St ah . ne W .s ae na o c- f i c eo R na o ts m t, e c. ia tb yo u ot f
work on the mythology and wor- Latium, about seventeen miles
Hips nph ai i tp a i vs e o f tH oh fe e ra Ec S ll o ie p ss h ,. i st a, n d 27 a7 , co3 n0 t9, e m-a LycS e. iW u. m , of 6R 3,o me in. historic times a
p loo gr ua er sy ofo f P laS to oc ra bt ee as r. hisT w no a me.d ia- Lynog cfy em A un t sa h ,es ni s 7u . 1m , si en e th Ie d ae sa .s tern suburbs
Hippocrates, 409, of Chios, a
Pythagorean philosopher, flourish-
ing in the middle of the fifth
century B.0., and chiefly famous M
as a mathematician.
Hippodameia, 17, daughter of Mantinea, 353, one of the most
Oenomaiis, and wife of Pelops. ancient and powerful towns in
Arcadia.
Melicertes, 57, a legendary per-
I sonage, son of Athamas and Ino
and, after his death by drowning,
Idas, 71, a Messenian hero, in- a beneficent sea deity.
separable from his brother, the Melité, 429, a deme, or ward, of the
keen-eyed Lynceus, with whom city of Athens, comprising the
he took part in the Argonautic hill-region west of the acropolis.
expedition and the Calydonian Menecrates, 59, otherwise unknown.
boar hunt. Metellus, Quintus, 117, probably
Ides, the fifteenth day of the the consul of 60 B.c. His father
Roman month (the thirteenth of had been consul in 93 Β.σ.
March, May, July, and October). Molpadia, 63, an Amazon who was
Ion of Chios, 41, a popular poet said to have slain Antiope. She
at Athens between 452 and 421 was herself slain by Theseus, and
B.c., also author of a prose work her tomb was shown at Athens
entitled “ Sojourns,”’ in which he (Pausanias, i. 2, 1).
580
DICTIONARY OF PROPER NAMES
Munychion, the tenth month of the Phalerum, 35, the ancient harbour
Attic calendar, corresponding of Athens, before Themistocles
nearly to our April. fortified Peiraeus.
Museum, 63, one of three hills to Phanias the Lesbian, 437, of Eresos,
the S.W. of the acropolis at the most distinguished pupil of
Athens, Aristotle after Theophrastus, a
prolific writer on philosophy and
N history, an historical romancer.
Pherecydes, 37, of Leros, one of the
Naxos, 41, the largest of the Cy- Greek logographers, who lived
clades islands, half way between at Athens, and died about 400
Attica and Asia Minor. B.C.
Nones, the ninth day of the Roman Philochorus, 29, 35, the most
month (the seventh of March, celebrated writer on the anti-
May, July, and October). quities of Athens, 306-260 B.c.
Philostephanus, 277, of Cyrene,
an Alexandrian historian and
O geographer, who was flourishing
in 250 B.0.
Oechalla, 19, see Eurytus. Phlya, 433, a township in the
Omphalé, 15, a mythical queen of eastern part of Attica.
Lydia. Pictor, Fabius, 97, 113, the earliest
Roman annalist, flourishing in
Ρ the latter part of the third
century B.C.
Paeon the Amathusian, 43, other- Plutus, 233, the god of wealth.
wise unknown. Pnyx, 61, that one of the three
Palladium, 63, a sacred precinct, hills to the S.W. of the acropolis
evidently near Ardettus, in the of Athens on which the people’s
S.E. suburbs of Athens. In assembly was held.
historical times the ‘‘ ephetai” Polyzelus the Rhodian, 447, an
sat here to try cases of involun- historian of uncertain date.
tary homicide. Promathion, 97, otherwise unknown.
Pallené, 27, an Attic township N.E. Pyanepsion, the fourth month of
of Athens. the Attic calendar, corresponding
Parrhasius, 11, a celebrated painter, ' nearly to our October.
a native of Ephesus, but resident
at Athens, flourishing in 400 B.c.
Pasiphaé, 37, wife of Minos, and R
mother of Ariadne and the
PatM ai en co ut sa ,u r. 4 19, otherwise unknown. Rhadamanthus, 33, a brother of
Peirithotis, 41, king of the Lapithae, Minos king of Crete, and like
a mountain tribe of Thessaly. him a judge in the under world.
Peisistratus, 41, became tyrant of
Athens in 560 B.o.
Peleus, 21, mythical king of the 8
Myrmidons of Thessaly, father
of Achilles. Samothrace, 353, a large island in
Pelops, 17, a mythical king of Elis the northern Aegean sea, about
in Peloponnesus, husband of forty miles south of the Thracian
Hippodameia. coast.
Periander, 413, tyrant of Corinth Scyros, 81, an island east of Euboea.
625-585 B.O., one of the Seven Selinus, 269, a Greek city on the
Wise Men. southern coast of Sicily.
581
DICTIONARY OF PROPER NAMES
Silanio, 11, a famous Athenian Thales (or Thaletas), 213, a Cretan
statuary in bronze, flourishing in musician and poet, who was
320 B.O. flourishing about 680 B.c.
Simonides, 21, 35, of Ceos, the Timaeus, 205, 303, of Tauromenium,
greatest lyric poet of Greece, a famous historian of Sicily,
556-467 B.C. 352-256 B.C.
Simylus the poet, 143, otherwise Timon the Phliasian, 333, a native
of Phlius in N.E. Peloponnesus,
Sosibius, 281, a distinguished composed satirical poems on
Lacedaemonian grammarian, earlier and current systems of
flourishing about 250 B.c. philosophy (320-230 B.c.).
Spendon the Spartan, 291, otherwise Trachis, 71, a city of Malis, com-
unknown. manding the approach to Ther-
Sphaerus, 221, a Stoic philosopher mopylae.
who lived at Alexandria and Troezen, 7, a city on the N.E. coast
Sparta, and flourished early in of Peloponnesus.
the third century B.o. Tyrtaeus, 225, a poet who flourished
Sphettus, 27, a township in the at Sparta during the second
eastern part of Attica. Messenian war (685-668 B.0.).
Stratonicus, 299, probably the
famous Athenian musician of the
time of Alexander the Great. Vv
Sulla, Sextius, the Carthaginian,
133, otherwise unknown. Valerias, 131, see Antias.
Varro, 121, M. Terentius, ‘‘ the
most learned of the Romans,”
oT an intimate friend of Cicero,
whose political principles he
Tegea, 73, an ancient city in shared (116-28 B.c.).
southern Arcadia. Veii, 169, an ancient and powerful
Telamon, 21, a mythical king of city of Etruria, about twelve
Salamis, son of Aeacus, father of miles north of Rome.
Aias. :
Termerus, 23, a mythical highway-
man slain by Heracles. Ζ
Terpander, 291, of Lesbos, father
of Greek music and lyric poetry, Zeno, 301, probably the Stoic
who taught at Sparta during the philosopher is meant, who taught
seventh century B.C. at Athens in the third century
Thales, 409, 411, 417, of Miletus, B.c., and wrote on law and
the most celebrated Ionian government.
philosopher, one of the Seven Zenodotus of Troezen, 131, referred
Wise Men, flourishing in the sixth to by Dionysius Hal. (ii. 49) as
century B.C. author of a history of Umbria.
Printed in Great Britain by Richard Clay (The Chaucer Press), Ltd.,
Bungay, Suffolk
ey εν 7 ν
way ,
i
ἣνἽ Ν "ταS itsT:s

THE LOEB CLASSICAL
LIBRARY
VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED
Latin Authors
AmmiANus MAREcLuINus. Translated by J.C. Rolfe. 3 Vols.
APULEIUS: THE GOLDEN Ass (METAMORPHOSES), W. Adling-
ton (1566). Revised by 8. Gaselee.
St. AuGusTINE: Ciry oF Gop. 7 Vols. Vol. 1. G. E,
McCracken. Vol. II. W.M. Green. Vol. IV. P. Levine.
Vol. V. E.M. Sanford and W. M. Green, Vol. VI. W.C.
Greene.
St. AUGUSTINE, CoNFrEssions OF. W. Watts (1631), 2 Vols.
St. AucusTINE, SELEcT Letters. J. H. Baxter.
Avusonius. Η. 6. Evelyn White. 2 Vols.
BrepE. J. E, King. 2 Vols.
Borruius: Tracts and DE CONSOLATIONE PHILOSOPHIAE.
Rev. H. F. Stewart and E, K. Rand.
pee ALEXANDRIAN, AFRICAN and SPANISH Wars. A, 6.
ay.
Carsar: Crvit Wars. A. G. Peskett.
CaEsAR: GatLic War. H. J. Edwards.
Cato: DE RE Rustica; Varro: DE RE Rustica. H. B. Ash
and W. D. Hooper.
Catutitus. Εἰ, W.Cornish; Tinuttus. J. B. Postgate; PEr-
VIGILIUM VENERIS. J. W. Mackail.
Crtsus: Dr Mepicina. W.G. Spencer. 3 Vols,
CicEro: Brutus, and Orator. G. L. Hendrickson and H. M.
Hubbell.
[CicERo]: AD Hrerennium. H. Caplan.
Cicrro: Dr ΟΒΑΤΟΒΕ, etc. 2 Vols. Vol. I. DE Ornatonre,
Books I. and II. E. W. Sutton and H. Rackham. Vol. 11.
DE ORaTORE, Book III. De Fato; Paradoxa Stoicorum;
De Partitione Oratoria. H. Rackham,
CicEro: DE Finisus. H. Rackham.
CicERO: DE INVENTIONE, etc. H. M. Hubbell.
CicrEro: Dr Natura DEoruM and AcapEMIcA. H. Rackham.
Cicrro: Dre Orricus. Walter Miller.
Cicero: Dr Repusiica and DE Leaisus; Somnium ScIPIONIs.
Clinton W. Keyes.
1
CicErRo: Dr SENEcTUTE, DE ΑΜΊΟΙΤΙΑ, DE DIvVINATIONE.
W. A. Falconer.
Cicero: In ΟΑΤΙΤΙΝΑΜ, Pro FxLAcco, Pro Murena, Pro Sura.
Louis E. Lord.
Cicero: LEettTEerRs to Atticus. Εἰ. O. Winstedt. 3 Vols.
CicrRo: LETTERS TO His Frienps. W. Glynn Williams. 3
Vols.
CicErRo: Puinippics. W.C. A. Ker.
CicERO: Pro Arcuia Post REepitumM, DE Domo, Dr Harvus-
PicuM Responsis, Pro Prancio. Ν, Η. Watts.
Cicero: Pro Carcina, Pro Lect Manitia, Pro CLuentio,
Pro Raprrio. H. Grose Hodge.
Cicero: Pro Carrio, DE PrRovincits ConsuLarisus, Pro
Batzo. ἢ. Gardner,
CicERO: Pro Mitong, In PisonEm, Pro Scauro, Pro ΕὌΝΤΕΙΟ,
Pro Rasrrio Postumo, Pro MarcELito, Pro Licario, Pro
REcE DeErotTaro. N. H. Watts.
CicERO: Pro QuiNcTIO, Pro Roscio AMERINO, Pro Roscio
ComMoEDO, ContTRA RuttumM. J. H. Freese.
Cicero: Pro Ssstio, IN Vatinium. R. Gardner.
Cicrero: TuscuLan Disputations. J. E. King.
CicERO: VERRINE OratTions. L. H. G. Greenwood. 2 Vols.
CLAUDIAN. M. Platnauer. 2 Vols.
CoLtuMELLA: DE Re Rustica. Dr Arsorisus. H. B. Ash,
E. 5. Forster and E. Heffner. 3 Vols.
Curtius, Q.: History oF ALEXANDER. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols,
Frorus. E.S. Forster; and Cornrexiius Nrpos. J.C. Rolfe.
FrontTinvus: STRATAGEMS and AquEDucts. C. E. Bennett and
M. B. McElwain.
FrRONTO: CORRESPONDENCE. C. R. Haines. 2 Vols.
Getutius, J. C. Rolfe. 3 Vols.
Horace: OpEs AND Epopss. C. E. Bennett.
Horace: Satires, Epistites, Ars Porrica. H. R. Fairclough.
JEROME: SELECTED Letters. Εἰ. A. Wright.
JUVENAL and PEersius. G. G. Ramsay.
Livy. B. O. Foster, F. G. Moore, Evan T. Sage, and A. C.
Schlesinger and R. M. Geer (General Index). 14 Vols.
Lucan. J. Ὁ. Duff.
Lucretius. W.H. Ὁ. Rouse.
Martian. W.C. A. Ker. 2 Vols.
Minor Latin Poets: from Pustimirus Syrus τὸ Rorimivs
NaMATIANvs, including Gratrius, CALPURNIUS SICULUs,
NEMESIANUS, AVIANUS, and others with “ Aetna” and the
“ Phoenix.” J. Wight Duff and Arnold M. Duff.
Ovip: THe Art or Love and OTHER Porms. J. H. Mozley.
2
Ovip: Fastt. Sir James G. Frazer.
Ovip: HeEroimpEs and AMorrs. Grant Showerman,
Ovip: MeramorpHosses. F. J. Miller. 2 Vols.
Ovip: Trist1A and Ex Ponto. A, L. Wheeler.
Prrsius. Cf. JUVENAL.
Prerronius. M. Heseltine; SeNEcA; APOCOLOOYNTOSIS,
W.H. D. Rouse.
PHAEDRUsS AND Bapsrius (Greek). Β. E. Perry.
Prautus. Paul Nixon. 5 Vols.
ῬΙΙΝΥ: Lerrers. Melmoth’s Translation revised by W. M. L.
Hutchinson. 2 Vols.
Puiny: Natura History.
10 Vols. Vols. I.-—V. and IX. H. Rackham. Vols. VI.-
VIII. W.H.S. Jones. Vol. X. Ὁ. E, Eichholz,
Prorertius. H. E. Butler.
Prupentius. H.J. Thomson. 2 Vols.
QumnTILIAN. H. E. Butler. 4 Vols.
Remains oF Otp Latin. Εἰ. H. Warmington. 4 Vols. Vol. I.
(Ennrius aND Caercitrus.) Vol. Il. (Livius, Naervius,
Pacuvivus, Acctus.) Vol. III. (Lucittus and Laws or XII
Tastes.) Vol. 1. (ArcHatic INSCRIPTIONS.)
Sattust. J.C. Rolfe.
Scriprores HistoriaE AveustaE. D. Magie. 3 Vols.
SENnEca: ApocoLocyntTosis. Cf. PETRONIUsS.
Seneca: EpistutAE Moratzes. R. M. Gummere. 3 Vols.
Seneca: Morat Essays. J. W. Basore. 3 Vols.
Senrca: Tracepigs. Εἰ, J. Miller. 2 Vols.
Srponius: Porms and Lerrers. W.B. ANDERSON. 2 Vols.
Sizn1us Iraricus. J.D. Duff. 2 Vols.
Sratius. J. H. Mozley. 2 Vols.
Suetonius. J.C. Rolfe. 2 Vols.
Tacitus: Diatocurs. Sir Wm. Peterson. AGRICOLA and
GERMANIA. Maurice Hutton.
Tacitus: Historizgs AND ANNALS. C.H. Moore and J. Jackson.
4 Vols.
TERENCE. John Sargeaunt. 2 Vols.
TERTULLIAN: Apotoata and Dr Specracuntis. T. R. Glover.
Minucivus Feit. G. H. Rendall.
VaLerius Fraccus. J. H. Mozley.
Varro: De Lincua Latina. R.G. Kent. 2 Vols.
VELLEIUs Patercutus and Res Gestaz Divi Aveusti. F. W.
Shipley.
Viren. H.R. Fairclough. 2 Vols.
Vitruvius: DE ArcHiTectuRA. F. Granger. 2 Vols.
3
Greek Authors
Acuities Tattus. S. Gaselee.
AELIAN: ON THE Nature or Animats. A. F. Scholfield. 3
Vols.
AENEAS Tacticus, ASCLEPIODOTUS and ONASANDER. The
Illinois Greek Club.
AESCHINES. C.D. Adams.
AxEscHyLus. H. Weir Smyth. 2 Vols.
ALCIPHRON, AELIAN, PHinostRATUs: Lrrrers. A. R. Benner
and F. H. Fobes.
AnpocipEs, AntreHon, Cf. Minor Arrio OraATorRs.
ApoLttoporRus. Sir James G. Frazer. 2 Vols.
APpoLitonius Ruopius. R. C. Seaton.
THE Apostouic FatHers. Kirsopp Lake. 2 Vols.
ΑΡΡΙΑΝ: Roman History. Horace White. 4 Vols.
Aratus. Cf. CALLIMACHUS.
ARISTOPHANES. Benjamin Bickley Rogers. 3 Vols. Verse
trans.
ARISTOTLE: Art OF RHETORIC. J. H. Freese.
ARISTOTLE: ATHENIAN CONSTITUTION, EUDEMIAN ETHICs,
VicEs AND VirturEs. H. Rackham.
ARISTOTLE: GENERATION OF ANIMALS. A. L. Peck.
ARISTOTLE: Histor1A ANIMALIUM. A. L. Peck. Vol. I.
ARISTOTLE: Mrtrapuysics, H. Tredennick. 2 Vols.
ARISTOTLE: MrtTroroLoaIcA. H. Ὁ. P. Lee.
ArIsTOTLE: Minor Works. W. S. Hett. On Colours, On
Things Heard, On Physiognomies, On Plants, On Marvellous
Things Heard, Mechanical Problems, On Indivisible Lines,
On Situations and Names of Winds, On Melissus, Xenophanes,
and Gorgias.
ARISTOTLE: NICOMACHEAN Eruics. H. Rackham.
ARISTOTLE: ΟΕΘΟΝΟΜΙΟΑ and Maana Moratta. G. C. Arm:
strong; (with Metaphysics, Vol. II.).
ARISTOTLE: ON THE HEAvENs. W. K. C. Guthrie.
ARISTOTLE: ON THE Sout. Parva NaturatiaA. ON Breats.
W.S. Hett.
ARISTOTLE: CATEGORIES, ON INTERPRETATION, Prior
Anatytics. H. P. Cooke and H. Tredennick.
ARISTOTLE: PosterRIon ANALyTIcs, Topics. H. Tredennick
and E. S. Forster.
ARISTOTLE: ON SOPHISTICAL REFUTATIONS.
On Coming to be and Passing Away, On the Cosmos. E.S.
Forster and D. J. Furley.
ARISTOTLE: Parts or AnimMAts. A. L. Peck; MoTION AND
PROGRESSION oF ANIMALS. KE. S. Forster.
4
ee Puysics. Rev. P. Wicksteed and F. M. Cornford.
2 Vols.
ARISTOTLE: PorTics and Lonemnus. W. Hamilton Fyfe;
DEMETRIUS ON STYLE, W. Rhys Roberts,
ARISTOTLE: Ponitics. H. Rackham.
ARISTOTLE: Propiems. W.S. Hett. 2 Vols.
ARISTOTLE: RHETORICA AD ALEXANDRUM (with PROBLEMs.
Vol. 11.) H. Rackham.
ARRIAN: History oF ALEXANDER and INpicA, Rev. E. Iliffe
Robson. 2 Vols.
ATHENAEUS: DEIPNOSOPHISTAE. C. B. Gutick. 7 Vols.
BasBRius AND PHAEDRUS (Latin). B. Εἰ. Perry.
St. Bastin: Letrrers. R. J. Deferrari. 4 Vols.
CaLuimacHus: FracmMents. C. A. Trypanis.
CaLiimacuus, Hymns and Epigrams, and LycopHron. A. W.
Mair; Aratus. G. R. Marr.
CLEMEN'r of ALEXANDRIA. Rev. G. W. Butterworth.
CotxiuTHus. Cf. OPPIAN.
DarHNIs AND CuHtoEr. Thornley’s Translation revised by
J. M. Edmonds; and Parruentus. S. Gaselee.
DEMOSTHENES I.: OLtyntTHIAcs, PHitippics and Minor OrRa-
TIONS. I.—XVII. anpD XX. J.H. Vince.
DeEMOsTHENES 11.: DE Corona and Dg Fatsa LEGATIONE.
C. A. Vince and J. H. Vince.
DrEmostTHENES III.: Merrmpias, ANDROTION, ARISTOCRATES,
TimocRATES and ARISTOGEITON, I. anp IJ. J.H. Vince.
DemosTHENEs IV.-VI.: Private Orations and In NEAERAM.
A. T. Murray.
DEMOSTHENES VII.: FUNERAL SPEECH, Erotic Essay, ExorpDIA
and Letrrers. N. W. and N. J. DeWitt.
Dio Casstus: Roman History. Ἐν. Cary. 9 Vols.
Dio Curysostom. J. W.Cohoon and H. Lamar Crosby. 5 Vols.
Dioporus Sicutus. 12 Vols. Vols. I1—VI. C. H. Oldfather.
Vol. VII. C.L.Sherman. Vol. VIII. C.B. Welles. Vols.
IX. and X. R. M. Geer. Vols. XI.—XII. F. Walton,
General Index, R. M. Geer.
DiocEnts LaEritius. Βα. Ὁ. Hicks. 2 Vols.
Dionysius or Haticarnassus: Roman ANTIQUITIES. Spel-
man’s translation revised by E. Cary. 7 Vols.
Epictetus. W.A. Oldfather. 2 Vols.
Evripipes. A.S. Way. 4 Vols. Verse trans.
Evsrsius: EccirstasticaL History. Kirsopp Lake and
J. E. L. Oulton. 2 Vols.
GALEN: ON THE Natura Facuttizs. A. J. Brock.
THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY. W.R. Paton. 5 Vols.
GREEK ELEGY AND JamBUS with the ANACREONTEA. J. M.
Edmonds. 2 Vols.
5
THE GREEK BucoLic Ports (THEOcRITUs, Bion, Moscuus).
J. M. Edmonds.
GREEK MATHEMATICAL WorRKs. Ivor Thomas. 2 Vols.
Herroprs. Cf. THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS.
HeEropotus. A.D. Godiey. 4 Vols.
HEsIoD AND THE Homeric Hymns. Η. 6. Evelyn White.
Hippocrates and the FraGMENTs OF HERacteitus. W. H. 5.
Jones and E. T. Withington. 4 Vols.
Homer: Iniap. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols.
Homer: OpyssEy. A. T. Murray. 2 Vols.
Isazus. E. W. Forster.
IsocratTEs. George Norlin and LaRue Van Hook. 3 Vols.
St. JoHN DAMASCENE: BARLAAM AND JoasapH. Rev. G. R.
Woodward, Harold Mattingly and D. M. Lang.
JosEpHUS. 9 Vols. Vols. 1-IV.; H. Thackeray. Vol. V.;
H. Thackeray and R. Marcus. Vols. VI.-VII.; R. Marcus.
Vol. VIII.; R. Marcus and Allen Wikgren. Vol. IX. L. H.
Feldman.
JuLiaAN. Wilmer Cave Wright. 3 Vols.
Lucian. 8 Vols. Vols. 1—V. A.M. Harmon. Vol. VI. K.
Kilburn. Vols. VII.-VIII. Μ. Ὁ. Macleod.
LycorpHron. Cf. CALLIMACHUS.
Lyra Grazca. J. M. Edmonds. 3 Vols.
Lystas. ὟΝ, Β. M. Lamb.
ManetHo. W.G. Waddell: Protemy: TETrRApIBLos. F. E.
Robbins.
Marcus AuREtIus. C. R. Haines.
MENANDER. F. G. Allinson.
Minor Attic Orators (ANTIPHON, ANDOCIDES, LycurRGus,
DeremapEs, DinarcHus, HypreripEs) Κα. J. Maidment and
J. O. Burrt. 2 Vols.
Nonnos: Dionystaca. W.H.D. Rouse. 3 Vols.
ΟΡΡΙΑΝ, CoLtLtuTHus, TRyPHIODORUS. A. W. Mair.
Paryri. Non-LirrErary SELEcTIONS. A. 8. Hunt and C. C.
Edgar. 2Vols. LirErRAry SELECTIONS (Poetry). D.L. Page.
ParTHENIvs. Cf. DAPHNIS and CHLOE.
PAUSANIAS: DESCRIPTION OF GREECE. W. H. S. Jones. 4
Vols. and Companion Vol. arranged by R. E. Wycherley.
Puito. 10 Vols. Vols. I.-V.; F. H. Colson and Rey. G. H.
Whitaker. Vols. VI.-IX.; F. H. Colson. Vol. X. F. H.
Colson and the Rev. J. W. Earp.
Puito: two supplementary Vols. (Translation only.) Ralph
Marcus.
PuHitostrRatus: THE LIFE oF APOLLONIUS OF Tyana. F. C.
Conybeare. 2 Vols.
6
Puitosrratus: IMAGINES; CALLISTRATUS: DEscRIPTIONS. A.
Fairbanks.
PuILostRATUS and Eunarivus: Lives OF THESOPHISTS. Wilmer
Cave Wright.
Pinpar. Sir J. E. Sandys.
Prato: CHARMIDES, ALCIBIADES, HirparcHus, THE LOVERs,
THEAGES, Mrnos and Errnomis. W. R. M. Lamb.
Prato: Cratytus, PARMENIDES, GREATER Hippias, LESSER
Hiprias. H. N. Fowler.
Prato: EuraypHro, ApoLtogy, Criro, PHAEDO, PHAEDRUS.
H. N. Fowler.
Prato: Lacuss, Proracoras, MENO, EurpypEMus. W.R. M.
Lamb.
Prato: Laws. Rev. R.G. Bury. 2 Vols.
Prato: Lysis, Sympostum, Goraias. W. R. M. Lamb.
Prato: Repusiic. Paul Shorey. 2 Vols.
Prato: STATESMAN, Poitesus. H.N. Fowler; Ion. W.R.M.
Lamb.
Prato: THEAETETUS and SopHist. H. N. Fowler.
Puatro: Timarus, Critias, CLIropHo, MENEXENUS, EPISTULAE.
Rev. R. G. Bury.
Prorinus: A.H. Armstrong. Vols. I.-III.
Prurarcu: Morarta. 15 Vols. Vols. I1-V. F. C. Babbitt.
Vol. VI. W.C. Helmbold. Vols. VII. and XIV. P. H. De
Lacy and B. Einarson, ΚΟ]. ΙΧ. E.L. Minar, Jr., F. H. Sand-
bach, W. C. Helmbold. Vol. X. H. N. Fowler. Vol. XI.
L. Pearson and F. H. Sandbach. Vol. XII. H. Cherniss and
W.C. Heimbold.
ProrarcH: THe Parattet Lives. B. Perrin. 11 Vols.
Potysius. W.R. Paton. 6 Vols.
Procorius: History oF THE Wars. H. B. Dewing. 7 Vols.
Protemy: TETRABIBLOS. Cf. MANETHO.
Quintus SmyrnarEus. A.S. Way. Verse trans.
Sextus Emprricus. Rev. R. G. Bury. 4 Vols.
SopHocites. F. Storr. 2 Vols. Verse trans.
SrraBpo: GrocrAPHy. Horace L. Jones. 8 Vols.
THEOPHRASTUS: CHARACTERS. J. M. Edmonds. HERopDEs,
ete. A. D. Knox.
THEOPHRASTUS: ENQuIRY INTO Priants. Sir Arthur Hort,
Bart. 2 Vols.
TuHucypipEs. C.F. Smith. 4 Vols.
TRYPHIODORUS. Cf. OPPIAN.
XENOPHON: CyrROPAEDIA. Walter Miller. 2 Vols.
XENOPHON: HELLENICA, ANABASIS, APOLOGY, and SyMPOSIUM.
C. L. Brownson and O. J. Todd. 3 Vols.
XENOPHON: MEMORABILIA and Orconomicus. E.C. Marchant.
XENOPHON: Scripta Minora. E. C. Marchant and G. W.
Bowersock.
4
DESCRIPTIVE PROSPECTUS ON APPLICATION
London WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
Cambridge, Mass. HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
τι Neyδ ὲ
itso n id ae
oἢ oi
ie δὰ
ΝΑ ἸῸΝ eal We battf i
Δ Vie! emu g bet ἢ uel ἃ
ἴδ
i De, ; as Ort χ ἬΝ' in ‘ ὲ
ἐν"ἢ Ἐ Ν Mio et ᾿ Asvy a ἢ

Other biographers in the
Loeb Series
τ SUETONIUS :
CORNELIUS NEPOS .
2[ea ateee e
DIOGENES LAERTIUS |
TeaνδeeETΦνARaSNSe eTe TTeῪes R:O Sο e RΛ yυ Θ ΜΙ