Book One
The Master said, Is it not pleasant to learn with a constant perseverance and application? Is it not delightful to have friends coming from distant quarters? Is he not a man of complete virtue, who feels no discomposure though men may take no note of him?
The philosopher Yóu said, They are few who, being filial and fraternal, are fond of offending against their superiors. There have been none, who, not liking to offend against their superiors, have been fond of stirring up confusion. The superior man bends his attention to what is radical. That being established, all practical courses naturally grow up. Filial piety and fraternal submission, are they not the root of all benevolent actions?
The Master said, Fine words and an insinuating appearance are seldom associated with true virtue.
The philosopher Zēng said, I daily examine myself on three points: whether, in transacting business for others, I may have been not faithful; whether, in intercourse with friends, I may have been not sincere; whether I may have not mastered and practiced the instructions of my teacher.
The Master said, To rule a country of a thousand chariots, there must be reverent attention to business, and sincerity; economy in expenditure, and love for men; and the employment of the people at the proper seasons.
The Master said, A youth, when at home, should be filial, and, abroad, respectful to his elders. He should be earnest and truthful. He should overflow in love to all, and cultivate the friendship of the good. When he has time and opportunity, after the performance of these things, he should employ them in polite studies.
Zǐxià said, If a man withdraws his mind from the love of beauty, and applies it as sincerely to the love of the virtuous; if, in serving his parents, he can exert his utmost strength; if, in serving his prince, he can devote his life; if, in his intercourse with his friends, his words are sincere: although men say that he has not learned, I will certainly say that he has.
The Master said, If the scholar be not grave, he will not call forth any veneration, and his learning will not be solid. Hold faithfulness and sincerity as first principles. Have no friends not equal to yourself. When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.
The philosopher Zēng said, Let there be a careful attention to perform the funeral rites to parents, and let them be followed when long gone with the ceremonies of sacrifice: then the virtue of the people will resume its proper excellence.
Zǐqín asked Zǐgòng saying, When our master comes to any country, he does not fail to learn all about its government. Does he ask his information? or is it given to him?
Zǐgòng said, Our master is benign, upright, courteous, temperate, and complaisant and thus he gets his information. The master's mode of asking information, is it not different from that of other men?
The Master said, While a man's father is alive, look at the bent of his will; when his father is dead, look at his conduct. If for three years he does not alter from the way of his father, he may be called filial.
The philosopher Yóu said, In practicing the rules of propriety, a natural ease is to be prized. In the ways prescribed by the ancient kings, this is the excellent quality, and in things small and great we follow them. Yet it is not to be observed in all cases. If one, knowing how such ease should be prized, manifests it, without regulating it by the rules of propriety, this likewise is not to be done.
The philosopher Yóu said, When agreements are made according to what is right, what is spoken can be made good. When respect is shown according to what is proper, one keeps far from shame and disgrace. When the parties upon whom a man leans are proper persons to be intimate with, he can make them his guides and masters.
The Master said, He who aims to be a man of complete virtue in his food does not seek to gratify his appetite, nor in his dwelling place does he seek the appliances of ease; he is earnest in what he is doing, and careful in his speech; he frequents the company of men of principle that he may be rectified: such a person may be said indeed to love to learn.
Zǐgòng said, What do you pronounce concerning the poor man who yet does not flatter, and the rich man who is not proud? The Master replied, They will do; but they are not equal to him, who, though poor, is yet cheerful, and to him, who, though rich, loves the rules of propriety.
Zǐgòng replied, It is said in the Shījīng, 'As you cut and then file, as you carve and then polish.' The meaning is the same, I apprehend, as that which you have just expressed.
The Master said, With one like Zǐgòng, I can begin to talk about the odes. I told him one point, and he knew its proper sequence.
The Master said, I will not be afflicted at men's not knowing me; I will be afflicted that I do not know men.

Book Two
The Master said, He who exercises government by means of his virtue may be compared to the north polar star, which keeps its place and all the stars turn towards it.
The Master said, In the Shījīng are three hundred pieces, but the design of them all may be embraced in one sentence 'Having no depraved thoughts.'
The Master said, If the people be led by laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they will try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame. If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of shame, and moreover will become good.
The Master said, At fifteen, I had my mind bent on learning. At thirty, I stood firm. At forty, I had no doubts. At fifty, I knew the decrees of Heaven. At sixty, my ear was an obedient organ for the reception of truth. At seventy, I could follow what my heart desired, without transgressing what was right.
Mèng Yì asked what filial piety was. The Master said, It is not being disobedient. Soon after, as Fàn Chí was driving him, the Master told him, saying, Mèngsūn asked me what filial piety was, and I answered him, not being disobedient.
Fàn Chí said, What did you mean? The Master replied, That parents, when alive, be served according to propriety; that, when dead, they should be buried according to propriety; and that they should be sacrificed to according to propriety.
Mèng Wǔ asked what filial piety was. The Master said, Parents are anxious lest their children should be sick.
Zǐyǒu asked what filial piety was. The Master said, The filial piety nowadays means the support of one's parents. But dogs and horses likewise are able to do something in the way of support; without reverence, what is there to distinguish the one support given from the other?
Zǐxià asked what filial piety was. The Master said, The difficulty is with the countenance. If, when their elders have any troublesome affairs, the young take the toil of them, and if, when the young have wine and food, they set them before their elders, is THIS to be considered filial piety?
The Master said, I have talked with Huì for a whole day, and he has not made any objection to anything I said; as if he were stupid. He has retired, and I have examined his conduct when away from me, and found him able to illustrate my teachings. Huì! He is not stupid.
The Master said, See what a man does. Mark his motives. Examine in what things he rests. How can a man conceal his character? How can a man conceal his character?
The Master said, If a man keeps cherishing his old knowledge, so as continually to be acquiring new, he may be a teacher of others.
The Master said, The accomplished scholar is not a utensil.
Zǐgòng asked what constituted the superior man. The Master said, He acts before he speaks, and afterwards speaks according to his actions.
The Master said, The superior man is catholic and not partisan. The mean man is partisan and not catholic.
The Master said, Learning without thought is labor lost; thought without learning is perilous.
The Master said, The study of strange doctrines is injurious indeed!
The Master said, Yóu, shall I teach you what knowledge is? When you know a thing, to hold that you know it; and when you do not know a thing, to allow that you do not know it; this is knowledge.
Zǐzhāng was learning with a view to official emolument. The Master said, Hear much and put aside the points of which you stand in doubt, while you speak cautiously at the same time of the others: then you will afford few occasions for blame. See much and put aside the things which seem perilous, while you are cautious at the same time in carrying the others into practice: then you will have few occasions for repentance. When one gives few occasions for blame in his words, and few occasions for repentance in his conduct, he is in the way to get emolument.
The Duke Ài asked, saying, What should be done in order to secure the submission of the people? Kǒng Qiū replied, Advance the upright and set aside the crooked, then the people will submit. Advance the crooked and set aside the upright, then the people will not submit.
Jì Kāng asked how to cause the people to reverence their ruler, to be faithful to him, and to go on to nerve themselves to virtue. The Master said, Let him preside over them with gravity; then they will reverence him. Let him be filial and kind to all; then they will be faithful to him. Let him advance the good and teach the incompetent; then they will eagerly seek to be virtuous.
Someone addressed Kǒng Qiū, saying, Sir, why are you not engaged in the government?
The Master said, What does the Shūjīng say of filial piety? You are filial, you discharge your brotherly duties. These qualities are displayed in government. This then also constitutes the exercise of government. Why must there be THAT making one be in the government?
The Master said, I do not know how a man without truthfulness is to get on. How can a large carriage be made to go without the crossbar for yoking the oxen to, or a small carriage without the arrangement for yoking the horses?
Zǐzhāng asked whether the affairs of ten ages after could be known. Kǒng Qiū said, The Yīn dynasty followed the regulations of the Xià: wherein it took from or added to them may be known. The Zhōu dynasty has followed the regulations of Yīn: wherein it took from or added to them may be known. Some other may follow the Zhōu, but though it should be at the distance of a hundred ages, its affairs may be known.
The Master said, For a man to sacrifice to a spirit which does not belong to him is flattery. To see what is right and not to do it is want of courage.

Book Three
Kǒng Qiū said of the head of the Jì family, who had eight rows of pantomimes in his area, If he can bear to do this, what may he not bear to do?
The three families used the Yōng ode, while the vessels were being removed, at the conclusion of the sacrifice. The Master said, Assisting are the princes; the son of heaven looks profound and grave; what application can these words have in the hall of the three families?
The Master said, If a man be without the virtues proper to humanity, what has he to do with the rites of propriety? If a man be without the virtues proper to humanity, what has he to do with music?
Lín Fāng asked what was the first thing to be attended to in ceremonies. The Master said, A great question indeed! In festive ceremonies, it is better to be sparing than extravagant. In the ceremonies of mourning, it is better that there be deep sorrow than a minute attention to observances.
The Master said, The rude tribes of the east and north have their princes, and are not like the States of our great land which are without them.
The chief of the Jì family was about to sacrifice to the Tài mountain. The Master said to Zǎn Yǒu, Can you not save him from this? He answered, I cannot. Kǒng Qiū said, Alas! will you say that the Tài mountain is not so discerning as Lín Fāng?
The Master said, The student of virtue has no contentions. If it be said he cannot avoid them, shall this be in archery? But he bows complaisantly to his competitors; thus he ascends the hall, descends, and exacts the forfeit of drinking. In his contention, he is still the Jūnzǐ.
Zǐxià asked, saying, What is the meaning of the passage, The pretty dimples of her artful smile! The well-defined black and white of her eye! The plain ground for the colors? The Master said, The business of laying on the colors follows the preparation of the plain ground. Ceremonies then are a subsequent thing? The Master said, It is Shāng who can bring out my meaning. Now I can begin to talk about the odes with him.
The Master said, I could describe the ceremonies of the Xià dynasty, but Jì cannot sufficiently attest my words. I could describe the ceremonies of the Yīn dynasty, but Sòng cannot sufficiently attest my words. They cannot do so because of the insufficiency of their records and wise men. If those were sufficient, I could adduce them in support of my words.
The Master said, At the great sacrifice, after the pouring out of the libation, I have no wish to look on.
Someone asked the meaning of the great sacrifice. The Master said, I do not know. He who knew its meaning would find it as easy to govern the kingdom as to look on this, pointing to his palm.
He sacrificed to the dead, as if they were present. He sacrificed to the spirits, as if the spirits were present. The Master said, I consider my not being present at the sacrifice, as if I did not sacrifice.
Wángsūn Jiā asked, saying, What is the meaning of the saying, It is better to pay court to the furnace than to the southwest corner? The Master said, Not so. He who offends against Heaven has none to whom he can pray.
The Master said, Zhōu had the advantage of viewing the two past dynasties. How complete and elegant are its regulations! I follow Zhōu.
The Master, when he entered the grand temple, asked about everything. Someone said, Who say that the son of the man of Zōu knows the rules of propriety! He has entered the grand temple and asks about everything. The Master heard the remark, and said, This is a rule of propriety.
The Master said, In archery it is not going through the leather which is the principal thing; because people's strength is not equal. This was the old way.
Zǐgòng wished to do away with the offering of a sheep connected with the inauguration of the first day of each month. The Master said, Zǐgòng, you love the sheep; I love the ceremony.
The Master said, The full observance of the rules of propriety in serving one's prince is accounted by people to be flattery.
The Duke Dìng asked how a prince should employ his ministers, and how ministers should serve their prince. Kǒng Qiū replied, A prince should employ his minister according to the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their prince with faithfulness.
The Master said, The Guānzǐ is expressive of enjoyment without being licentious, and of grief without being hurtfully excessive.
The Duke Ài asked Cài Wò about the altars of the spirits of the land. Cài Wò replied, The Xià sovereign planted the pine tree about them; the men of the Yīn planted the cypress; and the men of the Zhōu planted the chestnut tree, meaning thereby to cause the people to fear. 

Book Four
The Master said, It is virtuous manners which constitute the excellence of a neighborhood. If a man in selecting a residence does not fix on one where virtuous manners prevail, how can he be wise?
The Master said, Those who are without virtue cannot abide long either in a condition of poverty and hardship, or in a condition of enjoyment. The virtuous rest in virtue; the wise desire virtue.
The Master said, It is only the truly virtuous man, who can love, or who can hate, others.
The Master said, If the will be set on virtue, there will be no practice of wickedness.
The Master said, Riches and honors are what men desire. If they cannot be obtained in the proper way, they should not be held. Poverty and meanness are what men dislike. If they cannot be avoided in the proper way, they should not be avoided.
The Master said, If a superior man abandons virtue, how can he fulfill the requirements of that name?
The Master said, The superior man does not, even for the space of a single meal, act contrary to virtue. In moments of haste, he cleaves to it. In seasons of danger, he cleaves to it.
The Master said, I have not seen a person who loved virtue, or one who hated what was not virtuous. He who loved virtue, would esteem nothing above it. He who hated what is not virtuous, would practice virtue in such a way that he would not allow anything that is not virtuous to approach his person.
The Master said, Is virtue a thing remote? I wish to be virtuous, and lo! Virtue is at hand.
Zǐzhāng asked, saying, The minister Zǐwén, thrice took office, and manifested no joy; thrice he retired from office, and manifested no displeasure. He made it a point to inform the new minister of the way in which he had conducted the government; what do you say of him? The Master said, He was loyal.
The Master said, Was he perfectly virtuous? The Master said, I do not know. How can he be pronounced perfectly virtuous?
Jì Wénzǐ reflected thrice before he acted. When the Master heard of it, he said, Twice would have been enough.
The Master said, As to Níng Wǔzǐ, when the state was in order, he was wise; when the state was in disorder, he was stupid. His wisdom can be reached by other men, but his stupidity cannot be reached.
The Master said, When I was in Chén, I heard that the families of Bó and Shū were there, and I said, They are superior men.
The Master said, When I return to Lǔ, I will reform the music.
Zǐgòng said, If you had a piece of beautiful jade, would you store it away in a box, or would you try to sell it? The Master said, Sell it! Sell it! I am waiting for my price.
The Master said, I wish to reside in the nine barbarian tribes. Someone said, They are rude; how can you do that? The Master said, If a superior man dwells among them, what rudeness can there be?
The Master said, I returned from Wèi to Lǔ, and then the music was reformed, and the proper distinctions were made between the elegant and the vulgar.
The Master said, To serve in office and to live in obscurity, both are difficult to me. But to live in obscurity is more difficult than to serve in office.
The Master said, The superior man is free from anxiety and fear.
The Master said, If you are not anxious, you will not be fearful; if you are fearful, you will not be anxious.
The Master said, When internal examination discovers nothing wrong, what is there to be anxious about, what is there to fear?
The Master said, The people of Lǔ are rebuilding the treasury. Zǐgòng said, Why not follow the old plan? The Master said, This man talks much, but he does not hit the mark.
The Master said, The superior man is satisfied and composed; the mean man is always full of distress.
The Master said, The superior man is easy to serve and difficult to please. If you try to please him in a way that is not accordant with right, he will not be pleased. But in employing men, he uses them according to their capacity. The mean man is difficult to serve, but easy to please. If you try to please him, though it be in a way that is not accordant with right, he will be pleased. But in employing men, he demands all kinds of ability.
The Master said, The superior man is dignified, but does not wrangle. He is sociable, but not a partisan.
The Master said, The superior man does not promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does he put aside good words because of the man.

Book Five
The Master said of Gōngyé Cháng that he might be wived; although he was put in bonds, he had not been guilty of any crime. The Master gave him his daughter to wife.
The Master said of Nánróng that when the state was well-governed, he was employed; when the state was without law, he escaped punishment. He gave him his niece to wife.
The Master said, The virtue of the superior man is like the wind; the virtue of the small man is like the grass. When the wind blows over it, the grass bends.
The Master said, When a man’s knowledge is sufficient to attain, but his virtue is not sufficient to enable him to hold, whatever he may have gained, he will lose again.
The Master said, When a man’s virtue is sufficient to enable him to hold, but his knowledge is not sufficient to enable him to govern, whatever he may have gained, he will lose again.
The Master said, When a man’s knowledge is sufficient to attain, and his virtue is sufficient to enable him to hold, if he cannot govern with dignity, the people will not respect him.
The Master said, When a man’s knowledge is sufficient to attain, and his virtue is sufficient to enable him to hold, and he governs with dignity, if he does not act with propriety, his government will not be complete.
The Master said, The superior man does not forget danger even in safety; he does not forget ruin even in prosperity; he does not forget disorder even in order. Thus, his person is secure, and the state and families are preserved.
The Master said, Some men of worth retire from the world. Some retire from a single state. Some retire because of a look. Some retire because of a word.
The Master said, There are seven who have been such men; I have followed their example.
Zǐlù happened to pass the night in Shí mén. The gatekeeper said, Whence do you come? Zǐlù said, From Kǒng Qiū. The gatekeeper said, Is it not he who knows that what he does is in vain, and yet he still does it?
The Master said, To offer sacrifice to a spirit that does not belong to one’s own family is flattery.
The Master said, To see what is right and not to do it is want of courage, or of principle.
The Master said, If the people of a state are made tranquil, the state itself will be tranquil.
The Master said, The superior man seeks in himself what the small man seeks in others.
The Master said, The superior man is modest in his speech, but exceeds in his actions.
The Master said, The superior man is influenced by three things, and in none of them is there anything of himself: his actions are influenced by Heaven; his words are influenced by the sages; his carriage is influenced by the laws of propriety.
The Master said, The superior man has three things in which he must be on his guard: in youth, when the physical powers are not yet settled, he must be on his guard against lust; in manhood, when the physical powers are in full vigor, he must be on his guard against strife; in old age, when the physical powers are decaying, he must be on his guard against avarice.
The Master said, The superior man stands in awe of three things: the ordinances of Heaven, great men, and the words of sages. The small man does not know the ordinances of Heaven, and therefore does not stand in awe of them; he is disrespectful to great men; he makes sport of the words of sages.

Book Six
The Master said, There is Yōng! He might occupy the place of a prince, yet he is not arrogant. There is Nánróng! When the state is well-governed, he is employed; when the state is without law, he escapes punishment. He is a superior man.
The Master said, A superior man must be broad-minded and not narrow-minded. The small man is narrow-minded and not broad-minded.
The Master said, Knowledge acquired through learning is prized, but it is better to have innate knowledge. To have knowledge and to enjoy learning is even better.
The Master said, Those who love to learn are near to wisdom; those who practice what they know are near to virtue; those who understand shame are near to strength.
The Master said, If a man loves these three things—learning, virtue, and shame—he will seldom err.
The Master said, The superior man is calm and composed; the small man is always anxious.
Zǐlù asked, What kind of man is worthy to be called a scholar? The Master said, He who is earnest, encouraging, and kind may be called a scholar: earnest with his friends, encouraging to his brothers, and kind to all.
The Master said, If a man studies the Shījīng and the Lǐjì, but does not apply what he learns, it is like standing facing a wall.
The Master said, Those who speak of principles without practicing them are like those who count others' treasures without having any of their own.
The Master said, The superior man is concerned with virtue; the small man is concerned with land. The superior man is concerned with laws; the small man is concerned with favors.
The Master said, To act on impulse, without regard to principles, leads to regret.
The Master said, If a man loves bravery but does not love learning, he will fall into recklessness. If he loves strength but does not love learning, he will fall into violence. If he loves honesty but does not love learning, he will fall into rudeness.
The Duke of Shè asked about government. The Master said, When the people are pleased at home, and those from afar come to you, that is good government.
Zǐxià said, If a man withdraws from the pursuit of wealth and rank to follow virtue, he is a scholar. If he serves his parents with all his strength, his prince with his life, and speaks sincerely with his friends, though others may say he has not learned, I say he has.
The Master said, If a man is not grave, he will not be respected, and his learning will not be solid. Make faithfulness and sincerity your first principles. Have no friends not equal to yourself. When you have faults, do not fear to abandon them.

Book Seven
The Master said, Believing in and loving the ancients, I venture to compare myself with our old Páng. I transmit and do not create. I am sincere in what I say about the ancients.
The Master said, In silence, I reflect; in learning, I do not tire; in teaching others, I do not weary.
The Master said, My faults are failing to cultivate virtue, failing to examine what I have learned, failing to follow what is right, and failing to correct my faults.
The Master said, In my leisure, I find joy in dwelling with my friends.
The Master said, To fail to speak to a man who is capable of learning is to waste the man. To speak to a man who is not capable of learning is to waste words. The wise man wastes neither men nor words.
The Master said, The resolute scholar and the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of virtue. They will sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue.
The Master said, In archery, it is not about piercing the target, but about the strength of the archer. This was the way of the ancients.
The Master said, The superior man is not a utensil to be used by others.
The Master said, The superior man, when at ease, does not become careless; when employed, does not become proud; when in danger, does not become fearful.
The Master said, I have not seen one who loves virtue as he loves beauty.
The Master said, To study and not think is a waste. To think and not study is dangerous.
The Master said, Teaching others brings me joy, does it not?
The Master said, If Heaven had wished to destroy this culture, I, Kǒng Qiū, would not have been given a part in it. Since Heaven has not destroyed this culture, what can the men of Kuāng do to me?
The Master said, The superior man is dignified but not proud; the small man is proud but not dignified.
The Master said, The superior man is steadfast in adversity, while the small man is overwhelmed by it.

Book Eight
The Master said, The highest point of virtuous action is when it is inspired by reverence and carried out with knowledge.
The Master said, If a man is not moved by the Shījīng, he cannot be stirred. If he is not corrected by the Lǐjì, he cannot be improved. If he is not concerned with human affairs, he cannot be trusted.
The Master said, The superior man is distressed by his lack of ability, not by the fact that others do not recognize him.
The Master said, The superior man dislikes the thought of his name not being remembered after his death.
The Master said, The superior man examines himself and seeks the fault within. The small man seeks the fault in others.
The Master said, The superior man is calm and serene; the small man is always agitated.
The Master said, The superior man is respectful in his conduct, courteous in his manners, and loyal in his duties.
The Master said, Tàibó may be said to have reached the highest point of virtue. Thrice he declined the throne, and the people did not know it.
The Master said, Respectfulness without the rules of propriety becomes laborious bustle; carefulness without the rules of propriety becomes timidity; boldness without the rules of propriety becomes insubordination; straightforwardness without the rules of propriety becomes rudeness.
The Master said, When the state is well-governed, speak of good men; when the state is not well-governed, be silent but act.
The Master said, The man of virtue will surely speak, but one who speaks is not necessarily virtuous. The man of benevolence is surely brave, but one who is brave is not necessarily benevolent.

Book Nine
The Master seldom spoke of profit, fate, or benevolence.
The Master said, When I see a man of virtue, I strive to be like him. When I see a man without virtue, I examine myself to see if I am like him.
The Master said, To live with a man all day and not know his character is to be blind.
The Master said, I have not seen one who loves virtue as he loves beauty.
The Master said, Men seek office for honor, but they do not know that honor comes from virtue.
The Master said, If you make a mistake and do not correct it, this is a mistake.
The Master said, In the morning, hear the Way; in the evening, die content.
The Master said, The scholar who cherishes the love of comfort is not fit to be a scholar.
The Master said, The superior man is upright in his principles, not upright merely in appearance.
The Master said, I have never seen a man who was truly steadfast.
The Master said, When the state is well-governed, the superior man is at ease; when the state is in disorder, he is ashamed.
The Master said, The superior man seeks what is right; the small man seeks what is profitable.

Book Ten
Kǒng Qiū, in his village, looked simple and sincere, as if he could not speak. When in the ancestral temple or at court, he spoke fluently, but with caution.
The Master, when standing, did not stand in the middle of the doorway; when walking, he did not step on the threshold.
The Master, when he ate, did not converse; when he slept, he did not speak.
The Master, even with coarse rice to eat, with water to drink, and his arm for a pillow, found joy in it. Riches and honors without righteousness are to me as a floating cloud.
The Master said, If I were to add a few years to my life, I would devote fifty of them to the study of the Yìjīng, and then I might avoid great errors.
The Master spoke often of the Shījīng, the Shūjīng, and the Lǐjì. In all these, he spoke with earnestness.
The Master said, If the people are led by virtue, they will be virtuous; if they are led by punishments, they will avoid them but have no sense of shame.
The Master said, At fifteen, my mind was set on learning; at thirty, I stood firm; at forty, I had no doubts; at fifty, I knew the decrees of Heaven; at sixty, my ear was obedient to truth; at seventy, I followed my heart’s desire without transgressing what was right.

Book Eleven
The Master said, The men of former times, in matters of propriety and music, were rustic; the men of today, in matters of propriety and music, are refined. I follow the rustic.
The Master said, Of those who followed me in Chén and Cài, none are with me now.
The Master said, Yán Huí was nearly perfect, yet he was often in want. Zǐgòng does not accept his lot, yet his wealth increases. It is hard to judge men.
The Master said, If a man is not humane, what is the use of ceremonies? If a man is not humane, what is the use of music?
The Master said, The superior man is easy to serve but difficult to please. If you try to please him in a way not accordant with right, he will not be pleased. The small man is difficult to serve but easy to please.
The Master said, The superior man is dignified but not arrogant; the small man is arrogant but not dignified.
The Master said, The resolute scholar and the man of virtue will not seek to live at the expense of virtue. They will sacrifice their lives to preserve their virtue.

Book Twelve
Yán Yuán asked about perfect virtue. The Master said, To subdue oneself and return to propriety is perfect virtue. If a man can for one day subdue himself and return to propriety, all under heaven will ascribe virtue to him.
The Master said, The superior man seeks what is within himself; the small man seeks what is in others.
The Master said, The superior man is dignified but does not contend; he is sociable but not partisan.
The Master said, The superior man does not promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does he put aside good words because of the man.
Zǐgòng asked, Is there one word that can serve as a principle for the conduct of life? The Master said, It is shù: do not impose on others what you do not wish for yourself.
The Master said, In my dealings with men, whose evil do I blame, whose goodness do I praise? If I praise, it is because I have examined; if I blame, it is because I have tested.
The Master said, The superior man is slow in his words and earnest in his conduct.

Book Thirteen
Zǐlù asked about government. The Master said, Lead them and encourage them to work. Zǐlù said, Is that enough? The Master said, Make them happy, and those from afar will come.
The Master said, If a ruler is upright, all will go well without orders. If he is not upright, orders will not be obeyed.
The Master said, The governments of Lǔ and Wèi are brothers.
The Master said, If a ruler governs his state well, he can reside among the nine barbarian tribes.
The Master said, In serving a prince, frequent remonstrances lead to disgrace; in serving a friend, frequent reproofs lead to estrangement.
The Master said, When the state is well-governed, the superior man is at ease; when the state is in disorder, he is ashamed.

Book Fourteen
Xiàn asked what was shameful. The Master said, When the state is well-governed, to seek salary is shameful; when the state is in disorder, to seek salary is shameful.
The Master said, To avoid speaking of what is wrong and yet be conscious of it is to approach courage.
The Master said, The superior man is satisfied and composed; the small man is always full of distress.
The Master said, The superior man is easy to serve and difficult to please. The small man is difficult to serve but easy to please.
The Master said, The superior man is concerned with virtue; the small man is concerned with comforts.
The Master said, The superior man is dignified but does not wrangle; he is sociable but not partisan.

Book Fifteen
The Duke Líng of Wèi asked Kǒng Qiū about tactics. The Master said, I understand matters of ceremonies, not matters of tactics.
The Master said, If a man has no concern for what is distant, he will find sorrow near at hand.
The Master said, When the state is well-governed, speak of good men; when the state is not well-governed, be silent but act.
The Master said, The superior man is modest in his speech but exceeds in his actions.
The Master said, The superior man is influenced by three things: the ordinances of Heaven, great men, and the words of sages.
The Master said, The superior man seeks what is right; the small man seeks what is profitable.

Book Sixteen
The head of the Jì family was richer than the Duke of Zhōu, yet Qiú collected taxes for him and increased his wealth. The Master said, He is no disciple of mine. My disciples, you may beat the drum and assail him.
The Master said, Huì is of no help to me; he accepts all I say.
The Master said, Zǐlù is too impetuous; he will bring misfortune upon himself.
The Master said, The way of the superior man is threefold: virtuous, he is free from anxiety; wise, he is free from perplexity; courageous, he is free from fear.
The Master said, The superior man understands what is right; the small man understands what is profitable.
The Master said, The superior man loves to learn; the small man loves to teach.
The Master said, The superior man is dignified but does not wrangle; he is sociable but not partisan.

Book Seventeen
Yáng Huò wished to see Kǒng Qiū, but Kǒng Qiū would not see him. Yáng Huò sent a pig to Kǒng Qiū, and Kǒng Qiū timed his visit to thank him when Yáng Huò was not at home.
The Master said, To refuse office is not righteous. If the relations between old and young may not be neglected, how can the duties between sovereign and minister be neglected?
The Master said, The superior man is dignified but does not wrangle; he is sociable but not partisan.
The Master said, The superior man does not promote a man simply on account of his words, nor does he put aside good words because of the man.
The Master said, The superiorlof virtue will surely speak, but one who speaks is not necessarily virtuous.

Book Eighteen
The Viscount of Wèi withdrew from the court. The Viscount of Jì became a slave to his pleasures. Bì Xī invited Kǒng Qiū, but Kǒng Qiū declined.
The Master said, I am different from those who withdraw from the world. I have no fixed course, nor do I reject any course.
The Master said, Chángjū and Jié ní were plowing together. Zǐlù asked them for directions, but they said, The world is in disorder; who can change it? Rather than follow one who withdraws from this or that, why not follow those who withdraw from the world altogether?
The Master said, I cannot associate with birds and beasts. If I do not associate with mankind, with whom shall I associate? If right principles prevailed, I would have no need to change the world.
The Master said, Bóyí and Shūqí refused to compromise their principles or tarnish their persons.

Book Nineteen
Zǐzhāng said, The scholar, trained for public duty, seeing threatening danger, is prepared to sacrifice his life. When the opportunity of gain is presented to him, he thinks of righteousness. In sacrificing, his thoughts are reverential. In mourning, his thoughts are about the grief he should feel. Such a man commands our approbation.
Zǐzhāng said, When a man holds fast to virtue but does not enlarge it, and believes in right principles but without firm sincerity, what account can be made of his existence or non-existence?
The disciples of Zǐxià asked Zǐzhāng about mutual intercourse. Zǐzhāng said, The superior man honors the talented and virtuous and bears with all. He praises the good and pities the incompetent.
Zǐxià said, Even in inferior studies, there is something worth learning; but if carried too far, they may become inapplicable.
Zǐxià said, He who daily recognizes what he has not yet attained and monthly does not forget what he has attained may be said to love to learn.
Zǐxià said, Extensive learning, firm aim, earnest inquiry, and self-reflection: virtue lies in this course.

Book Twenty
Yáo said, Oh, you, Shùn, the Heaven-determined order of succession now rests in your person. Sincerely hold fast the due Mean. If there shall be distress and want within the four seas, the Heavenly revenue will come to a perpetual end.
Shùn used the same language in giving charge to Yǔ.
Tāng said, I, the child Lǐ, presume to use a dark-colored victim and announce to Thee, O most great and sovereign God, that the sinner I dare not pardon, and thy ministers, O God, I do not keep in obscurity. The examination of them is by thy mind, O God. If I commit offenses, they are not to be attributed to you, the people of the myriad regions. If you in the myriad regions commit offenses, these offenses must rest on my person.
The Master said, Zhōu conferred great gifts, and the good were enriched. Although he has his near relatives, they are not equal to my virtuous men. The people are throwing blame upon me, the One man.
The Master said, He carefully attended to weights and measures, examined the body of the laws, restored the discarded officers, and the good government of the kingdom took its course.
The Master said, He revived states that had been extinguished, restored families whose line of succession had been broken, and called to office those who had retired into obscurity, so that throughout the kingdom the hearts of the people turned towards him.
The Master said, What he attached chief importance to were the food of the people, the duties of mourning, and sacrifices.
Zǐzhāng asked Kǒng Qiū, In what way should a person in authority act in order to conduct government properly? The Master said, Let him honor the five excellent things and banish the four bad things; then he may conduct government properly. The five excellent things are: being beneficent without great expenditure; laying tasks on the people without their repining; pursuing desires without being covetous; maintaining dignity without pride; being majestic without fierceness. The four bad things are: cruelty, oppression, injury, and stinginess.
The Master said, Without recognizing the ordinances of Heaven, it is impossible to be a superior man. Without an acquaintance with the rules of propriety, it is impossible for the character to be established. Without knowing the force of words, it is impossible to know men.